ARMENIAN AND RUSSIAN 
OPPRESSIONS
( 1914- 1916)
(TESTIMONIES OF WITNESSES)
Prepared by 
Dr. ERDALiLTER
ANKARA -1999
liter, Erdal,
Armenian and Russian Oppressions (1914-1916)
(Testimonies of Witnesses)
Published by
KOKSAV - KOK SOCIAL AND STRATEGICAL RESEARCH 
FOUNDATION
Turgut Reis Caddesi 7/5 Tandogan - ANKARA 
Tel: 0.312 212 99 03 • Fax: 212 99 03 - 215 32 74 
Web: http://www.koksav.org.tr 
E-Mail: koksav @ koksav.org.tr
First published
Copyright © 1999 by Erdal ilter 
Printed in Turkey by SISTEM OFSET, 1999
ISBN: 975-7430-10-2
CONTENTS
PRESENTATION.........................................................7
INTRODUCTION 13
DOCUMENTS ON ARMENIAN AND RUSSIAN 
OPPRESSIONS
FOREWORD 23
CHAPTER ONE
OPPRESSIONS IN BITLIS PROVINCE 
(Testimonies of Witnesses)
1. Ali, son o f  Suleyman (his first testim ony)........ 25
2. Abdiirrezzak, son o f  K am il.................................. 26
3. Ebubekir and Abdiilkerim .....................................26
4. Ahmed Nureddin Efendi (his first testim ony)...28
5. Mehmed Resul, son o f  Abdurrahman.................29
6 . Yasin Efendi, son o f Haci Mehmed.................... 32
7. Grocer M uhiddin Efendi, son o f H iiseyin......... 33
8 . Haydar, son o f  Isa ................................................... 34
9. Ali, son o f Suleyman (his second testimony).... 35
10.Mahmud, son o f  M ev lu d ....................................... 36
1 l.Fevzi E fendi...............................................................39
12 . Headman Mustafa, son o f  Osman .........................41
13 . Sheikh Haydar Efendi and Mufti
Abdulmecid Efendi.................................................42
14.Davut Efendi and Hiiseyin Efendi.........................43
15.Ahmed Nureddin Efendi (his second
testim ony)............................................................... 44
16. Ahmed Nureddin Efendi (his third testimony) .44
17.Hulusi B e y ................................................................. 47
18 . Abdurrahman, son o f  M ehmed and Yusuf, son 
o f  M ehm ed.................................................................. 52
19. Ali and Fethullah, sons o f  Hamid Bey and
Selim, son o f  Haci B e y ............................................ 54
20.Tahsin, Sadullah and Bekir E fendi.....................55
21.£erkes A ga............................................................... 57
22.Devaz, son o f  §eyho, Omer, son o f  Mustafa,
Tayyib, son o f  A bdiilham id.....................................57
23. Abdullah, son o f  R esu l............................ 58
24.Nuh B ey .................................................................... 58
25.Abdullah, son o f §ebab..........................................60
26.Iso, Osman, Ferhad and Halid..............................61
27.Seyyid Han, son o f Y usuf Seydo......................... 62
28. Soldier R esu l............................................................. 62
29.M inutes o f the Commission ( I ) ............................. 63
30.M inutes o f  the Commission (II)............................ 75
31 M inutes o f  the Commission (III) .......................... 83
C H A PT E R  TW O
O PPR E SSIO N S IN  VAN PRO V IN CE 
(Testim onies o f W itnesses)
1. Salim Efendi, son o f Sadullah...................................93
2. M ehmed Tufan Efendi................................................95
3. Fehim Bey, son o f  Kahraman B ey .......................... 97
4. Mehmed, son o f  Abdurrahman B ey ........................ 99
5. Basri B e y .......................................................................99
6. Minutes o f the Commission (I) .,............................ 100
a. Mehmed Hulusi E fendi........................................ 102
b. Halid E fendi............................................................ 103
c. Nigar H am m ......................................................... 103
7. 32 people from Van Province.................................104
8. Re§id, son o f A li.........................................................105
9. Abdi and Re§id M ullah.............................................106
10. Tahir and Mahmud, sons of Halid....................... 106
11. Yusuf Kenan and Abdiilhakim............................. 107
12. Abdiilmecid, Halid and R esul.............................. 108
13. A bdullah....................................................................108
14. Salih and Ali, son o f  Halid.................................... 109
15. Abdiilhamid and H an g ir........................................110
16. Mahmud, son o f  Kotas and Behliil, son of
Said..............................................................................111
17. Mustafa and E sa d .................................................... 111
18. Sheikh Enver and M ullah Re§id...........................112
19. Yusuf Ziyaeddin...................................................... 112
20. Mullah Abdi, Selim Han, son o f  Haci Bey and
Ali, son o f Hamid B ey ............................................ 113
21. Firdevs H anim .......................................................... 114
22. Lieutenant §iikrii Efendi, son o f T im ur..............116
23. Dervi§ A ga................................................................ ' '6
24. Supply officer Hasan Fahri Efendi 117
25. §iikru, son o f H iiseyin ............................................118
26. Farmer Re§id............................................................. 121
27. Feyzullah E fen d i..................................................... 122
28. Yusuf Efendi, son o f M ahm ud.............  123
CHAPTER THREE
OPPRESSIONS IN ERZURUM PROVINCE 
(Testimonies of Witnesses)
1. Minutes o f the Commission (I)............................... 125
2. Mehmed, son o f  Mehmed Bulmaz, Hiiseyin
son o f  M ehmed, Haci Ibrahim, son o f
Ahmed and Hasan, son o f  Y usuf............................ 136
3. Riza, son o f  Suleym an...............................................138
4. A li...................................................................................139
5. Muhiddin, son o f  G oge§........................................... 141
CHAPTER FOUR
OPPRESSIONS IN TRABZON PROVINCE 
(Testimonies of Witnesses)
1. Besim, son o f  A lem dar..............................................143
2. Fatma, wife o f  Ali O sm an ....................................... 144
BIBLIOGRAPHY 147
INDEX.......................................................................... 151
ANNEXES (PHOTOGRAPHS, LISTS AND 
M A PS).......................................................................... 185
PRESENTATION
Armenian propaganda tries to conceal the facts 
through certificates which are the products o f imagina­
tion like “Andonian Certificates” . It forms clouds of 
questions in the minds with the claim that Armenians 
were subjected to massacres. All o f  these efforts in fact 
serve to make “The question o f the massacres o f the 
Turkish people” committed by Armenian gangs to be 
forgotten. Today the mass graves o f Moslems slaugh­
tered by Armenian gangs in Eastern and Southeastern 
Anatolia, are laid out in front o f the eyes o f  public 
opinion o f the w orld1. Many other unknown ones are 
waiting to be revealed to daylight and to be exhibited in 
genocide museums. Objective scientists are searching 
and revealing the facts that are wanted to be concealed 
and presenting them to the attention o f  the public opin­
ion in their studies. Although the days o f disaster are 
wanted to be made forgotten, these do not go out of 
minds. Objective studies carried out on Armenians, 
show the mistake o f the efforts to invoice the Emi­
gration Event in 1915 to Turkish Nation2. The real
1 For example, see Enver Konukgu, Ermenilerin Ye§ilyayla’daki 
Turk Soykirimi (11-12 Mart 1918), Ankara 1990; “Kars-Subatan 
§ehitligi Kazisi,” Yakin Tarihimizde Kars ve Dogu Anadolu 
Sempozyumu (Kars-Subatan 17-21 Haziran 1991), Ankara 
1992, pp. 361-457; “Zeve §ehitligi Kazisi,” Yakin Tarihimizde 
Van Uluslararasi Sempozyumu (Van 2-5 Nisan 1990), Ankara 
1990, pp. 309-406.
2 Stanford J. Shaw and Ezel Kural Show, History of the Ottoman 
Empire and Modern Turkey, Volume II, London 1978, pp. 314- 
317, Alois van Tongerloo, "Armeense Drang Naar Autonomie,” 
Inforient-Dossier (15 .October. 1981), pp.25-27; Justin McCarthy. 
“Armenian Terrorism: Histoiy as Poison and Antidode," Inter­
guilty are the imperialist states who provoked and 
deceived Armenian community. It is a reality that in 
our era, the wars are carried out not at the front, but at 
the behind o f the front lines. The front that the Russians 
opened in the Eastern Anatolia was also such a front. 
The Emigration Law  was prepared for the purpose o f 
preventing the further abrasion o f the lines o f the Tur­
kish Army behind the front, and to take away the de­
featist elements located in that area out o f the operati­
ons field and in the critical areas in the country, the 
people living in Eastern and Southeastern Anatolia and 
who disobeyed the State were removed from those 
areas. There where Turks also among the people who 
were removed. With this law, the aim was to cause 
them to settle in more secure areas, and not to be mas­
sacred, as Armenians claim. However, in the direction 
o f interests, by charging the event on the Turkish Na­
tion, it is tried to be screened and to be concealed. In 
fact, following the First World War, when Entente 
Powers occupied Istanbul, they could not prove the 
“Armenian M assacre” claim and the American archives 
to which they had clung with a last hope, did not give 
anything to them, and thus, “Armenian Massacre” 
claim had collapsed even at those days (1920) from the 
legal point o f view3. In our era also, the young Ar­
national Terrorism and Drug Connection, Ankara 1984. pp. 85- 
94; Azini Siislii, Ermeniler ve 1915 Tehcir Olavi. Ankara 1990; 
Osmanli Belgelerinde Ermeniler (1915-1920). Ankara 1994
3 Bilal N. §im$ir, Malta Surgunleri. Istanbul 1976. pp. 259-284; 
American High Commissioner in Turkey Admiral Bristol, in his 
report that he sent to U.S.A. Secretary of State in 1920 related to 
Armenians, indicated that the recent stories seen in European 
media about Armenian assassination, were directed for the purpose
menian generation is wanted to be grown up with hate, 
and to follow blood feud. In the freedom environment 
o f  the West, these negative efforts can give much quick 
results. The task that we have to carry out is to weigh 
the facts on the scales o f  reality and to find out the real 
truth.
Beginning from the declaration o f Constitution­
al Period, the result to be derived from the events hap­
pened, within its historical course is that, Armenian 
Committees who run after the dream o f  Armenia and 
who were directed towards the interests o f the Entente 
States, by putting obstacles that are difficult to over­
come, in front o f  both Turkey and Armenian people 
who want to live in peace, have always dragged the 
country and the people who followed them into disas­
ter.
In our era also, same Armenian organizations 
and institutions who dream to bring The Armenian 
Diaspora into Anatolian territory by establishing Great 
Armenian State and take action for this purpose, try to 
deviate the historical realities and to destroy the friend­
ly relations that are tried to be developed between Tur­
key and Armenia that gained her independence on Sep­
tember 23, 1991 by the dissolution o f  the Union of 
Soviet Socialist Republics. The observance o f the exist­
ence o f Turkey is a source o f  confidence for Armenia, 
in other words, for Armenians, the only window that is
of misleading and they were the propaganda made to ensure the 
support of egoist plans of Allied Powers. See Laurence Evans. 
United States Policy and the Partition of Turkey (1914-1924). 
Baltimore. The Johns Hopkins Press. 1965; Turkish Translation. 
Tevfik Alanay. Tiirkiyc’nin Payla$ilmasi (1914-1924), Istanbul 
1972. p. 262.
opened to the W est is Turkey is recognized by the poli­
ticians and statesmen o f Armenia and this is an impor­
tant development for Armenia that is prepared for the 
21st Century.
On the other hand, it is obvious that, a peace en­
vironment to be constituted in Caucasia, along with 
Turkey-Armenia friendly relations, will create a stabili­
ty medium for the other states in the area. For this 
reason, the problem o f Nagorno Karabagh between Ar­
menia and Azerbaijan, has great importance to be 
solved fairly between the parties. In this point, there is a 
historical task for the Armenian Republic. Following 
the solution o f  this problem, the participation o f  Ar­
menia in Western Alliance and, as it was expressed by 
The Turkish Prime M inister Mesut Yilmaz on March
21, 1996, the opening o f borders between the two coun­
tries, is seen as a point which can be evaluated from 
Turkish point o f  view.
According to us, it is a reality that it will be 
advantageous for the interests o f Turkish and Armenian 
communities, if  the Armenian Republic follows poli­
cies, parallel to the friendly hand extended by learning 
lessons from history, within the framework o f interna­
tional policies.
This book that we have prepared with the title 
“Armenian and Russian Oppressions (1914-1916) (Tes­
timonies o f  W itnesses)”, in order to open the screen o f '  
suspect on the “M oslem Victims Issue” that is tried to 
be concealed by the Armenians and to let the people 
know the realities behind Armenian claims, is the 
translation o f the works which consist o f  the records o f 
the testimonies o f  witnesses about the oppressions that
were committed by Armenians against Turkish people, 
and which was printed in Istanbul in 1917 among 
“National Congress” publications by the Ottoman State, 
with the title “Documents sur les Atrocides Armeno- 
Russes”. The testimonies o f the witnesses contained in 
the book, have been taken under oath by authorized 
people and commissions that examined the oppressions 
at sites and established by minutes.
A lacking translation of French edition o f this 
book o f documents which puts forward a part o f the 
Armenian and Russian oppressions carried out against 
innocent Turkish and Kurdish people in Bitlis, Mu§, 
Van, Hakkari, Siirt, Erzurum, Erzincan and Trabzon 
provinces between 1914-1916 and which have been 
used by some authors, have been included in the book 
o f Retired Major-General Ahmet Hulki Saral, “Ar­
menian Question” (pp. 411-446). However it has been 
observed that some parts in original French edition and 
its translation do not coincide with each other in the 
examination that we carried out, especially in location 
and individual names, and these were misreading and 
typing errors. For this reason, these mistakes were 
corrected as much as possible by going to the originals 
o f the text, and translated in compliance with the 
original text. Furthermore, the changed names o f  the 
locations mentioned in documents, have also been 
shown with today’s names. Since the book was printed 
disorderly, the book was brought to an understandable 
form by dividing it under general headings and fol-
4 Ar§iv Belgelerine G ore K afkaslar’da ve A nadolu’da Erm eni 
M ezalimi, 1906-1918. Vol. I. Devlet Ar$ivleri Genel Mudiirliigu 
Yaymi, Ankara 1995.
lowing the note numbers, and the reference books that 
have been made use o f for the arrangement o f  the book 
and a large index have been added to the end o f  the 
book.
In order to ensure the subject to be understood 
more obviously and to provide its integrity, the rele­
vant section o f  the book-which explains Van, Bitlis and 
Mu§ events before and after the mobilization, and titled 
“Ermeni K omiteleri’nin A ’mal ve Harekat-i ihtilaliyye- 
si, i ’lan-i M e§rutiyyet’den Evvel ve Sonra” (The Objec­
tives and Revolutionary Operations o f  Armenian Com­
mittees, Before and After the Constitutional Period) 
again published by the M inistry o f Interior Affairs of 
the Ottoman State in Istanbul in 1916, which is a Per­
fect evaluation o f  the works, has been included by us in 
summarized form as “INTRODUCTION” to the book.
March 28, 1996 Dr. Erdal ILTER
Ankara
INTRODUCTION*
After the declaration of Mobilization by the Ot­
toman State on August 3, 1914, riots happened in many 
places in compliance with the instructions given by 
Armenian Committees, with the arrangement and ad­
ministration o f branches. These events are remarkable 
incidents in regard to the ways that they happened. 
Until the time that we participated in the war, The 
Russian, English, French and later on Italian embassies 
and consulates together with the consulates o f these 
states in the provinces, acted as mediators in the com­
munications o f  the committees with foreign and Ot­
toman countries. They obtained their needs like weap­
ons and money. The chiefs and members o f these com­
mittees excellently spied on their account about our 
military and political situations.
With the money o f  Allied Powers and with the 
help and mediation o f the Consulates o f  these States the 
Armenians in foreign countries, have been armed. They 
were sent in gangs and gangs to Caucasia and Iranian 
borders as Regiments o f Revenge. The Armenian sol­
diers escaped to enemy side with their weapons. The 
Armenians in our most o f  the provinces, started armed 
riots in various areas in order to accelerate the victory 
o f the Entente States and thus to realize their national 
aims and to demolish the Ottoman State which they 
thought it would already survive only a few days.
* Ermeni Komiteleri’nin A ’mal ve Harekat-i ihtilaJiyyesi, 
i ’lan-i Me$rutiyyet’den E w el ve Sonra. Istanbul 1332 (1916). 
pp. 160-161, 170-176. 197-205.
Van province is one o f the most remarkable 
areas to be examined to  understand Armenian current 
and spirit. Here, the purpose o f  the Armenian Com­
mittees and the situation o f the committees are ob­
served with clear obviously. The preparations and con­
spiracies that have been concealed in other provinces, 
are observed obviously here. Both Van and Bitlis, were 
shown by the Armenians as the areas where they were 
most crowded as regards to population, and where they 
were shown as majority compared with the Moslem 
people. We should immediately say that this claim is 
completely contrary to the reality. Actually, Hakkari 
part o f  Van province, which consisted o f Central Van 
and Hakkari subdivisions, was settled by Moslems in 
eighty percent and. Moslems always constituted a great 
majority in other towns o f  Van compared with Ar­
menians.
It was necessary for the committees to spread 
out everywhere that there was a continuous uneasiness 
in this area. Because they hoped that they would reach 
their aim only in this way and they ran after the inter­
vention o f foreigners for many years and as a result 
they hoped that they would reach autonomy through 
this means.
The history o f events o f this province till the 
declaration o f Constitutional Period in 1908, can be 
summarized with the political riots that arouse from 
time to time and the attacks and the oppressions of 
gangs. After the declaration o f the Constitutional Peri­
od, all secret preparations that existed previously began 
to come out, the things which could not be written or 
said, started to be said openly.
In this province the Armenians always 
acknowledged the committee, not the state and the state 
always saw the committee against it. I f  the chain of 
events, is examined, that happened till the mobilization 
in this province, it would be seen that the members of 
the committee prohibited Armenians to approach to the 
state with all their force. Again it would be seen that 
they tried to  create a continuous enmity between Is­
lamic and Armenian communities and did their best ef­
forts to show the country in uneasy and public disorder 
situation.
As much as the weapons heaped up and the or­
ganization expanded, the rudeness o f  the Armenians in­
creased in the same ratio. In the center o f  Van Province, 
at Armenian districts there was a custom to fire guns in 
the evenings, after the sunset. It was not possible to 
prohibit it until the last times.
The closest friends and advisors o f the Ar­
menian Committee members in the province were 
British, Russian and French Consulates. The most im­
portant issues were negotiated with the Armenian Com­
mittee members in Russian Consulate.
All o f  the events happened till mobilization, in 
Van, are nothing but the political crimes arranged by 
the committee. After the mobilization, the Armenians 
in this region decided to integrate their activities to 
make easy the movement o f  Russians, together with the 
Armenians in Caucasia area, in compliance with the di­
rectives given by the committees. The strategical situ­
ation o f Van was-very important as it was the border 
neighbour o f Azerbaijan which was under the invasion 
and influence o f  Russians and due do its vicinity to
Russia. Here, no Armenians were observed, who com­
plied with the mobilization call. It w as observed that, 
the Armenians previously fled from the Army without 
weapons in order not to draw the attention, later on 
began to flee from  the Army w ith weapons and in a 
planned way.
After the declaration o f w ar in November 1914, 
upon the attack o f  Russians to our borders with volun­
tary Armenian battalions, the attitude and the behavior 
o f the Armenians both located in the center o f the 
province and its surroundings began to change com­
pletely. The civil servants and gendarm e were subjected 
to attacks an d . insults. The events be came unpre- 
ventable with the riot that burst out due to the counting 
o f sheep in Timar. Here, the number o f  gangs exceeded 
a thousand, with the participation o f  others in the vi­
cinity, These were armed with M auser and Russian 
rifles. Catak-Van-Bitlis telegram lines were cut. Two 
soldiers were killed in the attack made to the govern­
ment palace in Catak. They began to attack to Kurdish 
villages and passengers. They killed the Moslems they 
met, in a wild manner without any differentiation 
whether they were women or children. The revolu­
tionists, also opened fire to the squadron located at 
Hamid Aga Barracks in Van and gendarme and ter­
ritorial force stations surrounding Armenian districts. 
The riot, turned to be a general situation, and spreaded 
to Erci§ and Adilcevaz. In the middle o f  April 1915, the 
Armenian gangs, consisting o f  at least 400 people 
under the command o f Russian officers, tried to pene­
trate into the country from Russian and Iranian borders. 
In the combats happened with Armenian gangs in Van
and its surroundings, flags on which “Armenian free”, 
“Armenian salvaged” words written, and Armenian fur 
caps, Russian and French caps, in front o f which the 
w ord “Revenge” was written, were found in many of 
the trenches.
Another area that the Committees gave impor­
tance after Van, was the surroundings o f  Bitlis and 
Mu§. This area was on the way o f  Van-Diyarbakir- 
Aleppo-Iskenderun, which was suitable and convenient 
for transportation and especially it was busy in every 
season o f the year. Furthermore, Mu? was a famous 
place for Armenian riots for a long time. For this 
reason, committees gave much importance to this area. 
They appointed their most capable men and delegates 
to these areas to determine and administer their organ­
ization preparation. When there was no inspiration of 
the committees, the Moslem and Armenian people in 
these areas, had a very comfortable life. Before the 
declaration o f the Constitutional Period, there used to 
happen riots and a lot o f  Moslems used to be killed 
following the preparations that lasted for months. Later 
on, the governments o f Britain, France and other states 
were showered with telegrams stating these were 
“Islamic Oppressions” (!) Actually, the real victims 
were the Moslem people. Weapons and bombs were 
brought to these areas from Russia, through Caucasia, 
Iran and Trabzon; and from Egypt and America, 
through iskenderun. The committee organization in this 
area, was brought to a more perfect situation after the 
declaration o f the Constitutional Period. Gangs and 
volunteer establishments and committee centers opened 
even in villages. The Armenians began to act only with
the instructions o f  the committee. The Committee in­
spectors used to settle the disputes among the villagers 
in compliance with the instructions o f  the Committee. 
Furthermore, they were punishing those who avoided 
providing weapons and who made an application to the 
state; and even they centenced same to death. It is a 
definite reality that, in none o f the places o f Eastern and 
Southeastern Anatolia, the Moslem people never had 
weapons as many as the Armenians had. The offense 
was always made by Armenians. The Armenians had 
one aim through these events; and that was the auton­
omy o f Armenia.
Upon the declaration of Mobilization, with the 
instruction o f  Russia, Dashnak Committee gave the 
administration o f  Van area to Van Parliamentarian 
Vremian, one o f  the most famous Committee members; 
and the administration o f  Bitlis, Mu§ and their sur­
roundings to Vahan Papazian, who also one o f Van Par­
liamentarians. Vremian settled in Van, Papazian settled 
in Mu§ and they both began to prepare and conduct 
some movements.
At the beginning, Armenians began to partici­
pate in the Mobilization and made some small demon­
strations in favor o f Ottoman State. However the armed 
Armenian military units, after they received their weap­
ons, escaped and participated in the enemy side. The 
gangs began to attack on the Moslems on the roads who 
were going to carry out their military service.
At last, at the end o f  1914, the gendarme detach­
ment which was sent to Sekur village, around Ahkis 
village o f Hizan district o f  Bitlis, to capture fugitives 
and call for military service, was met by the people of
the village with weapons, saying that they would not 
give soldiers to Ottoman State and they would not 
recognize the State. They killed the gendarmes by 
opening fire on them. The same situation happened in 
large and crowded villages like Korsuh, Ahkis and 
Beygiri. As soon as the riots began in Hizan and Bitlis, 
the events began in Mu§ plain too. It once more came in 
to light that those who conducted the struggles there 
were Ruben, Mu§ Dashnak representative; and Esro, a 
famous Committee leader and the riot was arranged by 
Papazian.
The aim o f the Armenian in this riot, was to in­
fringe with the military communications, transpor­
tation and operations, and to keep the military forces 
and the units busy. For this reason, they did their best in 
Bitlis and Mu§ provinces.
DOCUMENTS ON ARMENIAN-RUSSIAN 
OPPRESSIONS
(DOCUMENTS SUR LES ATROCITES ARMENO- 
RUSSES)
Prepared by 
Dr. ERDAL iLTER
ANKARA - 1999
FOREWORD
The exchange o f places (Emigration) measure 
that the Ottoman State had to take in the military zones 
for two years (1914-1916) after the general riot of the 
Armenians are tried to be given under the appearance 
o f  a massacre in the public opinion o f  Entente States1 
and neutral countries. W e are in the opinion that it is 
our task to counter with these movements aimed to 
mislead the public opinion.
Today, every neutral person whose minds are 
not confused by the prejudice o f a century must know 
that the Armenians (so-called victims) at places where 
the subject war2 took place have been the executioners 
o f  Moslems. Real massacres were committed by these 
voluntary Armenian gangs that acted under the com­
mand of the Russian commanders, and the old pro­
sperous provinces and villages turned in to ruins at the 
end o f the attacks o f brigand gangs and the plan to 
destroy the Moslem people was continued pitilessly. 
These massacres not only committed in the invaded 
Turkish provinces but in the destruction and destroy 
winds also blew in Russian Provinces where the Mos­
lems were settled until today. Besides the Eastern Ana­
tolia which was smashed under the pressure o f the cruel 
enemy, all o fB atum ; area, Artvin, Acara, Hezor, Mara- 
dit3, Ma^akhel4 and their surroundings where the Mos­
lems lived comfortably until the last events became the
' United Kingdom, Russia and France.
2 The First World War (1914-1918).
3 Today, M uratli subdistrict of Bor?ka town of Artvin.
4 Today, Camili subdistrict of Borgka town of Artvin.
scene o f unimaginable and hair-raising murders com­
mitted by Armenians, under unconcerned looks o f the 
Russian official authorities.
This gathered book only contains a partial ex­
pression o f these disgusting events which were revealed 
by final and unobjectionable testimonies.
These few lines perhaps will draw the attention 
to the disgusting events that were concealed with deli­
cacy until today and which were rarely seen in world­
wide media.
CHAPTER ONE
OPPRESSIOS IN BITLIS PROVINCE
1. The first testimony under oath of Ali, son 
of Suleyman from Bitlis (10.6.1916) (He migrated to 
Kayalu5 village of Mardin)
The Armenians o f  Van and Bitlis, who previ­
ously learned that the Russians wanted to occupy Bitlis 
about the end o f  February 1915, attacked Moslems. 
They slaughtered the Moslem people pitilessly by 
closing the roads to escape. Meanwhile my brother-in- 
law Ali, his mother Rabi§e, Sheikh Ahmed from Kaza- 
nan6, his wife and one o f  his servants, our neighbors 
Receb, son o f Ahmed, Hasan who was 80 years old and 
his son izzet, two sick soldiers who were on leave, were 
the victims o f  these barbarians who killed them into 
pieces.
Only five persons from our family that was to­
talling to 17 people, could rescue from the massacre 
with great difficulty. One o f  the children o f my cousin 
was thrown into the air and while he was falling down, 
he was cut in tw o pieces with a stroke o f  a sword by 
these murderer Armenians.
They have raped young girls and later on they 
dragged them along the roads in blood. As a result, the
5 Today. Kayali village of idil town of Mardin.
6 Today. Kazanan village of Korkut subdistrict of Mu§.
Armenians performed murders that have not been 
heard, against Moslems.
2. The testimony under oath of Abdiirrezzak, 
son of Kamil from Bitlis (10.6.1996) (He migrated to 
Kayalu village of Mardin)
During the occupation o f  our province , we 
were going to Arap bridge together with the families o f 
my brother and uncle at the early hours o f the morning. 
The Armenians who cut our way, killed my brother 
Cerkes who was in front o f me, Abdtilkadir, the son o f 
my uncle and his sister Emine.
We escaped and rescued as five out o f  eighteen 
people and could reach Mardin. The remaining from 
the group, including my children were taken as slave or 
killed.
3. Giilpik8 Village of Hizan Town (Testimony 
under oath of Ebubekir and Abdiilkerim from Giil- 
pik Village) (4.7.1916)
I was some where outside o f  our village. Some 
o f the notables o f  our village had gone to Bitlis. Upon 
their return they informed us about the occupation of 
Bitlis. Some o f our men went there to stop the enemy 
when it was learned that the enemy was proceeding 
from Tatik9 town. The others set out towards Karfi-
7 Bitlis would be occupied by Russian on March 3. 1916.
8 Today, Siitta$i village of Hizan town of Bitlis.
9 Later on it was affiliated to Hizan town, today it is Boliikyazi 
subdistrict of Bitlis.
kan10. In the fight we had with the enemy, we under­
stood that it was impossible to resist them for a long 
time and we immediately ran to rescue our families. At 
this critical moment, the enemy army consisting of 
Russians and a lot o f Armenians who came to our vil­
lage from two different points by raiding, began to kill 
the people and burn the houses. A few o f us could res­
cue themselves. But 150 people, consisting o f women, 
men, children and girls, were killed by sword strokes. 
W hile we were escaping, Bided and Ar§ak from Ora- 
nis11 village, Sander from H irit12 Armenian village and 
Kisyo Kiyo from §ube13 village, were swearing our re­
ligion from behind and insulting our prophet.
Russians and Armenians tortured so much that, 
upon our return, the villagers burst into tears. Naked 
men and women, tied together, were hung on trees. 
There were children, cut into two pieces on the laps of 
women whose heads were plucked and breasts were 
cut. The young and beautiful girls were taken away and 
those who were less beautiful were killed after their 
genitials were torn. The murderers had taken away the 
furniture which would be o f  use to them, and burned 
the others.
10 While it was a village of Geva§ town of Van, later on it become 
a town. The name of this town, could not be identified today.
11 Today, Anadere is a village of Re$adiye subdistrict of Bitlis- 
Tatvan.
12 Today, Cokekyazi is a village of Hizan Town of Bitlis.
13 The name of this village could not be identified today.
4. The first testimony under oath of Ahmed 
Nureddin Efendi, Deputy head official of Pervari14 
Town (22.6.1916) (Former Town Director of Ak- 
?an15)
Servet Bey, governor o f  subdivision o f Mu§ 
Province, was honest and protective towards all o f  the 
people o f his subdivision without making any discrimi­
nation o f any face and religion difference. But the Ar­
menians o f  Mu§ were bringing out difficulties to the 
government in recruiting military service and in taxa­
tion when they found opportunity. We were clearly see­
ing the provocative behaviors o f  the Dashnak people 
and Armenian priests and sensed the damages o f the 
traps set up. With the inspiration o f  intrugues, most o f 
the Armenian villages did not delay in making terrorist 
events. Armenians used to  invite the voluntary soldiers 
and territorial forces passing by the area under the 
pretext o f bread and water, there they suffocated them, 
hollowed their eyes out and cut their heads. Especially, 
they did not hesitate to do any thing in order to have the 
rifles o f the soldiers. The Armenian oppression was 
especially made at Evran16 village, consisting o f 300 
houses. At this village, as a result o f  the investigation 
we made on July 15, 1915, the following information 
came out.
We found a well in the vicinity o f the house 
which belonged to an Armenian who was a member o f
14 A county of Siirt.
15 Today, M ercim ekkale subdistrict of central town of Mu§.
16 Today. Y agcilar village o f Mercimekkale subdistrict of Mu§.
Dashnak Committee; and its mouth was closed 
skillfully and narrowly. When we opened its lid, a 
disgusting and filthy odor covered the environment. A 
man, whom I told him to go down, informed me that 
the well was full o f human corpses. We took them out 
to  find out their identities. The number o f victims 
consisting o f  innocent and unlucky soldiers was 19. 
The situation o f  these corpses showed that only three- 
four days, had past after the frightful executions that 
were performed by the Armenians who were honored 
with the sincere protection o f Ottoman Government for 
600 years. We left the village after we buried the 
corpses o f these soldiers who were suffocated by the 
Armenians meanly.
5. The testimony undet oath of Mehmed 
Resul son of Abdurrahman from emigrants of Mu$17 
(5-6.6.1916) (The testimony is received by Hani1!i 
Director)
I was wounded towards the middle o f January, 
1915 in a combat made near Betlevo19 village. Together 
with my three sick friends, we could not follow the 
army that was withdrawing and we were taken as slaves 
by the enemy. First they carved the eyes o f soldier 
Hiiseyin and said “Get up and look around!. Are there 
any Ottoman soldiers9 Are they coming?” Later on,
1 Compare with. E rm eni K om itclcri’nin A ’mal ve H arekat-i 
Ihtilaliyyesi, i ’lan -i M e$rutiyyet’dcn E w el ve Sonra. pp. 314- 
315.
18 A town of Diyarbakir.
19 Its name of today, could not be identified.
they took him to  a small river and martyred him there. 
After this murder, they attacked to my other friend 
whose name I cannot remember. They killed him also 
when the frightful torture was over.
It was the turn o f  our third friend. They cut his 
genitial organ and put it in his mouth and later on, they 
martyred him by suffocating. I recognized three 
Armenians among executioners. One o f  them was 
Aram, son o f  Monk, from £akar district o f Mu§; the 
second one was Aleksan, son o f Bagdasar Giiriib; the 
third one was Hrant, son o f lawyer Hrant from Ba§ 
district o f Mu§, and the other five persons were Russian 
soldiers. These executioners approached me and told 
that the end o f  all Moslems were like this and they 
branded 24 parts o f  my body by red-hot heating o f the 
bayonets o f their rifles in the fire that they set up. When 
a Russian soldier came close to me, who wanted to 
rescue me, I was uttering painful screams. This soldier 
took me to  a side and told me that his name was 
Abdiilmelik and he came from a Moslem family from 
Kazan and he w ould be able to rescue me.
Eight executioners, I and Russians soldiers set 
out. Another group, consisting o f  about 100 Armenians 
and Kazakhs, joined us. We were going in the direction 
o f Til20 village. On the way, we met a Moslem Com­
munity o f  about 800 people. Kazakhs and Armenian 
martyred almost all o f  them. Towards the evening, we 
reached Til (Korkut) village. Armenians brought two 
pregnant Moslem women with them whom they had 
kidnapped during Karame$e21 village pillage. They
20 Today, Korkut village of Korkut subdistrict of Mu§.
21 A village of Merciinekkale subdistrict of Mu§.
brought the women in the middle o f Russians and Ar­
menians. Two Armenian soldiers, had betted about the 
sex o f the children that the women were carrying for 
forty pilasters. Upon this they cut the abdomen o f the 
one o f  the women with a knife and took out a boy. The 
fetus o f the other women, led various suggestions. Five 
minutes later, four Russians and six Armenians, 
brought six Moslem girls. I recognized one o f them 
among the Armenians who was from Ziyaret22 village 
o f Mu§. The girls were put in row. A Russian officer 
came, chose a girl among them and took her away. 
Meanwhile Russian soldiers ordered the girls to 
perform the namaz and do their prayers. While the poor 
girls were performing their religious obligations, they 
seduced them. They were both doing this mean behav­
iour and saying “From now on, we will conduct the 
namaz o f Moslems in this way”. I had three nights at 
Til (Korkut) village. Although I had too much pain in 
my wounds, I was able to rescue with the help of 
Moslem Russian soldiers. About dawn, I climbed a hill, 
overlooking the Kazanan village. Pitiful screams were 
coming from the village. When the Sun rose, 1 saw the 
Russian and Armenian killed the residents o f the village 
and burned them while they were still alive. I was 
horrified and turned to be a stone, and I could not leave 
the place where I was until the night. I set o ff in the 
dark and meeting with every kind o f danger and 
difficulty, I came to Hani.
22 Today. Yaygin subdistrict of central town of Mu§.
6. The testimony under oath of Yasin Efendi, 
son of Haci Mehmed (1.6.1916) (A police of Bitlis in 
charge in Mardin)
I was on duty at the station, when Bitlis prov­
ince was occupied at about 10 o ’clock at night. My hor­
rified sister came and said that the province was raided 
by the enemy. W hen we went out to the street with our 
friends, we saw the escaping people. The shots o f  thou­
sands o f rifles and machineguns was heard.
I was obliged to go to a place called Arap 
bridge, which was half an hour away from Bitlis, in or­
der to rescue my family from the agression o f the ene­
my. Behind o f  us, Russian units and Armenian gangs, 
were trying to stop all o f  the Moslems who were es­
caping from them under strong fire and were killing 
them. On the other hand, Russian Kazakhs were tread­
ing them under the feet o f their horses, Screams o f  
Hopelessness mixed with the yelling o f Russian 
Kazakhs, and the cries o f the children were rising in 
every corner. A small group like us, rescued in a mira­
culous way. During our escape, deputy Police Officer 
Mehmed Vehbi Efendi, was shot on his foot.
All the others became the victims o f the row­
diness o f Russians and Armenians. There were the fol­
lowing people whom I know, among these were the 
poor persons: Vefik Bey, deputy chief o f Police Direc­
tor o f  Van; Ali Efendi, Police Officer; Suleyman Efen­
di, deputy Police Officer Remzi Efendi and Said Efendi 
from Van, who were in charge in Bitlis, Hamdi Efendi 
and Resul Efendi, Police officers o f  Bitlis; §aban Vehbi 
Efendi, chief clerk o f  Bitlis justice Department; Mullah
Said-i Kurdi, a famous savant, with his 20 students; and 
tradesman Abdiirrezzak, son of Haci ishak.
7. The testimony under oath of 45 years old 
Grocer Muhiddin Efendi, son of Hiiseyin (6.6.1916) 
(He is from Ta§ district of Bitlis, now resides at Savur 
town)
It was the end o f February o f 1915. While I was 
staying at house, continuous firing and noise began to 
come from various places o f  the city. This was the indi­
cation o f the coming o f Russian and Armenian units. 
W hen I went out to the street, I saw that the gangs were 
executing a general massacre in the city. I immediately 
returned to my house to rescue my family. On the way, 
when I saw Fazil Efendi, Bitlis communications lines 
clerk o f Bitlis, from Viran23, was cut into pieces, I 
began to escape with my family in Province Palace Di­
rection. Here, the roads were blockaded by the Ar­
menians. They were killing all o f the Moslems without 
making any difference o f age. As I could not find a way 
o f escape in that direction, I wanted to jump into the 
river passing through Bitlis, not to be murdered by the 
enemy. My brother Musa, prevented this attempt o f 
mine and with the divine grace o f God, we rescued 
from the General massacre, in spite o f  many difficul­
ties.
Among the thousands o f victims, there were 
well-known people.
23 Today, Canakyayla village of Adilcevaz town of Bitlis.
1. Dursun Efendi, son o f  Haci §emseddin, from  
the notables,
2. Abdiilbaki Efendi, son o f  Haci Y usuf from  
Hersan district,
3. Haci M ehmed, son o f Haci Hasan,
4. Nadir, son o f  Mahmud,
5. Abdiirrezzak, son o f Cemal,
6 . Dursun, son o f  Mahmud,
7. Hamid, son o f  Receb,
8. Cemil, son o f  B ila l,
9. Sheikh Abdtilhalik Efendi, son o f  Sheikh 
Mehmed Kiifrevi,
10. Ismail Bey, Bitlis Gendarme battalion com ­
mander.
Former Judge o f  Muradiye, Ahmed Efendi was 
murdered in his bed. The sister o f Ahmed Efendi, Bed- 
riye Zaman Hamm; the daughter o f  Receb Efendi, Peri- 
han Hamm; the wife and son o f  corporal Halid, Leyla 
Hamm and Salih were martyred at their homes with 
horrible tortures M usa Efendi, like his brother Muhid- 
din, lived the same miserable scenes.
8. The testimony under oath of 40 years old 
Haydar, son of Isa (6.6.1916) (He is from Bitlis, now 
he lives in Savur town)
In February 1915, my family and I were in Ya- 
ko24, one o f  the villages o f Bitlis. One day, I set off to 
go to my brother, who was in Bitlis. On the way, when 
I saw a group o f  people from Bitlis. I asked the reason
"4 Today, Unaldi village of Sarikonak subdistrict of Bitlis.
o f  their leaving Bitlis. They told me that the province 
had been raided suddenly by Russian and Armenian 
units, those units were mainly consisted o f Armenians, 
they had killed the Moslems they met, without making 
any difference among women, men and children, with 
the strokes o f  bayonet.
Ali, son o f  Stileyman from Hersan district Bitlis 
told me that, among those who were killed, there was 
my brother, who was in Bitlis, and the son o f my other 
brother Halid; the wife o f  Halid; Minnet, daughter of 
Yakub, had been taken away; my brother-in-law Yusuf, 
son o f  Haci Ali had been killed and his aunt, Mercan; 
daughter o f $akir had been taken away; my neighbor 
Sheikh o f Kazanan, Sheikh Ahmed, who was sick, one 
o f  his servants, Hasan, son o f Mustafa, from Hersan 
district who had со me to visit Sheikh, had been mur­
dered after they had taken his money in great amounts 
as ransom They killed Hasan, near the house o f Suley­
man, son o f Haci Yusuf, together with his son izzet, 
and Ali, brother o f  Haci Nasrullah with the strokes of 
bayonet, they had killed 80 years old Nigar Hamm from 
Ahlat, and the sick family o f  a soldiers called Tero, and 
made 60 years old Sheikh Hafi Efendi, to carry furni­
ture with naked feet, upon this as I did not dare to go to 
Bitlis, I returned to Yako (Unaldi).
9. The second testimony of Ali, son of Suley­
man, residing at Hersan district of Bitlis (6.6.1916)
My brother Ismail and Halid were killed on the 
threshold o f their houses by Armenians. The wife o f 
Halid, who was the daughter o f Yakub, was taken away
by force. My brother-in-law Yusuf, son o f  Haci Ali, 
was also killed. H is aunt, Mercan, daughter o f §akir, 
was taken away meanly by the gang.
My neighbor Sheikh Ahmed from Kazanan who 
was sick and his w ife §emo and one o f his servants 
were killed in their beds. The fate of Receb, son o f  
Mustafa, who had come to visit the Sheikh, has been 
the same. Hasan, son o f  Kilin? zade ismail, was killed 
near the house Suleyman, son o f Yusuf, although they 
had taken ransom in great amounts from him. They also 
killed his son izzet and brother o f  Haci Nasrullah, with 
the strokes o f bayonet. 80 years old Nigar Hamm from 
Ahlat, the sick wife o f  Tero, Halil, son o f Celo zade 
ismail, Ahmed, son o f  Mehmed, his brother Mikdad, 
were massacred in the house o f Suleyman, son o f Haci 
Yusuf. Said Efendi, son o f ex-Mufli o f Bitlis and like 
his 60 years old uncle Sheikh Hafi Efendi, inspite o f 
heavy snow and cold, were forced to work with bare 
feet and head and to carry heavy loads to long dis­
tances. Upon these, I did not dare to go to Bitlis and 
returned my village Yako (Unaldi).
10. The testimony with oath of 37 years old 
Mahmud, son of Mevliid, who was Gendarme in 
Mu?25 (6.6.1916) (He is from Kale district of Mu? 
and from those who took shelter in Hani. His 
testimony is received by Hani Director).
I have been in the hands o f  Russians as a slave 
o f war for two and a half months. 10 days ago, I de-
Compare with Ermeni Komitclcri’nin A’mal ve Harekat-i 
Ihtilaliyyesi..., pp. 315-3 16
serted and learned that the office o f my battalion was in 
Hani, and came here. On February 10, 1916, I set off 
from Mu§ to go as a courier to the Commander o f the 
squadron which was in Liz26 area. When I arrived on 
the hills o f M olla Davud27 village, I was surrounded by 
Russian soldiers and Armenian gangs. Upon this, I im­
mediately destroyed all the documents. I was captured 
as a slave. The Armenians and Russians took my rifle, 
watch and money. Among enemy soldiers there were 
about a dozen Armenians. From these, I recognized 
Kinyaz, son o f  M onk from Bulanik, Gazar from Abri28 
village, Bedo from Gebolan29 village and Vano, son 
Melkon from Mu§. They wanted to kill me, but the 
Russians, saw that I was a soldier and prevented them. 
After wards, these Armenians had beaten me, they took 
me to Molla Davud village and shoved me to their 
officers. Later on they imprisoned me in a house, pro­
tected by six Russian soldiers. Only one o f them was on 
guard at nights. The other five used to go to the village 
and gathered M oslem married women and young girls 
and brought them near their friends. They forced those 
women and girls to dance and drink wine. After they 
forced them to submit their animal-like desires, saying 
to me, “Look, the same disaster will come to all o f  the 
Moslems” and they swore Islamic religion. We had that 
night in this way. The Armenians and Russians left the
26 Today, E rentepe subdistrict of Bulamk town of Mu§.
27 A village of Erentepe-Bulamk-Mu§. Its name could not be 
identified today.
28 Today, Esenlik village of Erentepe subdistrict o f Mu§-Bulamk.
29 Today C an k u rta ran  village of Erentepe subdistrict of Mu$- 
Bulamk.
village in the morning, by taking me with them, and 
they killed all o f  the remaining villagers after various 
tortures.
Later we came to Kazanan village. The enemies 
imprisoned all o f  the men in a house and women in a 
separate house. They imprisoned me in a third house. 
What I saw through the window was like this: Russians 
and Armenians calling the men one by one, took their 
money and killed them with tortures such as carving 
their eyes, opening wounds in their bodies or after tying 
their cut arms to their abdomens forcing them to dance. 
After these hateful executions they went to the side 
where there w ere women. They chose newly married 
ones and beautiful young girls. They burned young 
girls while they were alive, they took out the clothes o f 
newly married women and raped them. These Ar­
menians and Russians during their murders saw that 
two o f their victims were pregnant, and gathered 
around them and made bets on the sex o f their children 
on four rubles, and cut the abdomens o f  these poor 
women. They looked whether they are boys or girls. 
Later they hanged six women on the trees and cut them 
into pieces with cleavers. They said to me, “That is 
what you deserve” .
We set o ff from here to go to Molla Yahya vil­
lage. Here I was again imprisoned in a house. Here also 
they executed the same massacres. At night, by pulling 
a stone from the wall o f the room where I was staying, 1 
could escape from the prison and encountering with 
thousands o f  difficulties, I could come here. The citi­
zens I met on the way, said that they witnessed the
similar horrifying executions performed against Mos­
lems.
All o f  the residences of Kara Hiiseyin and Ku- 
§anli villages, were killed with the swords in the same 
w ay by Armenians and Russian.
11. The testimony under oath of Fevzi Efendi, 
Haklf30 Town Director31 (5.7.1916) (The oppression 
executed at Korsuh32 and Sekur33 villages of Hakif 
town)
I had gone to Ahkis34 village in October 1914 
together with about 20 gendarmes to recruit and to be 
submitted to newly established fortification (worker) 
battalions. Village elderly council stated that there had 
been nobody in the village and majority o f the villagers 
were in the army and they were in Erivan. This expla­
nation was wrong. Therefore, after preparing a list for 
50-60 people, I was obliged to send two gendarmes to 
Sekur village and four gendarmes to Korsuh (Karbasti) 
village to ensure these recruits participate in the army. 
When the gendarmes arrived at Sekur village where the 
resident o f the village were Armenians, had met them 
with swears, called them saying, “Get away from here, 
the authority o f  your director does not influence us, let 
your head officer o f  the district come here with two
30 Today, Ak$ar subdistrict of Hizan town of Bitlis.
31 Compare with Ermeni K om iteleri’nin A ’mal ve Harekat-i 
Ihtilaliyyesi..., p. 174.
32 Today, K arbasti village of Hizan town of Bitlis.
33 Its name could not be identified today.
34 A village of Ak§ar of Hizan town of Bitlis. Its name could not be 
identified today.
battalions” . Upon this by taking a force about six-seven 
persons, they went again to the village. However, these 
gendarmes met with intense fire o f rifles. These gen­
darme soldiers named Ismail and Nezir from Bitlis, 
were martyred there. The others returned to Hakif (Ak- 
§ar) after a struggle that lasted for a couple hours.
To the four gendarmes who were sent to Korsuh 
(Karbasti) village, Armenians, first o f all, behaved po­
litely and invited them to a house for dinner. They were 
massacred by the eight Armenians at the house, their 
bodies were brought in a situation that could not be 
recognized and their weapons were seized. When I 
learned this situation, with the force I had with me, we 
set off to the above mentioned villages to make investi­
gation. W hen we saw the Armenian rioting, we gave up 
this idea o f  ours and went to a Moslem neighboring 
village called Hi§et35. After a while a woman, called 
Sultan from Beygiri36 village came and said that she 
had brought the messages o f Armenian chief of gangs, 
namely Lato, from Ozim37 village and Kalosar from 
Sekur village. Sultan said to us, “If  you do not give 
back the Armenian recruits that you have taken as 
fortification soldiers, the Armenians will decide to put 
all o f you to the sword and bomb the villages” . O f 
course, we did not accept this offer. Upon this, the Ar­
35 Today, Kolludere village of Hizan-Ak§ar subdistrict of Bitlis. 
Here we have to remind this issue: There are two more villages 
today which are called Belenoluk (Upper Hi§et) and Ormandali 
(Lower Hi§et) o f central town of Pervari of Siirt.
36 A village of Hizan-Ak§ar subdistrict of Bitlis. Today its name 
could not be identified.
37 Today. Giimii$6ren village of central town of Pervari of Siirt.
menians attacked us. The struggle continued about two 
days. As a result of the help of other gendarmes and 
Kurdish people, we could drive away the attackers. 
During these events, a lot of Moslem women and 
children were killed without any cause.
The above mentioned events, prove that Ar­
menians arise turmoil in the country and limped the 
course o f military and civilian works.
12. The testim ony under oath  of H eadm an 
M ustafa, son of O sm an from notables of H orus38 
village (8.7.1916)
An enemy force about 400 people consisting of 
infantry and cavalry units, coining from Bitlis and Ke- 
san39 directions, attacked suddenly to our village at four 
o ’clock in the morning. In front o f them there were the 
Armenians from Hirit (Cokekyazi), Sim Hap40, Vastin41 
and Prons42 villages. There were about 200 armed men 
in our village. Although we defended our village till the 
sunset, the Armenians who knew the ways to our 
village, began to enter into the village. The Russians
,x Today. Horozdere village of Hizan tow n of Bitlis.
34 In XVlth Century, among the Sanjaks of Van Province, a 
sanjaks called Kesan. lias been mentioned Wc could not identify 
its location today. Furthermore, there was a Kc.san village, which 
is called Ergefidi today, of Tutak town of Agri.
A village of Hi?.an-Ak§ar subdistrict of Bitlis. Its name of today 
could not be identified.
11 A village of Hi/.an-Boliikya/.i subdistrict of Bitlis. Us name of 
today could not be identified.
Today. Gok^imen village of Hizan town of Bitlis.
followed them. W hen we withdrew, our village w as on 
fire. The women and children who stayed at Bekran 
district, were screaming. The cavalrymen ran after us 
and kept us under volley. The women and children suf­
fered the greatest loss. At last we succeeded to rescue. 
From the well-known people o f  our village, Omer son 
o f §afi’i, together with his family consisting o f  15 
women and children were taken as slaves by the Rus­
sians. They took these slaves to an unknown direction. 
After a few hours walk, in the investigation we carried 
out, it was found out that hundreds o f people were mis­
sing. We were afraid o f  their being massacred. After 10 
days, the enemy left our village and we returned back 
to the village. There was a horrible scenery in front of 
our eyes. It could be said that the village was con­
structed with human bodies. The women whose skins 
were stripped, were hung on the trees. The men. whose 
eyes were carved by Armenians and Russians were tied 
on the trees as a dartboard, the children were cut into 
pieces, the furniture and jewelry also were destroyed.
13. The testimonies under oath of Sheikh 
Haydar Efendi, from the notables of Hizan together 
with Abdiilmecid Efendi, Mufti of Hizan (5.7.1916)
Gayda Dervish Lodge, constructed on a small 
hill, located in Hizan, and where thousands of pas­
sengers are stayed for a night, consisted about 100 
rooms together with its annexes. Russians and Arme­
nians, proceeded to Gayda Dervish Lodge after burning 
Cem Ham Dervish Lodge which was protected by six 
gendarmes. The enemy that was attacking was a unit of
800 people. A force o f 60 people consisting o f Russian 
and Armenians under the command of Aram Pasha43 
suddenly attacked the dervish lodge. Against this force, 
gendarmes had to withdrew. All o f  the people blocked 
in the dervish lodge, were burned alive. We were on a 
hill, located an hour distance to the dervish lodge. 
While the fire was destroying people and buildings, Ar­
menians and Russians who were not satisfied with this 
wildness, attacked the villages in the vicinity and mas­
sacred all the people they caught.
14. Testimonies with oath of Davut Efendi 
and Huseyin Efendi, notables of central Karasu of 
Hizan (7.7.1916)
About the end o f  February, a crowd o f Ar­
menians and Russians o f  400 people, attacked Karasu 
at seven o'clock in the morning. We were on the hills, 
half an hour away from the village. We were informed 
by the nomads while the enemy was going to surround 
us. Russians and Armenians followed us and they killed 
all the people at Gayda. Later on the enemy entered 
into Karasu and they burned the government building 
and the house o f  Omer Ha§im. They massacred $afi’i, 
son o f Mehmed, two old women called Zeliha and 
Leyla who could not leave the village due to their ages, 
in a horrible manner. These gangs also killed a lot of 
women and children from the nomads o f  Hakif (Ak§ar)
Armenian chief o f gang from Karabagli. who executed Turkish 
and Kurdish massacre in Van and its surroundings. After the 
occupation of Van by Russian, he would be appointed as the 
governor of this Province.
village. This massacre was verified by the bodies that 
we met on the way returning Karasu, they were not be 
recognized at all. The Armenians destroyed the furni­
tures and goods that they could not take away.
15. The second testimony with oath of Ahmed 
Nureddin Efendi, old town Director of Ak^an (Mer- 
cimekkale)(25.6.1916) (Poisoning of Servet Bey, Mu? 
Governor)
It was December and January o f 1914-1915. 
Due to a feast celebrated by Armenians, Mu$ governor 
Servet Bey, had a courtesy visit to Armenian bishop. 
The Armenians who did not hesitate to execute every 
kind of murder, this time decided to kill Servet Bey, by 
offering him poisonous coffee. Servet Bey did not 
doubt and drank the coffee given to him and this caused 
his death.
This last event together with other events, show 
that the Armenians, wanted to kill also the educated, 
intellectual and active people among Moslems. When 
they find opportunity, they poisoned some o f them, 
burned them alive or carved their eyes. The horrible 
misbehavior o f the Armenians did not only consist of 
these murders executed against Moslems. At the same 
time, they made espionage in favor o f Russians and 
gave information on military and administrative sub­
jects and guided them in every kind of attack.
16. The third testimony with oath of Ahmed 
Nureddin Efendi, old town Director of Akpan (Mer-
cimekkale) (27.6.1916) (Massacre of Arak44 
Monastery)
At the end o f 1914, the Armenians were 
deserting from Ottoman army together with their 
weapons in groups. In Mu§ valley, especially at 
locations called Qankli Monastery45, Kizil Monastery46 
and Arak (Kepenek), murders were executed47. The 
Armenian bishop and Dashnaks, encouraged the 
murderers, to commit murders and banditry. Thus, riot 
movements were expanding. As the government had 
urgent works on those days, the Armenians took the 
advantage o f the government being busy, and they were 
bringing weapons and ammunition to the above 
mentioned places. This situation did not escape from 
the eyes o f governor Servet Bey. Servet Bey , warned 
Armenian notables and bishop and that in case riot 
movement is not given up, the government will lay 
hands upon the situation. As a result the continuation of 
Armenian movements, not complying with the call of
44 Today, Kepenek village of central town of Mu?. In the 
Armenian Monastiy located here, each year at the beginning of 
july they used to arrange fair.
45 Turkish people called Qankli Monastery located within the 
boundaries of Yaygm subdistrict of Mu?, Qanli Church or Cengelli 
Church. This monasteiy, is Surb-Garabet Monastery described by 
Evliya Celebi. In this monastery, a fair was being arrange in the 
middle of July .
46 It was within the boundaries o f Yaygm subdistrict of Mu§. They 
used to arrange fair here in the middle of August.
4 The most convenient and secure places for Armenian gangs 
were churches and monasteries. These gangs were protected by 
holy chiefs and church priests. Churches were used as the 
warehouse of weapons and bombs, at the same time.
the government, and shelving o f  the events o f  K um us 
and Sironik49 villages by Dashnaks and Armenian 
leaders, leaving the guilty unpunished, the government 
deemed it necessary to end the turmoil and formed a 
gendarme unit consisting o f 30 people. The commander 
o f  this unit, who was a young and honest lieutenant, 
Ahmed Bey, son o f  Galib Efendi, was assigned to 
arrange public order, to catch the gangs and to take the 
weapons. The Gendarme unit started towards Arak 
(Kepenek). 30 hours later, I learned that Ahmed Bey 
and 10 gendarm e soldiers had been killed in front o f 
Arak Monastery. H ow this murdering is executed is as 
here below.
Gendarme unit came to Arak (Kepenek) village 
in the evening. The commander wanted one or two 
guides from the villagers, to show the way to 
Monastery. The Armenians o f  the village gave two 
guides, and showed the way to the unit. The two 
Armenian guides, who were going for some time in 
front o f  the soldiers said, “This is your way, you can 
continue” and they returned to their village. Ahmed 
Bey did not insist on the accompany o f the guides and 
when he saw nobody around the Monastery, he walked 
towards the monastery with his men, without hesitating. 
When they came to a distance o f 200 m. The Arme­
nians who were hidden behind the loopholes o f the 
Monastery fired. Ahmed Bey who was walking in front 
o f  the unit and ten gendarmes were shot and martyred. 
The others, who were surprised from this unexpected
48 A village of the central town of Mu§. Its name of today can not 
be identified.
49 Today, K irkoy of the central town of Mu§.
fire, protected themselves. by taking shelter behind a 
small barrack belonging to the monastery. The Arme­
nians who fired them, were shouting like “You dishon­
est, mean! These territories do not belong to you! From 
now on there is no bread for you in these territories, 
will you still stay here? Russian people came, know 
that these territories belong to Armenians! These ter­
ritories are included in Armenia! Get out o f  here, other­
wise we will kill you all !” .
The funerals o f the gendarmes who were killed, 
were taken to Mu§ by carriages. The Armenians, who 
were encouraged with this event, extended their attacks 
till Mu§ and in order to arise bloody turmoil, they 
began to attack to the city at nights. Old Van parlia­
mentarian Papazian50 and Armenian bishop were work­
ing insidiously to facilitate these riot movements. A lot 
o f  Armenian school teachers and intellectuals also 
participated in these massacres. It is absolute that the 
above mentioned honest, helpful Ahmed Bey, was 
killed as a result o f  ambush, that was secretly prepared 
by Armenians51
17. The annex of the letter written by 
Ministry of Interior Affairs to the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs (26.9.1916) and the testimony with
50 Vahan Papazian, who was a Parliamentarian of Ottoman State 
from Van, was born in Tebriz in 1876 and died in Beirut in 1973. 
Vahan Papazian. would be assigned as the chief of Hoybun 
Association to be established in Beimt in 1927. See. Erdal liter. 
E rm eni Propagandasinin Kaynakiari, Ankara 1994. p. 17.
M Compare with A skeri Tarih Belgeleri Dergisi, Sayi:81 (Aralik 
1982) Beige No.1815,1816.1817: Ermeni K om iteleri’nin A ’mal 
ve H arekat-i Ihtilaliyyesi..., p. 175.
oath of Hulusi Bey, Director of Post-Telegraph 
Administration of Pervari town of Siirt Province on 
July 1, 1995 (26.6.1916)
Following the declaration of mobilization, on 
the first days o f  the year 1915, an Armenian wom an, 
named Ki§ from Hi§et (Kolludere) village, who served 
as a courier to Armenian gangs, found me and told me 
that, she had come from Ozim (Gumii§oren) village, i§- 
han, from Armenian gangs, had sent his regards to me, 
his sincere friendship about my personality had not 
changed and still continued, I had to serve to the aims 
o f Armenian Committee against a high salary and a 
great deal o f  goodness and in case that secret was 
disclosed, my family and I would be killed. W hen I 
asked her how I would serve the Committee, she told 
me that a decision had been taken for the establishment 
o f  an Armenian State consisting o f  six Eastern (Ana­
tolian) provinces and I had to provide information on 
the following issues and inform them to the Armenians.
1. The measures taken by the Ottoman Govern­
ment to prevent the establishment o f this state,
2 . Communications among state authorities on 
this issue,
3. What are the intent and plans o f  the govern­
ment about Armenian Committees,
4. The deployment o f  the Ottoman Army in the 
above mentioned provinces,
5. The areas taken under control,
6 . All kinds o f  information related with mobil­
ization.
Being afraid o f these threatening offers, I did 
not say anything to anybody.
On another day, a person called Lame Markere 
from the Armenian spies o f  Lower Hi§et (Ormandali) 
village, approached to me and conveyed me the regards 
o f I§han and Lato residing at Ozim (Gumu?oren) vil­
lage and told me that one day Lato would come and 
speak to me.
This time, I thought to have Markere be caught; 
but he suspected and escaped. Again I kept silent. 
However, after a short time, when the intrigues o f Ar­
menians began to be dangerous, I informed everything 
happened to the government. After a while, great 
amounts o f ammunition and stored food that were sent 
to Ozim (Giimu§oren) village by Armenians, were 
found. They used to bring these stored food from Pi­
roz52, Dentas53, Hertovin-i Ulya54 and Hertovin-i Suf- 
la55 villages which were called Nezarborum, and Kelda- 
ni56 together with Armenian villages called Lower Hi- 
$et (Ormandali), Malik57 and Vilas58 and Hashir, which 
was the central town o f Pervari. Local administrators, 
proved the crimes o f Armenians at the end o f the inter­
rogations and informed the Siirt governor and the head 
of the district o f this situation. However, the above
5: Today Ta$dilek village of Pervari town of Siirt.
53 Its name of today, can not be identified.
M Today Ekindiizii village of Pervari town of Siirt.
55 Today Ekindiizii village of Pervari town of Siirt.
v> Asuris of Eastern Church.
s A village of Pervari town of Siirt. Its name of today, can not be 
identified.
58 Today. Cobanoren village of Pervari town of Siirt.
mentioned government authorities did not conclude the 
interrogations in order not to cause confusion.
During these events, a gendarme unit that went 
to Ozim (Gumii§oren) village to catch the deserted sol­
diers, was insulted by the Armenians. These Arme­
nians also, escaped together with great amounts o f  
weapons and ammunition, in compliance with the 
deserted, towards Mtiktis59 subdistrict and §atak60. The 
Armenians o f Hizan, Pervari, §atak (Catak), Kargi- 
kan61, gathered at Ozim (Gumu^oren) village. The date 
o f these events coincided with the dates o f Armenian 
revolution in Van. The Armenians at Ozim (Giimu§6- 
ren) did not let any Moslem, gendarme and policemen 
in their villages and set up barriers. Meanwhile, they 
used to fire at the gendarmes and the authorities o f  the 
government who wanted to give advice to them. After a 
fight that lasted for three days, they obliged them to 
withdraw.
The Armenian woman, that I mentioned at the 
beginning o f  my statement, called Ki§, repeated every­
where that the Armenians o f Ozim (Giimu§6ren) would 
obtain the autonomy o f Pervari one day. The Arme­
nians o f Pervari, under the command o f Armenian 
Major Mecin, from Hashir62 village, fired at Pervari 
gendarmes who were going to be trained, and sur­
rounded the above mentioned village. During the ex­
change o f  fire, a gendarme was wounded. The minutes 
related with this event, are in the possession of the
59 Today, Bah^esaray subdistrict of Geva§ town of Van. 
611 Today, (̂  atak town of Van.
6' Its name of today can not be identified.
Central town of Pervari o f Siirt.
authorities o f  Pervari. Armenian Mihran, who was also 
named Lato, was a Colonel. Keldani (AsurT) Nirson 
from Borem63 village, and Mecin from Hashir village 
were majors, Mehr from Vilas village had the rank o f a 
Lieutenant. The Christians o f Siirt and Pervari had the 
some evil targets. The spies used to go to and come 
from the above mentioned villages. During the general 
mobilization, all Armenians, began to kill Moslems. 
Sheikh Mehmed Siddik Efendi, Mufti o f Van, was 
massacred near the bridge o f  Engil64 village, while he 
was performing ablution. His servants also met with the 
same end. Five gendarme soldiers who were going to 
Sason65 from Mu§, were murdered. Sheikh Mehmed 
Efendi, son o f  Sheikh Abdullah Efendi from £el 
£em kan66 village o f  Pervari, was killed without any 
reason by Keldani executioners residing at Hertovin 
(Ekindiizii) village o f  Pervari on the hills o f Herakolu 
mountain. With these executions, it was very clear that 
the purpose o f Armenians, was to arise confusion in the 
country, by inciting the religious feelings o f  Moslems.
After the riot o f Armenians o f  Van and the 
combat they made with Ottoman forces, the Christians 
o f Pervari and all o f  the Armenians, escaped to the 
boundaries of Van Province by taking this opportunity; 
they established a regular regiment there and attacked 
at Pervari and Hi§et (Kolludere) direction. At the end of 
this attack, which lasted for one day, a Moslem woman,
w A village of central town of Perv ari of Siirt. Its name of today,
can not be identified.
M Today, Doneme^ village of Gumii$dere subdistrict of Van.
65 A town of Siirt.
Its name of today, could not be identified.
two men and a child were martyred. W hile the 
Armenians were withdrawing, they left two cases o f 
knives, hand grenades and machine guns at the village.
The gendarmes and civilian authorities, who 
were sent to the villages o f  Geva§ town to provide 
stored food, were massacred by the Armenians. A lm ost 
half o f the M oslems o f §atak (£atak) town, including 
women and children, were put to the sword.
18. The testimonies with oath of Abdurrah­
man, son of Mehmed and Yusuf, son of Mehmed 
(1.7.1916)
W e are originally from the people o f  U?um67, a 
subdistrict o f  Hizan town and. Nurs68, Vavink69, E nd70 
and M ezraa-i End71 villages, where the sum m er 
grasslands are. After the occupation o f  §atak (£atak ) 
town by the enemy, the Armenians of Kevar72,Kutis-i 
Ulya73, Kutis-i Sufla74, £a<?van75, Seyfkar76 and Adir-i
6 Today. Saginli subdistrict of Hizan town of Bitlis.
58 Today. Kepirli village of Saginli subdistrict of Hizan town of 
Bitlis.
69 Its name of today, can not be identified.
0 Its name of today, can not be identified.
Its name of today, can not be identified.
" A village o f Saginli subdistrict of Hizan town of Bitlis. Its name 
o f today, can not be identified.
A village of Saginli subdistrict of Hizan town of Bitlis. Its name 
of today, can not be identified.
A village of Saginli subdistrict of Hizan town of Bitlis. Its name 
of today, can not be identified.
A villge o f Saginli subdistrict of Hizan town of Bitlis. Its name 
of today, can not be identified.
Ulya77 villages which are located in the vicinity o f our 
village, Sergis and under the command o f Lato (alter­
nately called Mihran), Gazar, Dilo who came Russia, 
came to Kutis-i Ulya. Here they made three written 
offers to the notables o f the village. Among the nota­
bles o f the village, there was the mullah known as 
Bedi-iiz-zaman Said-i Kiirdi.
They would choose one o f the following three
offers.
1. To surrender to the enemy,
2. To leave the towns,
3. To fight.
Nine hours after the arrival o f  the enemy, they 
attacked to our village with 600 people. They had hats 
and uniforms. W e could not identify whether there 
were Russian soldiers among them. Only, the number 
o f  those who had poor appearance in the enemy army 
was quite a lot. Those could be Russian or Armenians 
who come from Russia. The enemy took the people o f 
our village to Mezraa-i End. There were Abdurrahman, 
son o f Hur§id Bey among notables, his son M usa and 
his wife, with us. Their money and jewelry were seized. 
The woman and the girls were seduced. The next day 
about 33 men and boys and about 80 women, girls and 
children were taken to Miikiis (Bah^esaray) in two 
groups. The gioup o f  women was left at £a<?van. All o f 
the men were put to the sword that night. As they 
assigned me a task, I resqued from the massacre. When
76 A villge of Saginli subdistrict of Hizan town of Bitlis. Its name 
of today, can not be identified.
77 A villge of Sagmli subdistrict of Hizan town of Bitlis. Its name 
of today, can not be identified.
they assigned me a task, they said like this: “W e p ro ­
pose you money. Go to Mullah Said. Tell him to deliver 
us the Armenians who live there. Explain them that 
there is no advantage to fight for nothing. The country 
has already been occupied completely. Russian went till 
Aleppo. The Armenian country is established, tell them  
to come and submit themselves to us. Bring us inform a­
tion about the number and power o f the soldiers there” 
These words were told to me by Dilo. I immediately set 
off. When I arrived at Qagvan, I saw that together with 
our subdistrict director and Mullah Said, our military 
•forces consisting o f  gendarmes and Kurdish people had 
arrived. After an intensive fight that lasted five hours, 
our forces succeeded in rescuing the women group. 
The situation o f  the women was very miserable. The 
cheeks o f  the young girls were bitten and they did not 
have power even to walk. Most o f the children were 
killed by stepping on them with boots. We were only 
two left from 33 men. Most o f the women and children 
who were rescued died with the effect o f the torture that 
they encountered. No women was left other than the 
wife o f Abdurrahman, son o f  Hur§id. It is impossible to 
count the oppression activities that we witnessed.
19. Testimonies with oath of Ali and Feth­
ullah, sons of Hamid Bey from the notables of 
Hanianik78 village and Selim, Mahmud and Yakub, 
sons Haci Bey(14.4.1916)
78 The name o f Hanianik. mentioned in the certificate, should be
Hanik: However, it could not be idenlified whether Hanik village
mentioned here is the village Hanik (Qukurtarla) of Ahlat town of
Bitlis or Hanik (Dirinipmar) village of Nurclliii subdisirict of
In the middle o f June, 1915, at dawn, the Ar­
menians and Russian surrounded our village and told us 
to submit ourselves and nobody should have the vil­
lage. When we rejected their offer and upon our first 
bullet, that we fired to defend ourselves, they attacked 
our village like wild animals. The screams of help were 
coming from everywhere. Our village turned out to be a 
slaughterhouse within one minute. We recognized 
Ni§an, Murad, Oseb, Dikran, Zaho, Beyko, Sergis, Tan- 
gasal, Gazar, Mosis who were residing at the villages in 
the vicinity, among Armenians. The Armenians were 
killing the Moslems, while screaming “Long live Aram 
Pasha” . We witnessed a horrible scenery. A woman, 
carrying her child on her breast was running for being 
saved. One o f  the gangs stopped her Took her child 
and in front o f the eyes o f  the woman, which were 
opened wide with wilderness, pushed his bayonet into 
the body of the child and killed him. That gang, after 
this execution, killed his mother also While we were 
escaping, the above mentioned Armenians were shout­
ing, and saying “D on’t escape, we will follow you 
everywhere, even till Damascus !” .
20. Testimonies with oath of Tahsin, Sadullah 
and Bekir Efendi from notables of Hirit (Cokekyazi) 
village (3.7.1916)
Malazgirt (own of Mu$. In the examination we earned out. we 
could not meet with a village called Hanianik.
One morning, at four o ’clock Turkish tim e; our 
village Hirit ((^okekyazi) was attacked by the enem y 
consisting o f  10 Kazakhs, Russian infantry and the 
Armenians o f the neighboring villages, who came from 
Simek79 subdistrict direction. The enemy, that entered 
into our village, burned all o f the houses. The A rm e­
nians and Russian killed all the men they caught, and 
imprisoned women and children in a place. Tow ards 
evening the enemy withdraw in the direction o f Simek 
(Boliikyazi) subdistrict. Russian infantries and A rm e­
nians, burned the imprisoned women and children. 
Only one child was rescued from this massacre in a 
miraculous way, and the others were completely 
annihilated, they took away all the jewelry and 
furniture o f  the villagers after this horrible massacre.
On April 25, 1915, Ak^an (Mercimekkale) Sub­
district Director Ahmed Nureddin Efendi, together with 
a squadron consisting of local forces and gendarme 
went to look for to Kumus80 village of Mu§, where the 
deserted Armenian people o f Sironik (Kirkoy) village 
took shelter. At night, the deserted people, with the help 
o f  villages, under the command of Ruben and Esro, 
who were the effective members o f Dashnak Com ­
mittee, surrounded the house where the soldiers were 
staying and fired at them Among the gendarme , Mirza 
from Kapltca81 and Mehmed Emin died The others 
were suffocated at the same place.
9 Today, Boliikya/л subdistrict of ccnlnil (own of Bitlis 
A village of central town of Mu§. Its name of today cannot be 
established.
81 K aplica village of Qat town of Er/.uriim.
21. Testimony of (^erkes Aga from Hala? 
tribal Chieftains at Engesor82 village.
A gang consisting o f Armenians and Kazakhs, 
occupied Engesor (Dalda) on June 15, 1915. Russian 
and Armenians who did not take into account the 
screams of the people, plundered the houses. To the 
objection of a few villagers, they responded with mas­
sacre. The first victims o f  the massacre are as follows; 
Cuma, son o f  Ibrahim; Yakub, son o f  Ali; Murad, son 
o f  Haci; Asim, son o f Hami; Halil, son o f Haydar, and 
from notables, Abdiilhamid , son o f  Sheikh.
Those who were massacred from children and 
women: a twelve years old child, and his eight years 
old sister, Hatice, wife, son and daughter o f Mahmud, 
son o f Ali.
During this first occupation, if  the villagers who 
took advantage o f  the darkness o f the night and did not 
climb up the mountain, victims would be much more.
The second occupation o f Engesor (Dalda) by 
Russian and Armenians, happened in February, 1916. A 
few people were rescued from the massacre during this 
occupation. Orphan Mecid, son o f Tabir, whose whole 
family was killed by the enemy, was accommodated at 
Siirt Orphans Dormitory by the commission.
22. Testimonies with oath of Devaz, son of 
$eyho, Omer, son of Mustafa and Tayyib, son of 
Abdiilhamid from Kotum83
82 Today, Dalda village of Tatvan town of Bitlis.
83 Today, Kticiiksu subdistrict o f Tatvan town of Bitlis.
On July 12, 1915, the squadron com m ander lo­
cated at Kotum (Kii?uksu) , informed the notables that 
Russian and Armenians were approaching to  the  vil­
lage. Upon this, preparations were made and a w alk to ­
wards Bitlis direction had started. When the group 
came to Armenian village Tog84 which was h a lf  an 
hour away from Kotum (Kiieuksu), a few hundred Ar­
menians and Kazakhs attacked. Nomads were obliged 
to become slaves. In spite o f  this, women, men and 
children were massacred in pains and pitilessly. Only 
30 people could be rescued from these poor people.
23. Testimony of Abdullah, son of Resul from 
Aleman85 village.
W hen the villagers who left the village, 
returned, upon the withdrawal o f  the Russians, they 
found that all the houses were burned. The burned 
corpses o f  §emo , son o f Osman, Mustafa, son o f Tahir 
and two women, who could not leave the village, as 
they were wounded, were taken out under the ruins. 
The corpses o f  other 10 patients could not be found.
24. Testimony of Nuh Bey, Commander of 
Light cavalry regiment
In February 1916, during the attacks o f  Russian, 
the following villages located in Mu§ valley, Dirhas86,
A village of Tatvan town of Bitlis. Its name of today, can not be 
identified.
^  Today- O renlik  village o f Tatvan town of Bitlis.
Its name o f today, can not be identified.
Kolosik87, Zigak88, Var§hah89, U?tav90, Zirket91, Tog, 
M arnik92, Gurd93, Hiyoyan94, Avzut95, Kotni96, Pav9 , 
Capkis98, A gdad", Sipannan100, Suspert101, Til (Kor­
kut), Yekmal102, Norgah103 were completely burned.
The same commander, stated that the Russian 
had gone to Kara Kilise104. They were assigned to 
protect nomadic group During the withdrawal o f Tur­
kish units. At Hamzikan105 village located in the vicin­
87 Today, Elmabulak village of central town of Mu§.
88 Today, Karakiitiik village of central town of Mu§.
89 Its name of today, can not be identified.
90 Its name of today, can not be identified.
91 Today, Otaf village of Korkut subdistrict of Mu?.
92 Its name of today, can not be identified.
93 A village of Ak$ar subdistrict of Bitlis. Its name of today can 
not be identified.
94 Its name of today can not be identified.
95 Today, Buvetli village of Korkut subdistrict o f Bitlis.
96 Today, Glinkin village of Cukur subdistrict of Bitlis.
9 Today, Yama^koy village of Qukur subdistrict of Bitlis.
98 Today. Uziimveren village of £ukur subdistrict of Bitlis.
99 Today. Yolgozler village of Korkut subdistrict of Mu?.
Its name of today, can not be identified.
Its name of today, can not be identified.
Today, Pinariistii village of Korkut subdistrict of Mu§.
103 Its name of today, can not be identified.
1111 At that time. Kara Kilise was a town of Bayezid Province. 
Today, its name is Karakose. which is the center of Agn Prov­
ince. In the years when the Armenians were there, they have built 
a church made of black stones and during 1877-1878 Ottoman-
Russia war and in the 1st World War. they tried to change its name
to Kara Kilise (black church). At the end of the communications 
made in 1919. When General Kazim Karabekir was the com­
mander of XVth Army Corps of Ministry of National Defense. 
Kara Kilise was converted to Karakose .
Today. Ta;>tekne village of central subdistrict of Agri.
ity o f Kara Kilise ( Karakose ), Kazakhs caught this 
group. While a great majority o f  Kazakhs were at­
tacking the protecting unit, another squadron attacked 
on nomads, in order to create panic. Upon this attack, 
the nomads who were shocked, left their carriages and 
animals, and tried to save their souls. More than 3.000 
women and children were killed with swords. In order 
to be rescued from the sudden attack o f Kazakhs, 
Ottoman soldiers continued to walk at night also. 
Hundreds o f  old people and children, could not follow  
cavalrymen. These nomadic groups were attacked by 
Russian Kazakhs at Kilinp Gedigi. On the other hand, 
Russian have sent a powerful cavalryman squadron to 
occupy this mountain pass. However this mountain pass 
was seized by Turkish units. The attack o f the Russian 
was stopped. However, the end of the nomads w ho 
remained on the Russian side, was unknown.
25. Testimony of Abdullah, son of $ebab, 
from Bardik106 village of Azakpur107 subdistrict.
On February 18, 1916, it was learned from the 
nomads who came to Bardik village, that the Russian 
were approaching. They prepared to escape, and just 
before the villagers left the village, Russian were seen. 
Russian put the houses in the village on fire, without 
taking into account the screams o f the villagers. They 
killed the residents o f the village, including disabled 
and sick people. Abdullah and his two friends, took the 
advantage o f the darkness o f the night and saved their
106 Its name of today, can not be identified.
107 Today Korkut subdistrict of Mu§ province.
souls. They were hidden among the bushes in the 
vicinity o f the village.
26. Testimonies of iso, from Til (Korkut) 
village, Osman from Bitlis, Ferhad from Kotni108 
and Halid from Ozkavak109
The Armenian gangs, supported by Kazakhs 
were acting as advance guards during the Russian at­
tack. These gangs were assigned to attack quiet villages 
and to create turmoil there. The residents o f the villages 
were hiding in the pathways in order to get free from 
the follow-up o f the gangs. However, they were found 
by the Russian soldiers and they were taken away. 
Healthy men, were set off to the inside o f Russia as war 
slaves. Those who were taken under the command of 
Russian soldiers, have gone to the places they wanted 
to be. However, the Moslems who were taken away by 
Armenians and Kazakhs, were massacred absolutely.
The remaining began to walk in April 1916, 
under the direction o f 30 guards. The sergeant and 
some guards were Armenians from Caucasia. The first 
day the walk continued, on the second day when they 
come to the path-way, the sergeant said to one o f his 
men slowly in Armenian, “Let’s kill these also” .
Derbo, son o f  Haydar, who spoke Armenian, 
told to his friend the massacre directive that he had 
heard and said that instead o f  being killed like a mild 
person, it would be better to attack the guards.
108 Giinkiri
1,19 Ozkavak village of Cukur subdistrict of Bitlis.
When they came to §orkiyan11{) stream, the 
smell o f  the dead bodies began to come. The bodies, cut 
into pieces, were laying among the rocks. Everybody 
felt that the death was coming. In spite o f this, they 
attacked on the guards. Six slaves died, but the guards 
were killed also.
27. Testimony of Seyyid Han, son of Yusuf 
Seydo who was the Chief of Seydan tribe.
In February 1916, the villagers who took shelter 
on Tifnik Karakoy mountains, were trying to reach 
Huyut111. But they were attacked by a Russian squad­
ron. Hundreds o f  women and children were massacred 
by the Russian swords. The group, after fighting many 
times with Armenian gangs, could reach the place they 
wanted to go.
28. Testimony of soldier Resul, cousin of 
Celal Efendi who was the clerk of Mu$ Gendarme 
Regiment
In February 1916, I was wounded and taken as 
a slave by Russian. At Til (Korkut) village, where 1 was 
treated, Attorney-at-law from Mu§, Armenian Hrant, 
whom I knew previously, took me to a house where 10 
Armenian gangs were drinking. As 1 refused the drink 
given, the chief o f the gangs got angry and branded my 
body with an iron stick, heated in the fire. The doctor, 
who was ready in time, upon my screams, saved me
110 Its name of today, can not be identified
111 Today Kavakba$i subdistrict of Mutki town of Bitlis.
from death. After I was rescued, I walked three days 
and arrived at Huyut (Kavakba§i). I found that the Ar­
menians had gone to Russia in small groups and the 
Ottoman soldiers were in their hands.
29. MINUTES OF THE COMMISSION ( I )
Yusuf, cousin o f  Mercan, and daughter o f §akir 
from Hersan district has been killed and his house was 
burned.
Halid, son o f Polad from Avih district, the 
grandmother o f his wife MinnetT, and his seven years 
old son £erkes, were killed by the Armenians, and 20 
Turkish Lira was taken from her.
Abdullah, husband o f  Besi, daughter o f Suley­
man, from Zeydan district and her brothers M aruf and 
Re§id and a young girl called Feriha were killed by 
Armenians.
Abdiilbaki, 18 years old son o f Yadigar, daugh­
ter o f  Hasan from Hamtos district, was taken away by 
the Armenians, who took her 10 liras and plundered her 
house.
Hezar, mother o f  Cemile, daughter o f  Bekir, 
from Avih district, was killed by the Armenians and her 
house was plundered.
Hayriye, daughter o f  Ibrahim, from Mahalle- 
ba§i, was seduced by force, by the Armenian gangs, and 
later on this action was repeated by Russian many 
times. Her one lira, clothes, ornaments and other goods 
were taken away.
Mehmed Ali, sick husband o f Kuy, daughter o f 
§ero, from Mescid district, was killed by the Arme­
nians.
Mu§tak and Hikmet, nine and four years old 
sons o f §ohret, daughter o f Mehmed from Mermutlu 
district, were killed by Armenians by sword and fur­
thermore they took her five liras and plundered her 
house.
Ali and §akir o f  Hamail, daughter o f  Abdulaziz 
who was originally from Ahlat town and residing at 
Hamtos district, were shot by Armenians, her grand­
daughter, 10 years old Pakize, was killed after her ears 
and arms were cut and furthermore her daughter-in-law 
Hamail was massacred also.
112 *Safiye from Tatar Gazi village , was passing
from Bitlis, to go to Diyarbakir, was kidnapped by Ar­
menians. Her husband Siileyman, her eight years old 
daughter Umetullah and her newly born other daughter, 
were cut into pieces by the Armenians. Her son Abdul- 
kerim was kidnapped and their goods were plundered.
Abdtilmecid, husband o f Fidan, daughter o f M u­
sa from M arnik113, residing at Hamtos district, was 
beaten and wounded by the Armenian and later on they 
have taken him away.
Subera, daughter o f Amo, from Azad village, 
was kidnapped by Armenian gangs, her daughter-in- 
law Medine and 15 years old son Abdiilbaki were taken 
away and their goods were seized.
112 Today, Tatargazi village of Karahasan subdistrict of Malazgirt 
town of Mu§.
113 Its name of today, can not be identified.
Ali and Memi, brothers o f Zarife, daughter of 
Suleyman, who was originally from Kerekoglu114 vil­
lage, and residing at Komiis district, were killed by 
gangs and their goods were completely plundered.
Haso, husband o f  Abani, daughter o f Hasan, 
who was originally from Dedeli115 and residing at Kuru 
Bulak district, her brother-in-law Suleyman, and his 
wife Harime were killed by the sword strokes o f  Rus­
sian and Armenian gangs, their 20 liras and goods were 
taken.
Old father Ibrahim o f  MinnetT, daughter o f  Ibra­
him, who was originally from Ahlat town, residing at 
Kuru Bulak district, her brother Mecid, were put to the 
sword by Armenians, and their goods and 400 kuru5 
were taken.
Ibrahim, hushand o f  Cemile, daughter o f  Hiise- 
yin, from Ta§ district, and her 12 years old son Sayyad 
(Seyyid) were killed by raiders, their three liras were 
taken.
Halid, brother o f  Ziynet, daughter o f Nuri, from 
Naho§nud district, was killed by raiders and his 200 
kuru§ was taken.
Hasso, father o f Giirnaz, daughter o f Hasso, 
who was originally from Dedeli, residing at Kuru Bulak 
district, her brother, 15 years old Cem§id, her mother 
Amo, her 4 years old brother were killed and their 
goods together with their 12 liras were taken.
izzet Efendi, who was the son Esma, daughter 
o f  Haci M ustafa from Damascus, residing at Kizil 
Mescid district, and who was working as a clerk at the
114 Its name of today, can not be identified.
115 It could not be understood which Dedeli village it was.
court, was shot, his 15 liras and watch were taken and 
his furniture’s were completely plundered.
Necmeddin, 10 years old son ofFatm a, daughter 
o f Mehmed Efendi, from M abeker district, was killed 
by the Armenians. Her husband Ismail, has been sick 
for six months due to the wounds he has taken. 300 
liras, and 60 gold liras at her head, all o f  her furnitures, 
five watches, 3 bracelets and her other goods were 
seized.
Ahmed, father o f Ki§emi§, daughter o f Ahmed, 
from Zeydan district, was killed by the Armenians and 
his five liras were taken.
While Saliha, daughter o f Memi, from Tatar Ga- 
zi village was passing through Bitlis, her brothers Hami 
and Ham za and her nine years old son Salih and six 
years old son Sabit, four years old daughter Sultan were 
put to the sword by the Armenians.
Said, son o f  Elmas, daughter o f  Abdiilgafur 
from Tatar Gazi village, was taken away by the Rus­
sian, her husband was killed by the Armenians.
Haci, father o f  Rabia, daughter o f  Haci from 
§irvan §eyh116 village o f Malazgirt, her mother Seray 
and daughter-in-law Leyla, her 10 years old brother 
Sabri and newly born brother §ebab, her aunt Horzi and 
her sister Cemile, were killed by the Armenian.
§ebab, father ofN uran, daughter o f §ebab, from 
Malazgirt was killed by the Armenian.
The husband o f  Nigar, daughter o f Polad, from 
Avih district, was killed by the Armenian with the
116 Today. A divar village of Karaagil subdistrict of Bulanik town 
of Mu§.
strokes o f a large knife, furthermore his 30 lira was 
taken and his house was plundered.
Two sons and one daughter, a total o f  three 
children o f Fatma, wife o f  Davud, residing on Papir 
street o f Kizil Mescid district, the wife and sister-in- 
laws Fatma and Hadiye o f  bath attendant Nezir, two 
daughters and one son o f Fatma and one son and one 
daughter o f Hadiye, the wife, mother-in-law and daugh­
ter o f Hasan from Komiis district were taken away by 
the gangs. Habib Efendi, son o f Kuriim and a child 
called Emrullah, who were taken as prisoners, were 
killed; 12 years old daughter o f Haci Rustem, was 
raped at Alemdar Bridge.
Giircii, daughter o f  Ahmed and wife o f  Ibrahim 
Halil from Komus district, was raped by the Armenian. 
Abdiilbaki, 17 years old son of Isa Efendi, brother-in- 
law o f Giircii was kidnapped by the Armenian and his 
house was plundered.
The head o f  Ay§e, daughter o f Siilin, from Ayn- 
el Barid district, was cut through by the Armenians, her 
teeth were broken and her house was plundered.
The house o f  Yadigar, daughter o f  Bayram, was 
plundered by Armenian gangs, her husband Polad 
Efendi was taken away.
Mehmed, husband o f Cemile, daughter o f  Fevzi 
Bey from Ta§ district, and her brother-in-law Mikdad, 
were killed by the Armenian and Russians, their 
corpses and houses were burned.
A woman, called Hanim from Ta§ district was 
killed by the Armenian and her house was plundered.
Ki$emi$, the niece o f  Sofu Veli, son o f  Receb, 
from Ta§ district, her daughter Hadiye and Cemile, her
nephews, 15 years old Said and 13 years old Hamid, 
seven years old Cemil and five years old Garib, were 
killed by the Armenian and Russians. Furthermore, his 
house was plundered and 60 lira o f his wife Cemile, 
was taken.
The head o f  Nasibe, wife o f builder Mahmud, 
from Ta§ district, was cut, her 5 years old young son 
§ukrti was killed by the Armenian, her 10 years old 
daughter Cemile was massadfed after her eyes were 
carved.
Ali and Izzet, 15 and 17 years old sons o f 
Rayi§e, daughter o f  Mustafa, from Avih district, her 
husband Hasan, were killed by the Armenian gangs. 
Resul’s daughter named Kaile, and Hasso, son o f K1I19 
and his son izzet, Sheikh Ahmed Efendi, Sheikh o f
117 •Kazanan , his wife §emo, his servant Mehmed, M eh­
med, son o f  Kirmizi Ahmed and his brother Mikdad, 
Zekiye, wife of Habib son o f  A§ir, ismail son o f Polad, 
his nephew Halid, Fethullah, son o f plasterer Bulak, 
Haci Ali, son o f Bayindir, his son Yusuf were cut into 
pieces by the Armenian.
Melek, 13 years old daughter o f  §emseddin, son 
o f Haci Yusuf, and Ziilfinaz; mother o f Arafat, were 
killed by the Armenian. As Feride, daughter of M ah­
mud, son o f  Me§ko was afraid, she became mad and 
hanged herself.
15 years old daughter and Peri 20 years old 
daughter-in-law o f the brother o f Maksut, son o f Ka­
sim, from Hersan district, were raped and every where 
o f  them were disabled wildly and their house was 
plundered.
An 80 years old Kurdish person, named Meh­
med, who was a guest at Mehmed is home, son o f Ha­
san from Hersan district was killed and the house was 
plundered.
Fatma, from Hizan and Ziynet, from Van who 
were at the house o f Reyhan, son o f §emseddin, from 
Hersan district, were raped and later on they were killed 
by the Russians.
Tevfik, seven years old son o f  Batum, daughter 
o f  Yusuf, from Hersan district was taken away by the 
Russians and their house was plundered. Also the 
husband o f Azize Neno, their neighbor, was killed.
$efik, son o f §ohret, daughter o f Mehmed, from 
Hersan district, was taken away by the Russian, their 
house was plundered, their 47 liras were taken.
Cihangir, husband o f  Giillu, daughter o f Emrul- 
lah, from Avih district, was killed by the Russian, their 
15 liras and 15 pilasters w ere taken.
Polad, 16 years old grandson o f Ummiihan, 
daughter o f Abdiilgafur Efendi, from Avih district, was 
killed by the Armenians.
Bilal, son o f  M ullah Veli zade, son o f  Hasan 
from Kiimes district, was killed by the Armenian and 
his house was plundered.
Osman Aga, son o f  Kalkanci, from Kizil Mescid 
district was wounded from his armpits by the Arme­
nians with bayonet and he was imprisoned for 58 days. 
His 1,5 years old son Abdiilbaki died from cold. The 
house o f Osman Aga, was plundered.
Halid, son o f Feyzullah, from Kizil Mescid 
district was wounded by a bullet, shot by Russians on
his chest and was subjected to torture; his house was 
plundered also.
Mustafa Efendi, son o f Omer Efendi, from Z ey­
dan district, was imprisoned for two months and his 
house was plundered. 13 years old son §evket, o f  this 
person was lost and no information was received about 
his end, meanwhile his 10 coins o f 20 piasters, five liras 
and 50 piasters were taken.
27 coins o f  20 piasters, 20 quarters o f  20 
piasters and one watch o f Sheikh Y usuf Efendi, son o f  
Suleyman Efendi, from Zeydan district, were taken by 
the Russians, his house was plundered and his ten years 
old son, Mehmed Nuri, was lost.
Mehmed, son o f Re§id, from Sor118, residing at 
Hersan district was imprisoned for 60 days and was 
subjected to torture; his 50 years old mother, Nigar Ha­
mm was slaughtered. Hasan and Hiiseyin, the nephews 
o f Ahmed Aga, living at the house o f this person, and 
his daughter encountered with the same end and their 
corpses were thrown to the dogs.
Salih, son o f  Hiiseyin, from Ahlat, residing at 
Kizil M escid district, was wounded from his head and 
arms by Russians, with sword. His 70 years old father 
was killed by sword and his house was completely 
plundered.
Upon the resistance o f  Ahmed, son o f butcher 
from Ahlat, residing at Zeydan district, against the Ar­
menians, who tried to rape his 16 years old daughter 
Ash, while he was trying to take refuge in the Ottoman 
units that night, he was killed wildly by the Armenians 
and his skin was stripped.
118 Today, U ludere village of Ahlat town of Bitlis.
The house o f Resul, son o f  Mahmud, from 
Hersan district was plundered and his 120 piasters were 
taken. Furthermore, he was imprisoned for one month 
and later on he was subjected to torture also.
Hasan, son o f Hiiseyin, son o f  Safrasor Aga, 
was beaten and his house was plundered. He has been 
hospitalized for three months due to the wounds he has 
taken and later on he was imprisoned in a house where 
he lived in hard conditions.
90 years old father o f Mehmed, son o f Ismail 
from Ta§ district was killed, his body was cut into 
pieces by sword and his house was plundered. Furt­
hermore, the son was imprisoned for two wonths.
Fatma, 17 years old daughter o f  Bedri, son of 
Hasso, from Ayn-el Barid district, was raped and his 
house was plundered; he was imprisoned for three 
months, furthermore he was beaten and subjected to 
torture and his 400 piasters were taken.
The house o f §akir, son o f  Mehmed from Kizil 
Mescid district was plundered.
Abdiilhalim Efendi, son o f  Mullah Isa Efendi, 
who was a school teacher, from Avih district, was 
wounded from his head with a large knife. Furthermore, 
he was beaten and his ribs were broken and his eyes 
were carved. His 11 liras and also two watches were 
taken.
§aban Efendi, who was a deputy judge at Bitlis 
court o f appeal, husband o f  Emine, daughter o f  Musa 
Aga from Mahalleba§i district, was murdered wildly by 
the Armenians. His 18 ornamental coins, each worth of 
five Gold Turkish liras, 50 liras, 150 pieces o f golden 
jewelry, four belts, four pairs o f golden earrings, 28
banknotes each worth 100 para, were taken. Further­
more, his house was plundered and his 15 years old 
daughter Naciye was raped. His father Musa, and the 
niece o f  Emine Hanim, Giilperi were beaten and mur­
dered. Emine Hanim was also subjected to torture.
Fidan, the mother in-law o f Zulfiye, daughter o f 
Sadik from Та? district, and her brother-in law, Kamil 
were killed and their house was plundered.
Kamil, husband o f Ay§e, daughter o f Abdullah, 
from Ta§ district, her three months old son §erif and a 
women called Rukiye were killed in a horrible way, and 
their corpses were thrown to the dogs. Furthermore, 
their house was plundered, and meanwhile her five liras 
and 12 piasters were taken.
Faris, son o f  Miinteha, daughter o f  Mullah Ab­
dullah, from Ta§ district, was kidnapped, and no infor­
mation was received on his end. Furthermore, Kadir, 10 
years old son o f Faris, and Tevfik, his 12 years old 
other son were killed. Another boy, called Serif, was 
killed with stones and butt o f rifle. The girls called 
Mennan, Ki§emi§ and Zeyneb were raped. Esad, the 
nep hew o f Zeyneb, was killed with the strokes o f 
sword and every thing in their house was completely 
stolen. They acted very savagely against the individuals 
o f  this fam ily119
Mecidiye, daughter o f  Ayn, from Adilcevaz, 
residing at Kizil Mescid district, was wounded from her 
head and eyes with strokes o f hammer.
Fatma, daughter o f  Mustafa, from Zeydan 
district, wanted to protect her honor, and due to this
119 Compare with Ermeni Komiteleri’nin А’тД! ve Harekat-i 
Ihtilaliyyesi..., p. 310.
reason, she was beaten at her head and many parts of 
her body. Furthermore, her left arm was broken, and 
her three liras and a pair o f  brackets were taken.
Haci Omer Efendi, a school teacher from Ta§ 
district, was tortured by the Armenians and Russian, his 
70 liras, a watch and all his goods were seized.
Elmas, daughter o f Fazil Mullah Ali Kadi zade 
from Zeydan district, was kidnapped by the Russian 
and was brought to Kizil Mescid district. Eytib, six 
years old son o f this woman, was killed.
§ukrii Efendi, husband o f Hiinkar Hanim from 
Erzurum, residing at Kizil Mescid district, was kidnap­
ped, all his money was taken by the Armenians.
Kadri, son o f brother-in-law o f Ay§e, daughter 
o f  ibrahim, from Ahlat, residing at Kizil Mescid district 
was killed.
While Mehmed, son o f Yakub, from Kizil 
Mescid d is tr ic t, was going to the city, was wounded by 
a bullet on his left shoulder near Arap bridge. His 
wound has not been recovered yet.
Zeynep, daughter o f  Mehmed, from Komiis 
district was wounded while the enemy was entering the 
city. Arif, 16 years old son o f this woman was killed, 
Halid , 12 years old other son o f her was wounded at 
six places o f his body with the strokes o f  bayonet.
Abdiilbaki, 19 years old brother o f Abdiilgani, 
son o f Selim, from Komiis district, was kidnapped 
while the enemy was entering the city, and later his 
skin was stripped. His father Selim was killed in front 
o f  the Kizil Mosque, while he was leaving the province.
Hanife, daughter o f Halil from Hersan district 
was threathened with death and her 30 liras and jew elry 
were taken.
Nasibe, 15 years old daughter o f M iinevver, 
daughter o f Veli, from Kizil Mescid district, was kid­
napped and deflowered by the Armenians while the 
enemy was invading the province. Her husband M eh­
med §irin was also kidnapped and his clothes were 
taken.
Omer, brother o f Sultan, daughter o f Veli from 
Zeydan district, was killed near Tah§ot while he was 
leaving the province during the invasion o f  the enemy.
The Russian and the Armenians who entered 
into the house o f Sultan, daughter o f Mullah Suleyman, 
from Kizil Mescid district, took 10 liras, tw o watches, a 
belt and the bracelets by force from her husband, Носа 
Yusuf.
Beyaz, six years old daughter o f the bro ther- 
in-law  o f Dilber, daughter o f §emo, from Avih district 
was killed, his 10 years old daughter Sultan, was 
deflowered.
Hakverdi, husband o f Dilber, daughter o f M eh­
med, from Zeydan district, was first wounded with a 
bullet while the enemy was invading the province, later 
on he was murdered.
The above mentioned explanations have been 
made, by taking oath, before the commission, 
consisting o f the following people who signed the 
attached minutes, August, 12, 1916.
Hakki Bey : Acting Secretary in Bitlis.
M. Arif Bey : Acting Police Chief.
Omer Hulusi Efendi . Arabic teacher in Military 
school.
Abdiilhakim Efendi, son o f Mullah Isa.
Sheikh Yusuf Efendi, son o f Haci Melik.
Y usuf Efendi, Sheikh of Kazazlar.
30. MINUTES OF THE COMMISSION ( II )
Haydar Efendi, 80 years old father o f Kaleli 
zade Dursun Efendi, from Hersan district, was cut into 
pieces and his house was plundered.
Naciye, 6 years old daughter o f Saniye, daugh­
ter o f  Mustafa, residing at Mahalleba§i district, was 
killed. 6 liras were taken from her mother, and Bekir, 
her brother was kidnapped.
Hediye, 16 years old daughter o f Re§id, from 
Adilcevaz, residing at Kizil Mescid district, was def­
lowered by the Russian and the Armenians, during the 
invasion o f  the province.
Polad, 16 years old brother o f Yadigar, daughter 
o f  §aban, from Avih district, was killed.
Izzet, son o f  Hasan, 50 years old brother-in-law 
ofZerni§an, daughter o f Sayyad, from Avih district and 
her neighbor Ali were killed and their 60 liras were 
seized.
Muhiddin, a grocer, husband o f Ki§emi§, daugh­
ter o f  Носа §aban Efendi, from Komiis district was 
killed and his 30 liras were seized.
Osman, husband o f Giillii daughter o f Salih, 
from Karqukan was killed and his 10 years old son Haci 
was kidnapped.
Ali, 15 years old grandson o f Bedo, daughter o f  
Receb, from Kizil M escid district was killed.
Giilbeyaz, 8 years old daughter o f Cevahir, 
daughter o f Fehim from Avih district, and Behiye, her 4 
years old daughter were killed and their mother was 
wounded with the strokes o f  the butt o f  the rifle. Their 
20 coins o f 20 piasters and one watch were taken.
Mercan, daughter o f  Abdurrahman, from Ko- 
miis district, Rahmiye, 40 years old woman and Resul, 
her brother-in-law were killed. 60 liras o f  Resul were 
taken.
Fatma, 15 years old daughter o f Hacer, daughter 
o f Halid from Yako (Unaldi) village was shot and her 5 
liras were taken.
Arif, husband o f Fidan, daughter o f Andelib 
from Tatar Gazi district was kidnapped.
Sultan, 12 years old daughter o f Tilli, daughter 
o f Hasso, from Patnos district was killed.
§ukrii, a barber, husband o f Gulsiim, daughter 
o f Mehmed Efendi, from Kizil Mescid district was 
killed, Mehmed Ali, her son-in-law, who was a grocer, 
was kidnapped and all o f his money was taken.
Ktilhanci Salih, son o f Leyla, daughter of ilyas, 
from Kizil Mescid district was killed.
Haci Ismail, father o f  Karaca zade Abdiilaziz, 
son o f Haci Ismail, from Kizil Mescid district and his 
brother Ishak were killed, their 600 liras were taken.
Sheikh Yusuf, son o f  Sheikh Abdiilgani, from 
Ta§ district, was beaten by the Armenians; he was 
tortured and was threatened. His 23 liras, clothes o f  his 
wife and other goods were taken and his house was 
demolished.
Medine, daughter o f Kalelioglu Osman, son of 
Yusuf, from Hersan district was caught and beaten by 
the Armenians. Her son-in-law Halid, and her son Ali 
were slaughtered. Her house was plundered and her 14 
liras were taken. Her neighbor Mullah Mehmed, his son 
Ziver, his daughter, his mother-in-law Hezar, the hus­
band o f his w ife’s sister, Resul, and Ibrahim, who were 
guests at that time were killed. A person called Re§id, 
his wife together with their 6 children, who took shelter 
at Osman’s house were murdered. Another person 
called Yusuf, his wife and their 6 children, from the 
same village, took shelter in a house near Osman’s 
house, and they were also killed.
Hasan, 14 years old son o f Musa, son o f Mak­
sud, from Hersan district, was shot by the Armenians, 
his 4 piasters was taken and his house was plundered. 
Ahmed, the son o f Hasso, his neighbor, was cut into 
pieces by an Armenian gang with an axe, Salih, son of 
Ibrahim and brother-in-law o f Musa, was executed by 
shooting.
Hasan, son o f Haydar, from Та? district was 
wounded from his head by a large knife and he was 
imprisoned for 3 months and his 67 liras were taken.
Hanife, Rahime, sisters o f Sofu Halid, son of 
Ridvan, from Ta§ district, Resul, his brother, his neph­
ews Yusuf, Cemil, Hamid and Horzi, were killed by the 
Armenian gangs with the strokes o f sword, their golden 
jewelry worth o f 120 liras, furthermore, 32 ornamental 
coins worth five gold Turkish liras, that each o f them 
had, were taken and their house was plundered120
| :" Compare with Ermcni Komitclcri’nin A ’mal vc Harekat-i 
ihtilaliyvesi.... p. 311.
Yusuf, seven years old son o f  Polad, son o f 
Sadik from Ta§ district, his wife and Nazli, daughter of 
Rustem her daughter Nasibe and Hadiye, her daughter- 
in-law Sultan, were shot by the Russians and the 
Armenians, their 70 liras were taken and their house 
was put on fire.
Old Hasan Aga, from Van, residing at Mahalle- 
ba§i district was beaten, he was subjected to torture and 
his skin was stripped.
Abdiilmecid and Abdiilaziz, nephews o f Hatib 
zade Mullah Hamza, son o f Mullah ibrahim from Her- 
san district were killed. Their 15 years old nephew and 
Mehmed, son o f Mullah Ali, their wives, father and 
mother o f Cevahir and Zeynep, their daughter Huri and 
Sabriye, were raped, and they were all murdered by the 
strokes o f sword. A person called Faki Mehmed, from 
Malazgirt, his two sons and two daughters, furthermore 
his wife were murdered wildly at the house o f Resul 
Efendi. 55 liras o f Mullah Hamza and the jewelry o f  his 
daughter were taken.121
Mullah Resul, brother o f Bedir, son of 
Siileyman, from Hersan district, was shot by the Arme­
nians. His 7 liras and watch were taken. The jewelry o f 
Yadigar and Feride, his sisters, was seized.
Musa, husband of Reyhan, daughter of Omer, 
from Zeydan district, was killed with the strokes of 
sword.
The head o f AbdQlhamid, son o f Ziilfmaz, 
daughter o f isa Aga, from Ta§ district, was smashed 
and his 20 liras were taken.
1:1 Compare with, a.g.e.. p. 311.
Hanife, daughter o f  Zeyneb, daughter o f Halid, 
from Ayn-el-Barid district and Memi, his son-in-law 
were killed by the Armenians with the strokes o f large 
knife.
Mehmed, son o f  Cevahir, daughter o f  Haci Ali, 
from Hersan district was killed. His 40 pieces o f golden 
ornaments, one silver belt, golden earrings and 23 coins 
o f  20 piasters w ere taken.
The house o f  Ki§emi§, daughter o f  Osman Bey, 
from Hersan district was put on fire by the Russian and 
Armenian gangs. Her daughter Ziynet, her younger 
daughter, 6 years old Aliye and her 7 years old son 
Mehmed Salih, were burned while they were alive. 15 
years old son, o f  Osman the same person and her 
younger son. Needed were kidnapped.
Old Ismail, father o f  Ayn, son o f Ismail, from 
Ta§ district, was killed by the Armenians. Furthermore,
13 liras and one watch o f  Ismail, who was imprisoned 
for two months, were taken.
Ali, 15 years old son o f Mehmed, from Ta§ 
district, was wounded by the Armenians with a large 
knife at 3 places o f his body. His uncle Kasim was 
burned at the house o f the above mentioned person, 
while he was alive. His nephews Halid and Abdiilkadir, 
together Rukiye, the wife o f his uncle, were murdered. 
20 ornamental coins worth five gold Turkish liras, two 
liras, a pistol and a watch o f  Ali, were seized.
Mehmet, 8 years old son o f Hamid, from Ayn-el 
Barid district was caught and wounded by the Ar­
menians. His uncles, Faris and Ismail, were cut into 
pieces by sword.
Kadriye, daughter o f  Cuma, from Zeydan dist­
rict, her 4 years old son Hiiseyin and 14 years old Meh- 
med were killed by sword. Her brother-in-law Emin 
was executed by shooting and her house was plundered.
Didar, daughter o f  Rcceb, from Mahal leba§i 
district was beaten by the Armenians and was subjected 
to torture. Her house was plundered. Furthermore, the 
furniture o f Kamil Bey, son o f Sefer Bey which were 
left there as a trust, was plundered.
Kasim, the sick husband of Muhabbet, daughter 
of Haci ismail, from Ta§ district, was burned at his 
house while he was alive and his 20 liras were taken. 
Her brother was hung in front of his house, Rukiye, the 
widow o f Halid and aunt o f Muhabbet, was put to 
sword.
Guilin, who was the daughter o f Selam and the 
wife o f Birader zade Mirza, iffet, who was the daughter 
o f Abdurrahman and wife o f Haci Mehmed Birader 
zade and another woman from Van, Mahbube, who was 
the daughter o f iffet and Yakub and married to Dilan 
zade Faris, Hano, who was the daughter o f Ali and wife 
o f Dilan zade Polad, Ana, daughter o f Ismet and wife o f 
Barut^u zade Osman, her young son Abdullah, Ko§du, 
daughter o f Mullah Mahmud, son o f  Gul, Kose zade 
Hasan and his son Suleyman and Senco, son o f §aban, 
from Komiis district have been killed by the Russian 
and Armenians with the strokes o f swords, large knives 
and bayonets.
Peren, daughter o f Abdullah and wife o f Hamza 
(^elebi zade Haydar from Komiis district, was kid­
napped by the Armenians. Hamza £elebi zade Faris, 
son o f Yusuf and Kudret, his wife, daughter o f Ali
Efendi, Sultan, daughter o f  Abdullah and wife o f  Halo, 
son o f Hamza £elebi zade Ayo, daughter of Omer Aga 
and from the same family Cevahir, wife o f  Ahmed, 
were killed by the Russian. The house o f Hamza (^elebi 
zade Veli £avu§ was collapsed by a bomb thrown by 
the Armenian gangs. Meryem, daughter o f Fethullah 
and wife o f  Nuri, was murdered also.
Re§id, son o f  Cafer, from Zeydan district, his 
brother Ali, his nephew Halid were killed. Mehmed Sa­
lih, son o f Halid was kidnapped and his house was set 
to fire.
Fatma, wife o f Nuri, son Osman from Zeydan 
district, and her six years old daughter Hiirriyet, three 
years old son Abdiilaziz were kidnapped and their 
house was plundered.
The wife and seven years old daughter o f  Omer 
bin Mehmed, from Zeydan district, six years old and 
eight years old daughter o f Resul bin Veli , were taken 
away. Sofii Ibrahim and his wife, Asiye, two disabled 
old men were killed. 50 years old Mehmedoglu Su­
leyman, son o f  Mehmed from Zeydan district, and his 
100 years old mother Ummiihan were killed. Ki§emi§, 
wife o f  Suleyman and daughter o f Halil was wounded. 
Hamza, from Hizan was shot and his house was plun­
dered.
Hafiz Yakub Efendi, son o f Haci Mahmud 
Efendi, from Zeydan district was murdered. Elmas, 
wife o f  Emin, son o f  Hasan was killed and her daughter 
Nadire, was wounded at 4 parts o f her body.
Omer, son o f Veli, Halef, son o f  Haydar and his 
two sons, Halid, son o f  Nuri, Said, son o f Hamza, 
Mikdad, son o f  Sadik, Didare, wife o f  Mahmud, and
her daughter Giillii, Cevahir daughter o f  Hasan; Ceva­
hir, daughter o f Abdullah, 70 years old Irfan, from M e- 
lenze, Haci Ctindi, Abdulcelil, Zekiye, wife o f  Haci 
Ciindi, Ziynet, her mother Giillii, her three years old 
son Abdullah and four years old daughter Nuriye, Pem- 
be, wife o f §ukru; Nadire, wife o f Ahmed, E§ref, son o f  
Habib and Faik, son o f tailor Mustafa were killed.
Abdurrahman, son o f  tailor Рйп was cut into 
pieces. Tevfik, son o f Kazanci zade Ibrahim, eight 
years old son Dursun, son o f  Seyfullah Efendi, Bekir, 
son o f  Hamza, Mikdad, son o f  Zulkadir zade Sadik, Ha­
lid, son o f Mamagii zade Osman, and son o f Halid, Ab­
dullah Tahinci zade and Mehmed, seven years old son 
of Zulkadir zade Kasim were killed and their houses 
were plundered.
Hakverdi, 70 years old son o f  Puri zade Receb, 
was killed and his house was burned. §ukru, son o f 
Irfan Dizdar zade and Musa, son o f Giil§o, were killed. 
Reyhan, wife o f  M usa was wounded. Halid, son o f  Nuri 
Halid zade was taken away and his wife was killed. 
Mehmed, son o f  Mahmud, from Gevar122, and his 
daughter Huri, was wounded.
Isa, son o f Abdullah, from Zeydan district, 
Halime, wife o f £uruk  zade Halid, Nuri, son o f §aban 
(head), his grandson §emseddin Arif were killed. Tev­
fik, brother-in-law o f §aban was taken away and his 
house was plundered.
Pir Musa zade §evket, son o f  Habib Efendi, 
from Zeydan district was taken away. Selbi, daughter of 
Re§id Efendi and wife o f  Mustafa, Abdullah, brother o f
122 Today, Yiiksekova town of Hakkari Province.
Kaleli zade Mustafa was killed. Polad, sixty years old 
son o f Halid from the same district, Rindi, 85 years old 
sister o f Haci Osman Nasir zade, Miizik zade §em- 
seddin, Nigar, wife o f  Fethullah, Hediye, wife o f Budak 
zade Mehmed, her seven years old and two years old 
daughters and her seven years old son, Selbi, wife Nasir 
zade ishak, Kudret, 80 years old mother o f Nasir zade 
§emseddin Efendi, Kaleli zade Suleyman, son o f 
Sadullah were murdered and also their houses were 
plundered. M other o f §iikrti, son o f Be§ir Efendi, her 15 
years old daughter Cemile, Fatma, wife o f Kadi zade 
Mahmud, Hazo, mother o f  Dervi§, Hamo, wife o f Mus­
tafa, Kudret, wife o f  Hafiz were killed and also their 
houses were plundered.
The commission certifies the verification of the 
above mentioned explanations made before the Moslem 
public who stayed at Bitlis during the invasion o f the 
enemy and who were subject to the wild behavior of 
Russian-Armenian gangs.
August 12, 1916.
Temporary secretary from Bitlis : Hakki Bey.
Acting Police D irector from police organization
: M. A rif Bey.
School teacher . Omer Hulusi Efendi, Mullah 
Isa zade Abdtilhakim Efendi, Haci Melik zade Sheikh 
YusufEfendi, Y usuf Efendi, Sheikh o f Kazazlar.
31. MINUTES OF THE COMMISSION (III)
The mosques that were collapsed in Bitlis:
Meydan Mosque . Burned
Kizil Mescid Mosque 
Hatuniye Mosque
Носа Bey Mosque 
§erefiye Mosque 
Mermud Mosque 
Sheikh Hasan Mosque 
Sultan Arab Mosque 
Farisiyye Mosque 
Great Mosque 
Alemdar Mosque 
Kurey§ Mosque 
Gokmeydan M osque 
Cehar Sanduk Mosque 
Ta§ Mosque 
Kuru Pinar Mosque
Medresses:
: Demolished
: Brought into the form of 
a stable 
Burned 
Burned 
Demolished 
Burned 
Demolished 
Demolished 
Burned 
Demolished 
Demolished 
Burned 
Burned 
Demolished 
Burned
Gokmeydan Medresse 
Gazi Bekye Medresse 
Kerafiye Medresse 
§erefiye Medresse
Dervish lodges:
Demolished
Demolished
Demolished
Demolished
Kufrevi Dervish Lodge : Burned
Sheikh Emin Efendi Dervish Lodge : Demolished
Sheikh Abdullah Bedah§anT Dervish Lodge: Burned
Places to which pilgrimage is made:
Sheikh Abdullah Bedah§ani : Burned
Veli $emseddin 
Sheikh Babu 
Sheikh-ul-Garib
Demolished
Demolished
Demolished
Schools:
Gokmeydan Primary school, High school in the 
vicinity o f  Mermutlu, Primary school at Kizil Mescid, 
Primary school at £ar§i Ba§i. All o f  these schools were 
burned.
Inns:
M erchants’ inns at Pazar, Inn o f Hamza at A§agi 
Kale were burned.
Official Buildings:
The inner parts o f  Government Hotel, buildings 
belonging to police gendarme building, buildings of 
municipality were destroyed.
Police stations:
Mahalle Ba§i, £ar?i Ba§i, Kuru Pinar, Saparkur, 
Komiis and Zeydan police stations were collapsed 
completely.
Bridges:
Arap Bridge, Alemdar Bridge, Sefer Bey 
Bridge, Diyadin Bridge, §or Pinar Bridge, Hatuniye 
Bridge were collapsed.
Pa§a Bath, Han Bath and Orta Bath w ere col­
lapsed.
Warehouses:
The military warehouse, in the vicinity o f  
Gokmeydan, was burned, the one near the municipality 
was collapsed.
Vineyards-Gardens:
All o f the vineyards at Zeydan, Komiis and 
Hersan districts were destroyed, fruit-trees and other 
trees were broken down. The windows o f all o f  the 
shops at marketplace were burned, the roofs o f some o f 
the shops were collapsed.
1. The house o f Cafer zade located at Mahalle- 
ba§i was collapsed and more than 20 women and men 
died in this house (The photographs o f  this event are 
available).
2. In the house o f Ahmed from the same district, 
Ali and Abdullah from Ta§ district, both o f them were 
12 years old, were killed, Kerim, son of Ilyas, was 
slaughtered (the photograph o f this event is available).
3 On the way to Mahalleba§i, more than 15 
people, men and women were murdered (The photo­
graph o f  this event is available).
4. A 15 years old girl, called Fatma, from Antep 
was raped. Furthermore, two fingers o f her left hand 
were cut (The photograph o f this event is available).
The house o f Sivaci zade Abdiilgani: Zeydan
district.
The house o f Resul Efendi, clerk at court. Zey­
dan district.
The house o f Siileyman, the brother o f this Per­
son: Zeydan district.
The house o f Tahinci zade Hakverdi: Zeydan
district.
The house o f Mullah Musa zade Re§id. Zeydan
district.
The inn o f  Haci Hamza: A§agi Kale direction of 
Zeydan district.
The house o f Saatpi zade Mehmed Efendi: Her­
san district.
The house o f police officer Halef Efendi: Her­
san district.
The house o f Hala Ali zade Osman Efendi. Her­
san district.
The house o f Tahtavi zade Mahmud Efendi: 
Hersan district.
The house o f Dervi§ Efendi, son o f Merchant 
Resul zade Receb: Zeydan district.
The great house o f Haci Mehmed Salih Efendi: 
Ta§ district.
The house o f (Butcher) Be$ir Efendi: Ta§ dis­
trict.
The house o f Lawyer Mustafa Efendi: Ta§ dis­
trict.
The house o f Mecid, son o f Polad Efendi: Ta§
district.
The house o f Bekir, son o f Ahmed Efendi: Ta§
district.
The first floor o f  the house o f Barutpu zade Ya- 
sin: Ta§ district.
The house o f Dervi§ Aga zade Sadik: Ta§ dis­
trict.
The great house o f  Haci Hasan zade Resul Efen­
di, son o f Haci Bedir Aga having a firm structure. Ta§ 
district.
The house o f Osman Efendi, son o f Haci Meh­
med: Ta§ district.
The hosue o f  Police officer A rif Efendi, son o f 
Murad Aga: Ta§ district.
The house o f Yasin Efendi , son o f Faris: Ta§
district.
The houses o f Sheikh Abdiilmecid and Sheikh 
Nazif: Zeydan district.
The house o f Pabu?cu Bedir: Ta§ district.
The house o f Hankulu zade Bapir. Hersan dis­
trict.
The house o f Miizik zade Cevher: Hersan dis­
trict.
The house o f  Halil Bey: Hersan district.
The house o f  Kose zade Bayram: Ta§ district.
The caffee o f  Miiftiizade Sadullah.
The house o f Cafer: Zeydan district.
The house Haci Rustem: Zeydan district.
The house o f Cafer zade Eyiib. Zeydan district. 
The house o f Merchant Yakub zade Suleyman 
(at Gok Meydan): in the vicinity o f Ta§ district.
The house o f Как? zade Ahmed in the vicinity 
o f Kalbur: down below Zeydan district.
The house of Isa, son o f Abdiissamed, in the 
vicinity o f  Kalbur. down below Zeydan district.
The house o f Yunus, son o f Haci Hasan, down 
below Zeydan district.
The house o f Mecid, son o f Bekir: Zeydan dis­
trict.
The house o f KakiT zade Abdiirrezzak, son o f 
Hamid: Zeydan district.
The house o f Halil, son o f  Giilsenem: Zeydan
district.
The house o f  Fakih Hasan: Zeydan district.
After the evacuation of Russian units from Bit- 
lis, the province was in a miserable appearance. Against 
the wildness o f  Russians, nobody could detain himself 
from rebelling against it. During the invasion o f enemy 
units into Bitlis, the Moslem public was subject to a 
horrible massacre without making any difference o f age 
and sex. After these events, only 882 persons could 
survive. These people, however, were piled up in the 
rooms that could contain 10 to 15 people, as 60-70 
people. The other residents o f the province, were im­
prisoned in the government building and at Kizil Mes- 
cid district.
Various tortures were made to the people, the 
civilian servants who were arrested, were left hungry 
for many days. All o f  foodstuff was seized and only dry 
bread was distributed to Moslem public who were left 
in the dark. If  a small amount o f women are left 
exempt, all young, even old women were raped and 
young girls were deflowered.
Among them 18 were closed in a house and 
dissipation festivities were arranged with them. Among
them again, six o f  them were found as being caught to  
syphilis. These tortures continued till the Turkish units 
entered into the province. These unlucky people w ere 
forced to swear lo their religion and to  curse their na­
tionality.
The arm o f Ash, 16 years old daughter o f  A h­
med, son o f a butcher from Ahlat, who defended herself 
against those who wanted to rape her, was cut with a 
sword and she was killed near Arap bridge with the 
butts o f  rifles. A lot o f  children were killed by 
smashing their heads or by treading under boots, piles 
o f human goods and organs consisting o f head, arm, 
leg, the hair o f  women, carcasses o f  young children, 
bloody shirts, etc were found in the gardens o f the 
houses. A lot o f  people died o f hunger or lost their 
conscious. The mosques o f  Hatuniye, §erefiye, Kizil 
Mescid, Kuru Pinar were burned, collapsed or brought 
into the form o f a stable. Seven fountains and w ater 
conduits o f Hersan district and Mahalleba§i district 
were completely destroyed.
The furniture, kitchen utensils, facilities and 
tools belonging to government or private persons were 
plundered by the Russian and the Armenians, and some 
of them were sold to tradesmen from Iran, and some o f 
them were sent to Russia. The end o f the Moslem pub­
lic o f the villages in the vicinity, has been the same.
August 27,1916
Chief o f  Correspondence office in Bitlis:Hakki
Bey.
The second Officer of the Police Organization 
in Bitlis123: M. Arif Bey.
' “3 Compare with Ermeni Komiteleri’nin A ’mal ve Harekat-i 
ihtilaln vesi.... pp. .112-114; Kara Scliemsi. Turcs et Armeniens 
Devant L’Histoire. Geneve 1919. pp. 67-68.
CHAPTER TWO
OPPRESSION IN VAN PROVINCE 124
1. Testimony with oath of Salim Efendi, son 
of Sadullah125 (2.6.1916)(A police officer of Van, 
now appointed to Mardin)
Upon the approach of Russians towards Van, 
the Armenians residing at the provinces and villages in 
the vicinity, began to riot against Ottoman Administra­
tion and make enemy-like demonstrations. At the same 
time, they did not obey the instructions o f the adminis­
tration on tax payment, and they participated in the 
approaching Russian army. They were reaching the 
villages, attacking on the passengers, killing all o f the 
Moslems they meet with on their way, massacring the 
wounded soldiers who were returning to their villages 
on leave.
After a short time, the Armenians o f Van, rioted 
openly against Ottoman Government126. They began to 
attack on soldiers, gendarme and police officers with 
their weapons on the streets o f the province. They used 
to kill all o f  the M oslems they caught, fire at the
124 During the First World War. Van province, consisted of Van 
center and Hakkari Sanjak. During Republican era. Van was 
separated from Hakkari Sanjak and has been brought into a 
province by itself.
125 Compare with Ermeni Komiteleri’nin A ’mal ve Harekat-i
Ihtilaliyvesi_p. 299.
126 Van Armenians rioted on April 13-14. 1995. “Immigration 
Law” would pass after this date, on May 27. 1915.
persons they see at the windows or in front o f the 
houses o f Moslems.
This situation continued for 27 days. Even if
177 •
after the occupation o f the province , the Armenian 
continued their barbarism, wickedness and insolence. 
They were running after those who escaped and killing 
them in the middle o f the street. Hundreds o f Moslems, 
men, women and children who remained in the prov­
ince have been subject to torture by these Armenian 
gangs and massacred. Same Moslems who escaped 
towards Bitlis on board o f three sailboats, were mar­
tyred at Adilcevaz128 subdistrict, around Parkat129 by 
the Armenians130 Police officers Celal Efendi, Ha$im 
Efendi and Mustafa Efendi who accompanied these 
immigrants, were wounded during struggles and they 
could come to Bitlis.
The residents o f  the villages o f Timar131 sub­
district, such as Zeve132, Molla Kasim133, §eyh Kara134, 
§eyh Ayne135, Ayanis136, Zorova137and Pakiz138, were
121 Van city, will be invaded in the middle of May, 1915 (May 
16/17) by Russian Kazakh regiment and Armenian units.
128 Adilcevaz, was a subdistrict at that time.
129 Today, Esenkiyi village of Goldiizii subdistrict of Adilcevaz 
town of Bitlis.
130 Compare with Mehmed Hocaoglu. Ar$iv Vesikalanyla Tarih- 
te Ermeni Mezalimi ve Ermenilcr. istanbul 1976 p. 632; Ermeni 
Komiteleri’nin A ’mal ve Harekat-i ihtilaliyyesi..., p. 304; fur­
thermore see, Hiiseyin Qelik. Gorenlerin Goziiyle Van’da Erme­
ni Mezalimi, Ankara, without date, p. 12.
131 A subdistrict o f central town of Van.
132 Today, Zeve is a ruin of village and a cemetery of martyrs.
133 Today, Mollakasim village of Timar subdistrict of Van.
134 Today, Giilsiinler village.
135 Today, Otluca village.
massacred by the Armenian gangs, like the residents o f 
other villages.
Before the occupation o f Van by the Russians, 
six gendarmes, Sheikh Aga Efendi Rtza Maho, Носа 
Hasan Efendi, deputy president o f Accounting Depart­
ment o f Van, and his family consisting o f six people, 
secondary school teacher Rasim Efendi and his family 
and furthermore some other people had been martyred 
by the Armenians o f  Van. Lieutenant Hiiseyin Efendi, 
was attacked at his house and his daughter Nadide, was 
raped and wounded. Other young girls and women 
were raped also and hundreds o f houses were burned 
together with those who lived inside these.
2. Testimony with oath of Mehmed Tufan 
Efendi (4.6.1916) (Son of major Esad Efendi, 
Deputy judge at court)
The Armenians in Turkey, have brought the 
independence idea, as a fixed idea for a long time, and 
have tried to take out a part of the Empire with all the 
possibilities they had.
The Armenians, without concealing their aims 
and desires, after the declaration o f General mobil­
ization139, began to put forward their revolutionist 
ideas, by transforming these aims into operation. The 
Armenian committees, that had been organized previ-
136 Today, A garti village.
137 Today, Yemlice village of Timar subdistrict of Van.
138 Its name of today, can not be identified.
139 As of July 30.1914, partial mobilization has been inaugurated in 
Turkey, in the beginning of August, the mobilization has been 
generalized.
ously, began to be active and have been the guides and 
couriers o f the Russian units. These Armenians called 
the Russian and made them to come on November 22, 
1914 to the management center o f §ikefti140 subdistrict 
at Hakkari region, which was Dir141 village.
While the Russian were occupying Dir village, 
the Armenian gangs killed all the men at the Kurdish 
villages on their way and put thousands o f  children to 
sword.
Together with young women, more than 400 
Kurdish girls were raped, old women were killed.
Before the occupation o f Ba§kale142, that was 
the administration center o f the region, by the enemy, 
the Armenians came to this town on November 30, 
1914 and began their wild activities. The Armenians, 
under the chairmanship o f Oseb, son o f HafO, declared 
so-called a martial law at church and imprisoned more 
than 200 Moslems on whom previously they applied all 
kinds o f torture to take out their money, in the stable 
section of the church.
The Armenian Committees, under the command 
of Garabet Efendi, who was a judge at court, entered 
into the houses o f Moslem and Jewish people and 
plundered all the goods and furniture they found. Like 
the house o f Sheikh Taha, Sheikh Yusuf, Seyyid Ibra­
him and Ali Efendi, all o f  the houses o f civil servants 
and public were plundered in the same way by the Ar­
menian pillagers. The goods and furniture and jewelry,
1111 Today, Albayrak subdistrict of Ba$kale town of Van.
141 Today, subdistrict center (Albayrak) of Ba$kale town of Van.
,4: Ba§kale town was then a subdistrict of Hakkari Sanjak.
worth of 300 liras belonging to people were taken 
away. Furthermore, they plundered the food warehouse 
o f  the official commission who blocked some o f the 
goods for the mobilization, the goods o f Suleyman, son 
o f Nuril and those at the shops o f other Moslem 
merchants. Suleyman, son of Nuril was taken to the 
church and subjected him to torture there, and at the 
end, they branded his body with a hot iron to give 5.000 
liras. Stolen goods were distributed among Armenian 
Committees.
The enemy remained 13 days in Ba§kale. 
During this period, the Armenians showed all kinds of 
despising behavior towards Moslem, even they ar­
ranged dissipation festivities at the mosques.
The roads were full with the corpses o f women 
whose breasts were cut, abdomens were opened up, 
children who were cut into pieces, young girls who 
were raped and men whose eyes were carved.
It is not possible to explain the wilderness made 
by the Armenians one by one.
3. Testimony with oath of Fehim Bey, son of 
Kahraman Bey from Muradiye (10.6.1916) (Now, he 
is residing at Kiilat143 village)
In May 1915, the Russian-Armenian units con­
sisting o f Armenians in majority, occupied Bayezid144
Today. Gokay village of H i/an town of Bitlis.
Eastern Bayezid. The central town of Agri Province. It was 
occupied by Russian units on November 3. 1914, Eastern Bayezid 
was a Sanjak at that time.
and 300 villages o f Abaga145 subdistrict o f  Muradiye. 
They massacred the Moslems they met on the way, 
even those who surrendered. As we knew that even if  
we surrendered, we would have the same end like our 
co-religionists, we decided to immigrate to Erci§ to ­
gether with the residents o f  the villages around M ura­
diye.
While we were leaving our village to go to Erci§, 
10.000 Moslems from Abaga subdistrict which was 
rescued from Armenian oppression, took shelter in M u­
radiye. We left the region on the same day. Later on, a 
few women, with tears on their eyes and children who 
rescued and joined us, told us that the remaining people 
o f Abaga subdistrict who had taken shelter in Mura­
diye, had been massacred by the gang o f Russian 
citizen Aram, who was engaged in commerce at Baye- 
zid.
During our walk, we learned from Salih Bey, who 
was the head man o f Komiis146 village told us that the 
people of his village and the villages in the vicinity had 
been massacred by the Armenian gang of Aram, from 
Van, and the children had been burned in the bakeries 
while they were still alive. On the way, together with 
Salih Bey we saw Ekice147 village, consisting o f 80 
houses, and Komiis (Balakli) village, consisting of 100 
houses, were completely burned by the Armenian 
gangs. Everywhere there were the corpses o f women 
and men who were killed in a horrible way. A few
115 Its name of today, can not be identified.
116 Today, Balakli village of central subcfistrict of Muradiye of 
Van.
Today. Saglamta$ village of Timar subdistrict of Van.
women and children who rescued from Komiis (Ba- 
lakli) village massacre, joined us and told us that, all o f 
the residents o f their village, were pitilessly killed and 
burned by the Armenians.
4. In the testimony with oath of Mullah 
Mehmed, son of Abdurrahman from Kizil Kilise148 
village of Muradiye town
Those told by Fehim Bey, were confirmed. To 
those that was told by Mullah Mehmed, Salih Bey, 
added that, who was one o f the residents o f Komiis 
(Balakli) village, had hidden himself in a well in order 
to be rescued from the death. The one who organized 
Komiis (Balakli) village massacre was the gang of 
Aram, from Van.
5. Testimony with oath of Basri Bey, Com­
mander of Gendarme unit of Siirt (23.6.1916)
Last year, on the first days o f  May, I went to 
Taramak149 village o f Miikiis (BahQesaray) subdistrict, 
as the head o f my unit due to my task. The Armenians 
of this village, did all kinds o f oppression and pressure 
that could not be told, against the Moslems. We entered 
into the village covered with the corpses o f men and 
women and also set on fire, towards evening. Among 
the corpses, men whose ears and noses were cut and 
eyes were carved, children whose heads were cut and
MX Today. Yakincak village of central subdistrict of Muradiye of 
Van.
119 Today. Yaylakonak village of Geva§ town of Van.
bodies were cut into pieces, were seen. However, the 
corporals o f a young woman and a girl impressed us 
very much. The abdomen o f the woman was cut with a 
knife, the baby taken out was suffocated and was put 
again in its place. The girl who was hung from her feet, 
was, covered with holes all over. After the Armenians 
and Russians had committed these executions, made 
canonically unclean the religious buildings and burned 
them.
6. MINUTES OF THE COMMISSION (I)
The source of the Armenian riot in Eastern 
Anatolian region, is based on the murder o f  four 
Armenian beggars, who were sent from Iran especially 
by Russian ambassadors, by Kurdish people. Like 
others, who opposed this riot movement, Rafael, who 
was a teacher at Geva§ school, was also killed by the 
members of the Committee.
At the end the investigations carried our at site, 
it came out that the Armenian riot movement had began 
upon the murder o f a woman from Agcakale village. 
This woman who was returning to her village from 
Van, after doing her shopping, was attacked by the 
Armenians o f Asba?in150 village on the way and she 
was killed. Her goods were sent to Havasur151 com­
mittee.
Haci Musa Bey from the notables of Kar?ikan152 
and Haci Yusuf Aga from K arkar'53, who was known
150 Today, Cavu$tepe village of Giirpinar town of Van.
151 Today, Giirpinar town of Van.
1,2 It was a town of Van. Its name today, can not be identified.
as a helpful person, and their seven friends who were 
returning to  their villages, were murdered by the mem­
bers of the committee who laid an ambush behind a 
barricade on the way.
Sergeant Mehmed, from Hizan was attacked on 
Aht mountain and his head was smashed by stones.
Three shepherds, who were serving the sheep mer­
chants from Aleppo, to take the herd that they had 
purchased to Saray154, were murdered at Kirs155 village 
o f  Havasur (G iirp inar).
Apart from these, a lot o f well-known Moslems 
were martyred. A passenger from Yedi Esbi§ad156, at 
Kozluca15 village; Abdullah Efendi, Kamil £avu§ from 
Muradiye, at Tasm ali158, Cafer Bey from the notabjes 
o f Karfikan, while he was walking at Derebey district 
in Van: Ismail from Pakiz159 village, by the farmers o f 
Kalecik160, ismail Bey from Zivistan161, at Ke§i§oglu162 
village, while he was returning to Van; Tevfik Efendi,
153 Karkar was registered in the yearbook of Van province dated 
1315 (1899) as a subdistrict o f Geva? town. Karkar, is seen among 
the towns of Van in “Memalik-i Mahrusa-i §ahane’ye Mahsus 
Miikemmel ve Mufassal Atlas” dated 1325 (1909). Today, Dalde- 
re village of central subdistrict of Geva§ of Van.
154 Today, Ozalp town of Van province.
155 Its name of today, can not be identified.
156 Today, Yukan Golalan village of Er^ek subdistrict of central 
town of Van.
1 s7 Kozluca village of Ergek subdistrict of central town of Van.
' 58 Its name of today, can not be identified.
159 Its name of today, can not be identified.
160 Kalecik village of the central town of Van.
161 Today, Elmalik village of Gumu$dere subdistrict o f central 
town of Van.
162 Today, Bakacik village of the central subdistrict of Van.
head o f Finance department, from Norduz163, and the 
gendarmes accompanying him, Nuri and Ibrahim at 
Asba§in (£avu§tepe) village, Sheikh Mehmed Siddik 
Efendi, Mufti o f  Van, while he was on duty at Flavasur 
(G urpinar), were killed.
In December 1914, a gendarme unit consisting o f  
eight people, were killed at Pelli164 village o f  Geva§. 
Ismail Hakki Efendi, substitute judge o f Geva§, to ­
gether with the gendarme soldier Sayyad (Seyyid) who 
was accompanying him, were killed at Atalan165 vil­
lage.
In March 1916, while soldier Bi§ar, from Diyar- 
bakir, was going to his village leave, on leave, at an A r­
menian house, called Yedi Kilise, where he was invited 
to stay at night, was killed treacherously, together with 
seven people.
a. In the testimony with oath o f  Mehmed Hulusi 
Efendi, Deputy Mayor, he stated that during the first 
occupation o f Saray ( Ozalp ) area by the Russian, the 
Armenian gangs, had attacked to Koprii Koy166, where 
200 people were living. Women, men and children 
were massacred and all o f  the houses were burned.
The corpses o f the soldiers who came from Erzu­
rum and wanted to pass Van lake from Ke§i?167 village 
to Ebriren168 village, were taken out from the coasts o f
' 63 Today, Yalinca subdistrict of Giirpinar town of Van.
164 Today, Alacabiik village of Re$adiye subdistrict of Tatvan 
town of Bitlis.
165 Atalan village of central subdistrict of Geva? of Van.
166 Its name of today, can not be identified.
167 Its name of today, can not be identified.
168 Its name of today, can not be identified.
Van lake. As the roads were closed due to Armenian 
riots and the telegram lines were cut, §atak (£atak) area 
was surrounded by the Armenians.
169
b. Halid Efendi, Commander o f Ba^erge 
border protection unit, said that there were huge mas­
sacres executed around Dir (Albayrak) while they were 
following the enemy. Women were raped, children 
were suffocated.
Yaplan (Sheikh Hamid), Alilan at Gevar (Yuksek- 
ova); Sheikh Gazali, Sheikh Abdurrahman Gazi, Hindi 
Baba, Mullah Kasim in Van; Kurande$t at §atak (£a- 
tak); Arvasi at Miikiis (Bahgesaray), Mir Hasan Veli, 
Haci Zive, Haci Ham tombs and medresses at Geva§, 
were demolished by Armenians.
c. Nigar Hamm, wife o f cavalryman sergeant 
Osman, son o f  Mirac, who was in the province, during 
the occupation o f  Van, in her testimony with oath as a 
witness; indicated that women and children who were 
in panic due to the invasion o f Russian into the pro­
vince, escaped from the city to save their souls. Nigar 
Hamm, with her daughters, Refika, 10 years old, §efi- 
ka, five years old, her son, 12 years old Kemal, six 
years old Celal and one and a half years old Cemil, 
whom she took with her, were not able to walk any 
more. Nigar Hamm who arrived at Surba§170 village, 
together with her children, passed the night among the 
bushes near the village. At dawn, she saw the armed 
gangs were wondering about and killing the people they 
met and she was very afraid. It was her turn. She 
recognized Ruben who was the cashier o f accounting
169 Its name of today, can not be identified.
170 Its name of today, can not be identified.
office o f Van, among executioners. With his help, Ni- 
gar Hanim rescued her children. The daughter o f Н оса 
Hiiseyin Efendi, who was a civil servant at the Finance 
office of Van, and other 15 women died as they were 
deflowered.
7. Testimonies with oath of 32 people from  
Van, who are at M a’murat-iil-Aziz171 at present
(17.6.1916) (The names of these people are written 
in the Minutes )
Before the occupation o f  Van, the people who 
were killed by Armenian gangs, are as follows : Gen­
darme mailman Sayyad (Seyyid) and his tw o friends at 
Atalan village; Hur§it Aga, and son o f Ata Bey from 
Vostan172, at his house, Lieutenant Suleyman Efendi, 
who was the detachment commander at Erci§, together 
with gendarme soldiers at Nabat173 village; Hamza, son 
o f  Alay Bey from Adilcevaz, Said and Abdurrahman, 
sons o f Haci Ali and their five friends at §eyh Kara 
(Gulsiinler) village, Gendarme Hamid and his friends at 
§u§anis village; Camu§cu zade ismail, Cebeci zade 
Haci Yakub and his son Halil, Dervi§, son o f  Be§ir, 
Haci Latif zade Haci §erif, Hertii§lii zade Mustafa, Haci 
Rifat, son o f  Toptju, Kaya Celebi zade Mahmud and 
Yusuf, from the notables o f  Van; Kahraman zade Bekir,
171 Today, Elazig Province.
172 The old name of Geva§ town of Van.
173 Today, Com akli village of Ergek subdistrict of the central town 
of Van.
174 Today, Kevenli village o f the central town of Van.
§akir and §iikrii from the Notables o f Erci§, Mahmud 
Siddik Bey from Bargiri175 were massacred.
All o f  the residents o f H idir176, Zeve, §eyh Kara 
(Gulsiinler), Amik(Amuk)177, Ayanis (Agarti) and other 
villagers were massacred, women were raped and 
young girls were taken to inside o f Russia.
Hiiseyin Efendi, son of Kadik (from Nor§in dis­
trict) o f Van and his wife Zeliha Hamm, gave tes­
timonies which verify the statements o f above men­
tioned Nigar Hamm.
8. Testimony of Re§id , son of Tradesman Ali 
from Topcu Oglu district of Van
During the first panic, a great majority o f the 
public, went to  Ho§ab direction where the division 
Halil Bey was located. But, before reaching the desired 
location, a group approximately consisting o f  80.000 
people, was attacked by Russian and the Armenians at 
§ahmanis179 village. Only about 2.000 o f them, were 
taken to Ho§ab (Giizelsu). During the two months in 
which they were imprisoned as slaves, they were 
subjected to every kind o f  torture and transgression. 
Meanwhile, the city o f  Van was rescued by Turkish
175 The old name o f Muradiye town of Van.
176 Today, H idirkoy of Timar town of Van.
177 It was a village of Timar town of Van. It was located between 
Timar and the mouth of M armit Suyu (Karasu). It was a Turkish 
village . Its name o f today can not be identified.
178 Today, Giizelsu village o f Giizelsu subdistrict of Gtirpmar town 
o f Van.
179 Today, Top^udegirm eni village of Yalinca subdistrict of Giir-
pinar town of Van.
army. Upon this news, the natives o f Van who took 
shelter in Diyarbakir, Bitlis and K aipkan, came to 
Edremid180 village, which was an hour away from Van 
and to Engil181 and Atalan villages located in the north 
o f Van. The number o f  these people was about 15.000. 
As a result o f the sudden attack o f the Russian and the 
Armenians, these people and 2.000 Turkish soldiers 
were killed with machine guns and shrapnels. Among 
them only 1.000 succeeded in escaping and rescuing.
9. Testimonies of Abdi and Re$id Mullah, 
from immigrants of Geva$ (1.7.1916)
After the evacuation o f Van and Geva§, an 
Armenian and Kazakh unit, consisting o f 500 people, 
directed by Ha$o, M onk Sergis, Onnik, Hako and Parso 
from Horotis182 village, surrounded Karkar (Daldere) 
village o f Geva$. They fired .at the significant build­
ings. They massacred men and children, raped women. 
Only a couple hundred o f  villagers could rescue with 
great difficulties.
10. Testimonies of Tahir, son of Halid and 
Mahmud who migrated to Mezraa-i $eyhan183
(20.6.1916)
Today, Sarmansuyu village of Giimu^dere subdistrict of 
central town of Van.
Today, Doncme^ village of Giimu§dere subdistrict of central 
town of V an .
18~ Its name of today, can not be identified.
183 Today Unliice village of Bahgesaray subdistrict of Geva$ town
of Van.
When it is learned that the center of Sanjak 
would be evacuated, all o f the people o f the village 
began to walk towards a place where the Turkish Ad­
ministration still continued. When they arrived to 
Kasir184 village, it was seen that the bridge was closed 
by the Armenian gangs among whom there were: Надо, 
Mardiros, Bakdo, Berzo, Sergis, Haro, teacher Garabet 
and Migirdi?.
In spite o f the begging of the crowd, the brigands 
did not let anybody pass the bridge. They searched the 
women till their private parts. After they plundered 
everything they had with them, they attacked girls. 
They were equipped with Ottoman and Russian rifles, 
and they fired at men intensively. Most of them died, 
the others escaped with great difficulty and took shelter 
on Kuru Salan mountains. We observed that 121 peo­
ple, most o f them were women and children, had been 
killed with the bullets o f the brigands.
11. Testimonies of Yusuf Kenan and Abdiil- 
hakim, from the immigrants of Miikiis (Bah^esa- 
ray) (19.6.1916)
Last year on August 30, the Russian gangs came 
to Geva§ and $atak (£atak), the Armenian gangs came 
to Miikiis (Bahgesaray). The women, old people and 
children, who could not escape, were massacred com­
pletely. In the Armenian gang, Kirkor, and teacher Ga-
181 Today. Sevindik village of Giizelsu subdistrict of Gtirpinar 
town of Van.
rabet, Vahan from P ar185 village, Artin from K inekas186 
village, Kevork from Miikiis, Minto Sembat, Hayastan, 
ironsmith Naro, Ha?ik Muhik, Dikran and Bedros w ere 
seen. These brigands especially attacked on women and 
raped them in a disgusting manner.
12. Testimonies of Abdulmecid, son of Halid 
and Resul, son of Osman from Lahyan187, im­
migrants of Miikiis (Bah^esaray) (19.6.1916)
The testimonies o f these people are the same 
with the above mentioned testimonies. In their testi­
mony, they indicated that among the Armenian execu­
tioners, there were Lato from Ozim (Giimii§oren) vil­
lage o f Pervari, Ha?o, Oseb, §irak from Miikiis, Sergis, 
Ni§an, Garabet, Vahan and Artin, from the neigh bour- 
ing villages.
13. Testimony of Abdullah (19.6.1916)
After the evacuation o f Van, Geva§ and Havasur 
(Giirpinar), Armenian villagers, under the leadership o f  
Vartan, bishop o f Ahtamar Church who came from Van 
and Tuluncian Simon, attacked on Kurdish villages 
such as Verandanis188, Horavil189, Der190, Zikoh ,
185 A village of Bahgesaray subdistrict of Geva? town Van. Its 
name of today can not be identified.
186 A village of Bahgesaray subdistrict of Geva§ town of Van. Its 
name of today can not be identified.
187 Its name of today, can not be identified.
188 Today K urultu  village of Geva§ town of Van.
189 Its name of today, can not be identified.
190 Its name of today, can not be identified.
Karkar (Daldere), in hundreds o f  groups. Plundering, 
seducing and execution followed one another. About 
200 young girls were taken to Van to satisfy the bestial 
emotions o f  the Armenians and Russian. Only very few 
o f them could endure this attack. Only about 200 
residents o f the plundered and burned villages, could 
take shelter on Agirof mountain. After a period, these 
poor people, thinking that they would find Turkish 
administrators, went to Miikiis (Bahgesaray). However 
also the Armenians located there, attacked again on 
these miserable people. Only a few people could rescue 
also from this massacre in a miraculous way.
14. Testimonies of Salih and Ali, son of Halid 
from Serir192 village of §atak (Catak) (19.6.1916)
All o f  the residents o f Sortekin193, Ar?kanis194, 
M ezraa195 and Pars196 Armenian villages, surrounded 
Serir village at early hours o f the morning. From 60 
persons o f the village, only 15 men, could escape. The 
others were killed. Women were kidnapped and the 
houses were plundered.
191 Its name of today, can not be identified.
192 Its name of today, can not be identified.
193 A village of Catak town of Van. Its name of today, can not be 
identified.
194 Its name of today, can not be identified.
195 Its name of today can not be identified.
196 There were two villages, called Pars. These seem the villages of 
Ba§kale town of Van and Ozalp town of Van . Their names of 
today are Y urttepe (Ba$kale) and Bagna^ik (Ozalp). We could 
not determine which was meant.
15. Testimonies of Abdiilhamid and Hangir
• • 197  *from the Immigrants of Darnis-i Ulya and Darnis- 
i Sufla198 (19.6.1916)
The Armenian gang, consisting 5.000 oeople 
who came from Erzincan, Kahnemiran1 9, §idan2 °, K a- 
gaziz201 and other places under the leadership o f Com ­
mittee President Leo, who was originally from H avasur 
(Giirpinar), gave orders to Damis-i Ulya (Yukari Narli- 
ca) and Damis-i Sufla villages to send 500 liras and 50 
girls and added that Russian had seized Istanbul, there 
had been no Sultan o f  the Ottoman Empire any more 
and added that there had been no solution for them  
except being Armenians. Hopeless Moslem public 
began to collect the requested 500 liras. These brigands, 
after massacred 10 Muslems, staying at a house at K ah­
nemiran (Uzuntekne), one night they surrounded the 
above mentioned two villages. Their leaders, were 
Mesrob, from §idan, Simon, from Kagaziz, Bartik from 
Surengen202, Bedo from Sokan203. They burned the 
houses and by screaming “Long live Armenia”, and 
attacked on the people. Only 50 people, out o f 320,
197 Today, Narlica village of Catak town of Van.
198 A village of Catak town of Van. Its name of today, can not be 
identified.
199 Today, Uzuntekne village of Catak town of Van.
200 A village of Catak town of Van. Its name of today, can not be 
identified.
201 A village of Catak town of Van. Its name of today, can not be 
identified.
202 Its name of today, can not be identified.
203 Today, Catakdibi village of Kirkgegit subdistrict of Giirpinar
town of Van.
could be able to rescue from the massacre by taking 
advantage o f  the darkness.
16. Testimonies of Mahmud, son of Kotas 
and Behltil, son of Said from the notables of Sokan 
(Catakdibi) village of $atak(£atak) town (19.6.1916)
Sokan (Catakdibi) village had a population o f 
680 people. One night, the Armenians and the Russian 
attacked suddenly to the village. Nobody could prevent 
them. Because the Moslem people had no weapons. 
The executioners burned the houses. When the situation 
became calm, a lot o f  women and children, died under 
the swords o f  Kazakhs and short, curved daggers o f 
Armenian rebels. At dawn, they gathered those, who 
could rescue from the night execution in a house. Girls 
and young women were taken to an unknown direction. 
At lunch time, they burned the house in which they had 
imprisoned the villagers. Only 21 o f these miserable 
people could rescue from this massacre miraculously. 
We saw Sahak, from §atak (Catak), Oseb, Artin, Hovik 
and Simon and the Armenian villagers, whose names 
we could not remember among the executioners. They 
especially attacked young girls and did every kind o f 
oppression.
17. Testimonies of Mustafa and Esad from 
the immigrants of Avzini204 village of §atak (Catak)
(20.6.1916)
204 Today, Aga^lik village of Catak town of Van.
The population o f our village was 500. T he  
Armenians and the Russian attacked to the village and  
they plundered and massacred . Only 30 people cou ld  
rescue from the massacre. The end o f the others are no t 
known.
18. Testimonies of Sheikh Enver and M ullah
Ч Л С
Re§id from the religious leaders of Alan village o f  
Kar^ikan town (7.7.1916)
It was learned that about a 100 cavalrymen and 
a reinforced infantry unit were approaching to the v il­
lage. The villagers set off to be away from the village. 
But the residents o f  the Armenian villages, called 
Pelli206, Tankas207, Azerkuh208 and Prons (G6k?imen) 
cut their ways. They attacked on the women, and the 
Russian unit entered into the village. The houses w ere 
put on fire. The disabled such as old, sick and children 
were killed pitilessly. Kazakhs walked on those who 
tried to rescue. Very few o f them could succeed in 
saving their souls.
19. Testimony of Yusuf Ziyaeddin (20.6.1916)
In the beginning o f March, 1915, the Russian 
Kazakhs attacked with the help o f Armenians o f  Geva§ 
town to the villages called Arkanis209 Havins210, Var-
205 Its name of today, can not be identified.
206 Today, A lacabuk village of Re§adiye subdistrict of Tatvan 
town of Bitlis.
207 Its name of today, can not be identified.
208 Its name of today, can not be identified.
209 Today, Iginli village of Catak town of Van.
koz211, Norevan212, Berho213, Tarvis214 and Bahik215, 
each having a population between 100-150, gathered 
the men in a house and burned them. Young women 
and girls were kidnapped.
20. Testimonies of Mullah Abdi, from the 
notables of Kesan (Erge(iti), Nak?ibendi Sheikh of 
Arvas216, Selim Han, son of Haci Bey and Ali, son of 
Hamid Bey (14.4.1916)
The Russian and the Armenians invaded 
Re§adiye217 village o f  A§nak218. They deflowered the 
girls in front o f  everybody, they burned the children 
while they were alive, they carved the eyes o f  men. We
219recognized among the gangs, Apre from Norkuh , 
Bizinik, bishop o f Ahtamar church, Mirbek and Oseb, 
Bedros from Arpit220, and iso from Anzak. These 
executioners, closed 15 the most beautiful girls o f the
210 Today, Atmaca village of Timar subdistrict of Van.
211 Today, Yeti§en village of Kocapinar subdistrict of Erci$ town 
of Van.
212 Today, Escnpinar village of Timar subdistrict of Van.
213 Today, Alacayar village of Catak town of Van.
2i 4 Its name today, can not be identified.
215 Its name today, can not be identified.
216 Today, Doganyayla village of BahQesaray subdistrict of Geva§ 
town of Van.
217 Re§adiye subdistrict of Geva§ town of Van; now it is the 
subdistrict of Tatvan town of Bitlis.
218 Today, Budakli village of Re§adiye subdistrict of Tatvan town 
of Bitlis.
219 Today, Yola$an village of Van-Giirpmar town.
220 A village of Geva§ town of Van. Its name today can not be
identified.
village in a room and began to drink and after they had 
undressed the girls stark naked, they made them dance 
with the screams “Dam Moslems” and “Long live 
Armenia” . They urged them to pray and while they 
were performing namaz, the brigands took the advan­
tage o f this situation and they attempted to deflower 
them. When the girls rejected and resisted there was a 
fight. At the end the Armenians and the Russian killed 
these poor girls.
21. Testimony of Firdevs Hamm, wife o f 
$erif, residing at Abbas Aga district of Van 
(?.6.1916)221
While the enemy was entering Van city, Firdevs 
Hanim and her neighbors, were gathered in the house o f  
retired officer Mehmed Ali Efendi. The sounds o f firing 
rifles and screams began to be heard. After they plun­
dered the houses, they were burning them. The fire was 
coming closer to the house o f Ali Efendi. About 15 
armed people, rang the door o f this house. They called 
Ali Efendi and ordered him to give money to them. Ali 
Efendi, after hesitating for a moment, obeyed the order. 
The brigands, after taking the money o f  Ali Efendi, 
they killed him and his 80 years old sister. His wife 
also, after being seduced, had the same end. My hus­
band §erif Efendi was shot at his head and fell down on 
the ground. In spite o f  my screams full o f pain, my 16 
years old son, Ahmed, was massacred. The brigands 
stabbed a pregnant woman and after killing all the men
Compare with Ermcni Komitcleri’nin A’mal ve Harekat-i 
ihtilaliyyesi..., p. .103
in the house, they took the women to Hatuniye district. 
There they cut the penis o f a 15 years old boy and put it 
in his mouth and after this torture, they killed him. The 
brigands killed all the people they met without any pity.
They took the women, previously they had 
taken to Hatuniye district, to American Institution222. 
On the way, they met a woman walking together with 
her 15 years old son and her baby. The boy was 
suffocated, the woman after being raped was killed 
with her baby. From the American Institute where there 
were a lot o f  immigrants, the Armenians and the Rus­
sian chose the most beautiful women and took them 
away, not to return them any more. None o f the women 
could protect their honor. Among the women who were 
raped by force, they killed the wives o f two sons and 
daughter o f Fevzi Aga from Molla Kasim village and 
the daughter o f  Ibrahim Aga from Ayams (Agarti) 
village. The 15 years old daughter Zeliha o f Ismail Aga 
from Gollii223 village, died, for being raped too much. 
Lots o f Moslem immigrants have been the victims o f 
the torture applied on them.
222 In the beginning of XXth Century, the total number of 
American Institutes within Ottoman State, when schools, churches, 
or phantry, hospital, dispancary, house- kinder garten are con­
sidered separately, was about 310. At the central subdistrict of 
Van. there were three American hospitals and dispancary. See 
also. Adnan §i$inan. Osmanli Devleti’nde XX. Viizyil Ba$lann- 
da Amerikan Kultiircl ve Sosyal Miiesseseleri. Balikesir 1994
221 Today. Gollii village of Timar subdistrict o f  Van.
22. Testimony of Lieutenant $tikrii Efendi, 
son of Timur,who was originally from Van(?.6.1916)
I was at Geva§, while the Russian were 
withdrawing from Van. Upon this withdrawal news, I 
went to Van to help my family. When I saw the corpses 
o f  my family among the corpses who were killed by the 
Russian and left behind while they were withdrawing, I 
was horrified. There were corpses whose bodies were 
tied and the heads were separated from their bodies and 
men nailed on walls. Retired Lieutenant Mehmed Efen­
di, who was originally from Diyarbakir, 80 years old 
Rustem Efendi, from the notables of Van, and his 15 
years old son Necib, had been massacred on Bitlis 
highway passing from Edremid (Sarmansuyu) village. 
The corpses o f  15 boys were on the highway. They had 
no wound traces. They died because of hunger. Their 
mothers had also been killed or they were kidnapped. 
The roads were full with the corporals o f men and 
women . The Armenians had attacked the immigrants 
between Engil (Donerne?) and Edremid villages and 
they had plundered and killed them.
23. Testimony of Dervi? Aga , one of the 
members of village council of Menderi?224 village
(26.6.1916)
The houses at Komiis (Balakli) village were 
burned, the people were massacred, the women were
224 A village of Albayrak (§ikcfti) subdistrict of Ba§kalc town of
Van. Its name today, can not be identified.
raped. Yunus, who was on old man, and his wife were 
subjected to torture. The wife o f the Head official o f the 
district, Mehmed Bey; Fatma Hanim, Lali, daughter of 
Ismail Aga, had been killed after being subjected to 
torture. The wife o f  Suleyman Aga died, because she 
was raped too much. The women, whose babies were 
taken from their laps, were taken away to an unknownn 
direction.
24. Testimony of Latife Hanim, wife of 
Supply officer Hasan Fahri Efendi, from 1st 
Battalion, 97th Regiment (28.6.1916)
During the first invasion o f Van by Russian 
units and the Armenian gangs, only a small potion o f 
the people could go away from the city. As there were 
no transportation vehicles, the majority o f  the people 
stayed in the city, and they thought that the forces 
invading the city belonged to a civilized nation and 
they would show respect to the lives, and honor o f the 
unprotected people. The situation was not as they 
thought. The Armenians which constituted the advance 
force o f the enemy, did not prevent the occupation, 
their evacuation and putting on fire. The people, who 
were in panic, gathered at the major houses o f the city. 
The men were arrested, the women were taken to the 
buildings o f  the American Institutes. More than 10.000 
people were gathered there. The Armenians and Ka­
zakhs chose a woman every night and took her out. 
Most o f the women who were taken out, were killed, 
after being raped.
Reyhan Hanim, wife o f Gendarme sergeant 
Mahmud, and Piruze Hanim, wife o f Nasir Efendi 
(from Selim Bey district o f Van), have also told these 
hateful events that the people were subjected to.
25. The testimony with oath of 30 years old 
§iikrii, son of Hiiseyin , who resided at Nev$an dis­
trict of Van and at the moment he is at Nusaybin225, 
about the malfunctions made by the Armenian and 
the Russian gangs to the prosecutor of the town and 
exemining magistrate (1.7.1916)
The Armenians had a great hate agaijist the 
Ottoman Government and Turkish people for a long 
time. They were trying to cease the existence o f  the 
Ottomans and they w ere serving for this purpose since 
many years. In the context o f this goal, they tried to  
plant the seeds o f  enmity among various elements o f  
the empire. They had set up revolutionary committees 
in Van, Erzurum, Bitlis and Diyarbakir provinces with 
the incitement o f Russian government. In the revolu­
tionary Armenian organization in Van province, there 
were three committees called Dashnak, Hunchak and 
Armenakan. Their leaders were Aram Pasha, i§han and 
Vremian. These people, began to equip themselves with 
rifles, cartridges, bombs, dynamites and other explo­
sives that they had brought from Russia in order to 
apply their plans. They had also organized armed Ar­
menian gangs and attempted to dig underground tun­
nels at Moslems districts o f Van. One o f these gangs,
225 A town of Mardin.
upon the instruction o f  a brigand, known as §irin, went 
to Timar (Gedikbulak). The other, under the command 
o f Sergis (the elder), activated at §atak (Catak) and the 
third one, under the command o f Sergis (the younger), 
went towards Havasur (Gurpmar). Furthermore, a sepa­
rate group that showed its activity in Erzurum, Bitlis 
and Diyarbakir, had been formed. Following the gene­
ral mobilization, the number o f the gangs in Van, was 
increased too much together with the gangs that came 
from everywhere and participated them.
The gang o f  §irin, seized Hi§t226 village and 
killed all the Moslems there. Gendarme major Ahmed 
Bey, and a subordinate officer and the gendarmes who 
came to the place o f  the event were killed also. After 
these executions, the gang attacked Gollii village where 
the Armenians killed all o f  the Moslem people without 
making any difference between age and sex, with 
tortures not ever heard till that day. The young girls at 
the above mentioned village were raped in disgusting 
ways. The abdomens o f  the pregnant women were 
opened up and their uterus were cut into pieces in front 
o f the eyes o f  their parents. The breasts, noses, and ears 
o f lots o f women were cut. Newly born and a little 
older babies were boiled in the boiling water by these 
barbarians and later on their mothers were forced to eat 
them. Territorial forces commander Edhem Bey who 
came to Gollii, was also subject to the attack o f this 
gang and together with his four men, they were 
martyred.
226 It was a village of Yalmca subdistrict of Gurpmar town of Van.
Its name of today, can not be identified.
The residents o f Bahams227, Zorova (Yemlice), 
Koprii Koy228 and Zeve villages were killed pitilessly, 
in a barbarian way and in an unbelievable manner. All 
o f their property was seized by the gangs.
The gangs o f  Sergis (the younger) and Sergis 
(the elder), behaved pitilessly in an unbelievable way 
towards the Moslems in their field o f operation. As the 
Moslem people had no weapon to defend themselves, 
they were killed by these brigand gangs who did every 
kind o f cruelty w ithout making any difference w hether 
they were women or children.
A gendarme in Van, was killed in the middle o f  
the street by Sergis (the younger). Everyday one or 
more Moslems were the victims o f Armenian w ilder­
ness.
Hamid Aga Barracks in Van, was seized by the 
Armenians who killed the guards and blew up the 
building by dynamite, on April 18, 1915.
The Armenians behaved pitilessly and in an 
unbelievable manner towards Moslems for 27 days. 
Within this period, they fired drumfire against Mos­
lems districts, bombed and with the help o f under­
ground tunnels, they blew up the houses o f Moslems. 
Actually, the Armenians reached an agreement with the 
Russian and through the assistance o f the members of 
the Committees, by informing all o f the military ope­
ration o f the Turkish units to the enemy, they made 
espionage in favor o f  them. The head o f  the gang, $irin 
went to Russia later on and he guided the Russian army
" 7 Today. Alniak village of Giizelsu subdistrict of Giirpinar town 
of Van.
“"8 Its name of today, can not be identified.
that invaded Van. Russian also got rid o f the Moslem 
public in a systematic manner. Only five percent of the 
people could rescue from this massacre.
26. Testimony with oath of 55 years old, 
Re$id, farmer from Liva229 village
This person, after making the same statement 
with the previous witness, about the establishment of 
Armenian Committees and gangs, their purpose and 
their wild behavior against Moslem public, added the 
following.
The Armenians o f the gang o f Aram Pasha, 
killed in a horrible way, Captain Halil Efendi, from 
Erci§, Lieutenant Halid Efendi, corporal Alican and 
Ahmed and Mehmed who were accompanying them, 
and a soldier who had come to the center o f the pro­
vince on the road.
§emo, from Yazik230 village, his sons Hiiseyin, 
Kulcan and their friends were killed by the above 
mentioned gang on the way going to mill which was 
half an hour distance from the province and their 
corpses were thrown to the river. Like these, Mullah 
Ali, from (^obanoglu231 village and his friend Hayri, 
were attacked by the Armenians on the way and they 
were killed. A lot o f  Moslem villages were burned by 
the Armenians and the residents were put to sword. 
Before the arrival o f the Russian, the Armenians killed
229 Its name of today, can not be identified.
:з" Its name of today, can not be identified.
231 Today, C°banoglu village of central town of Van.
the residents o f Hidir (Hidirkoy), M olla Kasim, §eyh 
Ayne (Otluca) and §eyh Kara (Gulsiinler) villages, the
232 •headman o f  Pirsolan village, Nuro, w ere gathered in 
a house with about 150 men, women and children and 
by pouring kerosene on them, they were burned while 
they were alive. After the invasion o f  Van by the 
Russian, the Armenians began to destroy the Moslems 
and the remaining o f  the people, escaped from the city. 
But the Russian, in cooperation with the Armenians, 
followed these who escaped and migrated and killed all 
the Moslems they met on the way. The young girls 
were deflowered and were taken to Russia. The men 
and old women were killed or burned.
27. Testimony with oath of immigrant 
Feyzullah Efendi, son of 52 years old Hasan Dunbiil- 
oglu, residing at Edremid district of Van (21.6.1916)
These testimonies verify the statements o f 
§iikrii and Re§id, on the issues such as the wilderness 
made by the Armenians at various sections o f Van 
Province and on the establishment of gangs, Feyzullah 
Efendi, who gave the testimony, added the following:
During the general mobilization, some of the 
Armenians, escaped to Russia to fight in the service of 
Russian army as volunteers. The others, established 
armed gangs to attack the Moslem villages, where the 
adults were called for military service. These gangs 
were killing women and children, were raping young 
girls, burning houses and villages, doing all kinds of
“32 Today, Siiriivolu village of central subdistrict of Muradiye of 
Van.
horrible , unbelievable things. The Armenians o f Van, 
attacked suddenly the Moslems, who were not anxious 
o f anything and were doing their business. They killed 
all the Moslems, they met on the road pitilessly. They 
did not make any difference such in this massacre, as 
whether they were Moslem women, men and old.
Immigrant Sidki, son o f Hasan, 27 years old, 
whose profession was grocer, and who was residing at 
Nor§in-i Ulya district o f  Van and 50 years old Hur$id 
Efendi, son o f Hiiseyin, an artilleryman lienteyant of 
territorrial forces, repeated the previous statement.
28. Testimony with oath of 32 years old Yu­
suf Efendi, son of Mahmud, who was chief tele­
grapher of Province and at the moment he is work­
ing provisionally as Postal and Telegraph Director 
at Nusaybin town and residing at Selim Bey district 
of Van (29.6.1916)
The task o f the revolutionary committees that 
were established in Van Province and whose major 
chiefs were i§han, Aram, Vremian and Papazian, was to 
kill all o f the Moslem passengers they met on the roads. 
In this context, the first two o f these, have personally 
killed Haci Musa Bey and Haci Yakub Aga from the 
notables o f Re§adiye , subdistrict o f  Vostan (Geva§) 
town. These brigands, cut the ears and noses o f  their 
victims and cut the penis o f both o f the corpses later on 
and put them in their mouth. The members o f  these 
committees, were always holding secret meetings at 
Ahtamar monastery at Vostan (Geva§) area, at the vil­
233 Now, Re$adiye subdistrict of Tatvan town of Bitlis.
lages o f Er^ek subdistrict and Korzut234 village o f  
Muradiye town. They were meeting at the monasteries 
and houses o f the Armenian district o f Van, suitable for 
this purpose. When the mobilization was declared and 
the soldiers moved to go to various fronts, the insolence 
o f the Armenians did not recognize any limit.
I left Van, when the Russian passed the border. 
After Van was invaded, 1 listened from the neighbor 
women who succeeded in coming Bitlis, the following : 
About 25 men from our district, who took shelter in a 
house with their families, have been encountered with 
the attack o f about 100 Armenians, who cut 13-14 years 
o f children into pieces in front the eyes o f  their parents, 
who dragged the men along the ground to the garden 
and shot them with gun after lining them up in order. 
The women were taken to the house o f  Ziya Bey at 
Halil Aga district where French Consul was residing. 
Young women were separated in one side and were 
taken away by these brigands.
' ,1 Today. Ulu$ar village of Muradiye town of Van. 
124
CHAPTER THREE
OPPRESSIONS IN ERZURUM PROVINCE
1. MINUTES OF THE COMMISSION (I)
The commission that was appointed to examine 
the Russian and the Armenian oppression at site, 
walked about Tercan235 town where torture had been 
applied by M oscow forces.
The commission arrived at Kurukol236 that had 
become a ruin, on June 6, 1916. Here the commission 
interrogated 70 years old Kina Mehmed Efendi who 
was residing at neighboring Mezgeyik237 village, told to 
the commission that the enemy, especially the Arme­
nians, had done every kind of cruelty that could be 
thought of. The head o f  his brother, Ismail, was split 
into pieces with bullets. Merd, son o f Sabit and 65 
years old Hasan, son o f Dursun, were martyred with 
rifle, izzet Hatun, wife o f Hasan, son o f Dursun was 
wounded from her right hip with bayonet.
Terbusek238 village was visited by the com­
mission on the same day. A few old men and women 
remained in the village. From them, Head Hiiseyin and 
Musa, son o f Haydar, told that the Armenians and the 
Kazakhs had seized almost all their animals, money and 
stored food and other valuable goods. The enemy had 
sent all powerful men to Erzurum. The Russian and the
A town of Er/incan.
Today. Kurukol village ofTcrcan town of Er/incan. 
:v  Today, Cakmakli village ofTcrcan town of Er/incan 
:w Today, Yalinka? village ofTcrcan (own of Erzincan.
Armenians especially insulted women. They would 
keep the doors o f their houses open and the women 
would not put on their undershoots. About 20 women 
died as they could not bear the torture. Suna, wife o f  
Mikdad Bey, whom the commission found as bedrid­
den, had given 35 liras, that was all her wealth, to  
protect her honor, but but even that donation, could not 
rescue her from the animal-like actions o f the brigands. 
The answer o f the Russian Commander, to whom she 
went to complain, was to force her to go to bed.239
Seki240 village which remained under the occu­
pation o f the enemy was presenting a ruin scenery. 
From 40 houses, 12 o f them were in a situation to be 
stayed in. All o f  the valuable goods o f the village were 
taken away by the Armenians and the Russian and the 
men were banished to Erzurum. Here the point that at­
tention to be paid, the Russian commander Arslan Bey, 
was originally a Moslem from Kazan. Thanks to him, 
here the number of the raped women was a few. Zey- 
nep, wife o f Murad, son o f Timur; Havva, wife o f Meh­
med, son o f Ahmed; Giillu, daughter of Mehmed, son 
of Yagiz; Zekiye, daughter o f  §akir, son o f Be§ir; Fehi- 
me, wife o f Refet, son o f Be§ir, were subjected to tor­
ture. 25 years old another woman, was killed by a bomb 
as she opposed to be raped. The eyes of Hifzi, from 
Yavi241 who had a child from an Armenian woman, 
without being married, were carved with bayonet, with 
the permission o f his wife and then he was cut into
239 Compare with Ermeni Komiteleri’nin A ’mal ve Harekat-i 
ihtilaliyyesi..., pp. 289-290.
240 Its name of today, can not be identified.
241 Today, Yavi village of Cat town of Erzurum.
pieces. His wife and his 15 years old daughter were 
taken away by the Armenians. Arslan Bey, who did not 
want to hurt the Armenians, was contented with the 
advice that he gave to the villagers to be closed in their 
houses, and sometimes he used to send infantry units to 
help them.242
The Armenians destroyed 27 houses completely 
also at Gokta?243 village. The commission interrogated 
the persons called Re§id, Mahmud, Hasan, Sergeant 
Mevliid and Sergeant Hiiseyin who were there, during 
the occupation. The enemy sent 14 young men, to Pa- 
sinler244; among them 4 could be able to escape. The 
young men, who could escape told that they were 
forced to work at fortification and road construction 
works.
Only three slices o f bread were given to every 
five persons. Among them, two died because o f hunger. 
Again from this village, two young men, one was 14 
years old, the other was 35 years old, were killed with 
bayonets with an excuse they had fired at the enemy. 
Women, even eight years old girls were raped. Hediye, 
who was the daughter-in-law o f a person called Mail, 
was taken to the Russian positions by force. Later on 
she was obliged to submit the animal-like desires o f the 
enemy soldiers. Hediye succeeded in taking shelter at
242 Compare with Ermeni Komiteleri’nin A’mal ve Harekat-i 
ihtilaliyyesi..., pp. 290-291; For the orijinal of the certificate see, 
Ar$iv Belgelerine Gore Kafkaslar’da ve Anadolu’da Ermeni 
Mezalimi, 1 ,1906-1918, pp. 583-584.
243 Today, Gokta$ village of Tercan town of Erzincan.
244 A town o f Erzurum.
Edebuk245 village during the withdrawal o f the enemy. 
The villagers recognized Antranik, son o f Aleksan from 
Kottir246, with a nick name Antranik Pasha,Ni§an, from 
Cikmz247; Olos, son of Armenak Tako; Sahak, son o f 
Mosik and others among the Armenian rebels. The 
enemy took with them nine years old Mehmed, grand­
son o f Re§id, son of Ahmed. All o f the beehives and 
private houses were destroyed, the mosque was used as 
a stable.248
The commission met with Mehmed Bey, one o f 
the rich men o f Kurukol at Alirik249 village. Mehmed 
Bey said that the Armenians and the Russian took all 
their animals and jewelry. Furthermore, the enemy 
destroyed the house of this person and killed two o f his 
relatives, called Ahmed and Mecid. They also suffo­
cated the wife o f his uncle with a rope. The Armenian 
gangs under the command o f famous brigand, known as 
Antranik Pasha, did their known wickedness in this vil­
lage also. They deflowered eight years old Fatma, 
daughter o f Mullah $iikrii Efendi, nine years old Ni- 
gar, daughter o f §akir, son o f Binba?i, and seven years 
old Miinevver, daughter of Ali Mustafa from Silik250 
20 years old Esma, the granddaughter of Yasin, the 
daughter o f Emir Han; 25 years old Haznur, who had 
two children, one eight years old, the other five years 
old, were chosen, because o f their beauties, to be as
245 A village of Tercan.
2 ,6 Today, Bagpinar village of Tercan town of Erzincan.
247 Today, Yaylayolu village of Tercan town of Erzincan.
248 Compare with Ermeni Komitclcri’nin A’mal ve Harekat-i 
Ihtilaliyyesi.... pp. 291-292
249 Today, Be^goze village of Tercan tow n of Erzincan.
2511 Its name of today, can not be identified.
tools for the ugly purposes o f the Armenians; and 
during the withdrawal o f  the enemy, they were taken 
away with them. A person called Suleyman, son of Ali, 
was martyred with the strokes o f sword. 60 years old 
Ahmed, son o f Kii<?uk Omer, was killed by treading 
under feet. The Commission took the photographs o f a 
woman, whose left arm was cut with bayonet, an old 
man who was wounded at his food with a pistol, and 
the girls who were raped2' 1
Parsinik252 village also has been the scene of 
oppression. The Commission observed that, an old man 
called Fehim, son o f Musa, had three knife strokes, 
immigrant Halil oglu had been slaughtered by the 
Armenians. As usual, all o f the goods of the villagers 
were seized by the Russian, the mosque and the ceme­
tery were demolished and destroyed. The commission 
established that the enemy always omitted the Kurdish 
villages, only attacked on Turkish villages.
At Pelegoz253 village, Medical Doctor Major Ri­
fat Bey from 29 th Division, explained to the commis­
sion that, in a combat held on the hills o f Kursan254 
village on March 14, 1916, as Ferid, son o f Kibar from 
Giimii§hane and Granduk, son o f Grandiik Kellemit 
from Baghdad, from 5th Regiment, 1st Machinegun bat­
talion; Ahmed, son o f Hiiseyin o f Gorele255, from 12lh 
Regiment, 2nd Artillery battalion; Hasan, son o f  Ismail
Compare with Ermeni Komitclcri’nin A ’mal vc Harekat-i 
ihtilaliyyesi.... p. 292
"5" It was a Milage of Tercan; its name of today, can not be 
identified.
Today. Giizbulak village of Tercan town of Erzincan.
1 Today. Findikli village of Tercan town of Erzincan.
'  '  A town of Giresun.
o f imam Kullu256 village, from 5th Regiment, 1st B atta ­
lion, 1st squadron, were wounded, they could not be  
taken away and were left in the vicinity o f  II A ldi257 
and Cigerkum258 villages; and in spite o f  all their en­
treaties o f these miserable men, Russian officers and 
soldiers, passing by, did not help them and these 
wounded soldiers remained on snow with blood all 
around them, at the countryside for 20 days and la ter 
on, the Russian authorities gave permission w ith  
difficulty for them to be taken to the village, provided 
that they should not be hospitalized at Russians hos­
pitals. The villagers, who were afraid o f  the cruelty o f  
the Russian, took bread and milk to them, at night by 
taking all o f  the provisionary measures. After a very 
long time, they got the permission to move to the 
village, provided that they should not be hospitalized at 
Russian hospitals. These soldiers remained at the 
village till June 3, 1916, when the Ottoman troops reen­
tered into the village. The appearance o f these four 
wounded people were tragic. They had lost weight so 
that they could be deemed as corpses and as their dis­
eases were not cured, they were in fatal stage.
The Interrogation Commission, found Zarif Bey 
Korn259 in ruins. The building o f  the Administrators, 
was a newly constructed two storey building. It had two 
fronts and its was cost 1.000 Liras. The Russian and 
the Armenian gangs had brought this building in a way
"5fi Today, imamkullu village of Bakirdagi subdistrict of Develi 
town of Kayseri.
"57 Today, Elaldi village of Tercan town of Erzincan.
It was a village of Tercan. It is name of today, can not be 
identified.
259 Korn is an equivalent o f small settlement area.
that could not be settled in. All o f the buildings and the 
goods o f those who live in cities, were plundered. 
These miserable people became poor. The commission 
took the photograph o f  above mentioned building.
The commission arrived Mama Hatun, which 
was the center o f  Tercan town on June 10, 1916 and ob­
served that four fifth o f  the houses had been destroyed 
by the enemy. Out o f  280 houses, only 64 were rigid. 
The mosque was converted into a church and some o f 
its important parts were destroyed. A bell was hung on 
its minaret. The Moslem people were subject to all 
kinds o f cruelty. The houses were plundered, the 
women and young girls were raped by force. Among 
those who were raped women there were the families o f 
Edhem, son o f  Bayram, deceased Gendarme Sergeant 
Cemal, Htiseyin, son o f  Dede and Bekir Efendi and 
furthermore Kiraz Hatun.
Fatma Hanim, who wanted to save her honor, 
could only reach her goal by committing suicide. The 
Russian and the Armenians who were furious against 
this self-defense o f Fatma Hanim, got their revenge by 
demolishing her house, and her brother-in-law’s house. 
About 40 young men were taken as prisoners and sent 
to Erzurum. No news could be received from them till 
now.
The commission observed that the residents o f 
Humlar260 Korn, were subject to every kind o f  plunder, 
cruelty and rape by the Russian and the Armenian
gangs.
26,1 Today, Be$kaya village of Tercan town of Erzincan.
The Armenians o f Vartik261 village joined in the 
Russian army immediately at the beginning o f  the inva­
sion. During the invasion o f the village, a few hundred 
o f Armenians were settled in the Moslem houses w hich 
they furnished with the furniture o f Moslems; they 
demolished the mosque and the pulpit.
There were only three houses to be lived in at 
$orlar Kom. Omer Aga and Merik Ali Korns were 
found empty and in ruin by the commission.
Topal Osman262, Hiiseyin Efendi and Tuzla 
Koms were almost demolished completely. There was 
nobody in these koms.
On June 12, 1916 the Commission made visits 
to Vartik (Begendik) village, Tuzla (Salim), Zaza>Var- 
tik, Akta§263 Karacaviran, Zelgo Koms and Ki§lak264 
village. The first o f these villages was in a condition 
that could not be lived in.
The residents o f Zaza Vartik suffered too much 
from the Armenian gangs. Their houses Were burned 
and demolished and their furniture were taken away, 
their agricultural tools were destroyed. They raped 
women and young girls in front o f their parents. Su­
leyman, son o f Servet; Durak, son o f  Mustafa; Mah­
mud, son o f Suleyman; Dursun, son o f  Sergeant M us­
tafa; Mail, son o f Mustafa; Rii§tu Mehmed, Mustafa 
from Bayburt, were killed as they wanted to protect the 
honor o f  their family. Fethiye Hanim, wife of Mustafa, 
who wanted to protect her honor, was killed with bay­
251 Today, Begendik village of Tercan town of Erzincan.
262 A village of Tercan town of Erzincan.
263 A village of Tercan town of Erzincan.
264 Its name of today, can not be identified.
onet. The daughters o f Osman, son of Mencu, Nuriye 
and Peluka, who were both 12 years old; 10 years old 
daughter o f Arif, Kudret; the wives o f Osman and Ha­
san, and another young woman, were subject to out o f 
humanity treatment for three months by the Armenians 
and the Russian. Even old women were subject to this 
unlucky situation. After these tortures, those who could 
survive, told these disgraceful events, with tears in-their 
eyes, before the police chief. The young people from 
the same village were imprisoned and sent to Erzurum.
The enemy who always implemented destruc­
tion plan, burned Akta§ village and plundered. The 
young men were taken as prisoners, the houses were 
demolished and all o f  the money and goods o f the 
Moslem people were plundered. The old people about 
60 and 80 years old, were beaten and tormented to give 
their last piasters to the Armenian brigands. Edhem 
Aga, the head o f  the village, was killed with the strokes 
o f the butt o f  the rifle. Ismail Aga, son o f Karahan, was 
obliged to give his wealth in the amount o f  50 Liras, 
under the fatal knife o f these barbarians, and 15 years 
old girl, called Ziibeyde, was deflowered in front of 
everybody.
The enemy plundered the property, money and 
animals o f  the residents o f  Hogik265 village, and turned 
the inside o f the mosque into ruin. The commission, 
could only find 98 houses in which it could be lived, in 
the village which had 210 houses. The mosque was 
converted into a stable by the Russian and the 
Armenians. At the end o f the invasion, 16 young men
265 Today, Gok^e village of Tercan town of Erzincan.
who remained at their village, were taken as a pris­
oners.
Kabunduruk266 and Mustafa267 Korns, like the 
other Moslem villages, were destroyed. The Armenians 
took all o f the goods, furniture and animals and sent 19 
villagers to Erzurum. No news could be received from 
them.
Eyiib Oglu Kom268, was turned into a ruin by 
the Russian and the Armenians who killed Hasan, son 
of Hanfer; Dursun, son o f Hiiseyin; Mehmed, son o f  
Hasan; Ismail, son of Hasan; Ali, son of Hiiseyin; M ah­
mud, son o f Hasan with torture.
Yusuf, son o f Saylam, from Sogiitlii269 Kom had 
the same destiny.
270The enemy destroyed 32 houses at Ser?eme 
Kom, 20 houses at Ciftlik271 village. Furthermore, they 
took away everything they seized at the village. 26 peo­
ple were taken as prisoners from the village. Osman, 
son o f Mustafa; Seyyare, daughter o f  Durak; nine years 
old A§ir, son o f Mustafa and six years old daughter of 
Mullah M ustafa were put to sword.
266 Today, Ko?baba village of C'lftlik subdistrict of A§kale town of 
Erzurum.
267 Today, Mustafabey village of Tercan town of Erzincan.
268 Today, Eyiipoglu village of C’iftlik subdistrict of A§kale town 
of Erzurum.
269 There are three Sogiitlii villages of central subdistrict of 
Erzurum, and of Ilica and Ovacik subdistricts. It could not be 
identified, which one was meant.
270 Today, Eskipolat village of llica subdistrict of Erzurum.
271 Today, Ciftlikkoy of central subdistrict of Erzurum.
Durak, son o f Mehmed; Hiiseyin, son o f  Ridvan 
and Giili son o f Zeynel from Mustafa (Mustafabey) 
Kom, gave their souls with bayonet.
Ovacik village also was destroyed and burned. 
Only 20 houses remained rigid. The daughter-in-law o f 
Zaza Ali was raped and her 70 years old brother-in-law, 
who wanted to protect her, was killed.
Pekeri?2 2 village, has been the scene o f every 
kind o f  oppression. The commission that came to the 
village on June 14, 1916, could not find anything, ex­
cept the ruins. The mosque and the cemetery were 
demolished, all agricultural tools were destroyed. The 
Russian and the Armenian gangs plundered all the 
goods in Moslem houses and taken away all o f the 
animals. When they entered into the village, they killed 
six years old Emrullah, from Кагафау273 and seven 
years old Mahmud in front o f the door o f the church, 
and later on they exhibited their heads that were sepa­
rated from their bodies to the public. They continued 
their executions by killing Ahmed, son o f Fettah; Merik 
Ahmed Efendi, Kaya, son o f Ako; Mehmed from Cede, 
Mullah, son o f Memi, Sergeant Mehmed; and his son 
Osman, Haydar Aga, Halil, son o f  Hafiz; Hayri, son o f 
Dellal and his seven years old son Hakki; Zihni, son o f 
Mustafa, nine years old Mevliid and his four years old 
brother Eyiib, sons o f Yusuf; the mother o f  Mevliid 
from Altinta§274, 15 years old daughter o f Sheikh Be?ir; 
Fatma the sick daughter o f Hoti Mustafa, four and eight
272 Today, Hakbilir village of Bozoglak subdistrict of Kemah 
town of Erzincan.
273 Today, Kara^ay village of Tercan town of Erzincan.
274 Today. Altinta? village of A§kale town of Erzurum.
years old daughters o f Bahri from Kars, namely N aim e 
and Esmer.
Later on, 500 Russian and the Armenians, raped 
150 women who were hidden in Ahmed B ey’s house at 
Pekeri? (Hakbilir) village, through torture. Among 
them, there were the wife o f Ahmed Bey, 12 and 14 
years old two daughters o f Mustafa, daughter o f  Selim, 
from Karagay; seven years daughter of, Mullah §tikru. 
Izzet Hatun, wife o f Sergeant Arif and four other 
women were killed by beating. The head o f the village 
Mullah §iikrii and his friends, showed the corporals o f  
these miserable martyrs, which had no head.
The Russian and the Armenian gangs who 
plundered the house o f 90 years old Dursun Aga, from 
the notables o f  the village, threatened him with death to 
give them money. Miserable Dursun Aga, who had no 
money left to give, was hung down into a well, with his 
feet tied. The brigands who could not obtain anything 
with this torture, had beaten him terribly and left him 
near the well in half-died position.
June 14, 1916
Legal Adviser o f Erzurum Province Kemal.
Ilica Town Director §iikrii.
2. Testimonies with oath of Mehmed, son of 
Bulmaz; Hiiseyin, son of Mehmed; Haci ibrahim, 
son of Ahmed and Hasan, son of Yusuf, from the 
immigrants who came to Tadim275 village from Hi- 
nis (5.6.1916)
7S Today, Taditn village of the central subdistrict of Elazig.
We are from Molla Kula9276 village which is an 
hour away from Hints. During the invasion o f our ter­
ritory by the Russian, The Armenians called Vahan and 
Aleksandr Asoyan, who were from the same village 
with us, together with certain amount o f cavalrymen 
attacked suddenly to our village. These people, had 
already proved that they were from the leaders o f 
Dashnak Committee, through their despot-like and piti­
less behaviors. First o f all they suffocated more than 20 
children, they cut the abdomens o f some o f  the preg­
nant women with knife and put the children that come 
out on the top o f their bayonets and showed them to 
their fathers. They called their assistants to swear to the 
died women. Vahan and Aleksandr, after promising 
that they would release us at night, they themselves and 
their assistants chose a beautiful woman for each o f 
them, from the notable families. Later on, they impris­
oned 12 women and 28 children in a house. After the 
midnight, observing the drunkenness o f these Arme­
nians was still continuing, with the help o f one of my 
friends, we were able to rescue the imprisoned women 
and children and leaving all our property at the village, 
we escaped. Now, in our village, where there were 250 
Moslems, only 35 people were left. We are all in 
poverty.
276 Today, M ollakula? village of central subdistrict of Hinis town
of Erzurum.
3. The oppression executed by Russian at 
Elejkirt277 town’s Arap278 village. Testimony with 
oath of Riza, son of Suleyman, who is residing at 
Orta Til279 village temporarily and who is originally 
from Arap village of Elejkirt (3.6.1919)
On December 30, 1914, the Russian occupied 
our town. On January 1, 1915, a gang, consisting o f 200 
Kazakhs and 70 Armenians, under the leadership an 
Armenian, called Abramayis, surrounded our village. 
We, through the mediation o f an Armenian, told them 
that we would deliver our village, rather than shedding 
blood. The gang entered into the village. First they took 
our weapons and later on they took away our 500 cattle 
and 2,000 sheep. When we demanded receipt against 
the cattle and sheep that they took away, the com­
mander o f the Russian unit, stating that our souls also 
belonged to them, dismissed us. On the second day o f  
the occupation, the Armenians entering into our house, 
attacked to our wives and daughters. When we com­
plained about it to Russian commander Haydarov, we 
got the answer stating that the Armenians and Kazakhs 
would behave as they wished. Two hours later, he 
called us again and said “I am also a Moslem like you. 
The Armenians will behave as they wish. Do not stay 
any more in this village, save your wives and daugh­
ters, you are going to lose your everything”. After these 
words he gave two Russian Moslems from Kazan to 
protect us.
277 A town of Agri.
Today, Oztoprak village of Ele§kirt town of Agri. 
" 9 Its name of today, can not be identified.
Within the two days we remained in the village, 
the Armenians and the Russian deflowered 23 girls, and 
performed fatal torture to the women. My three sisters 
who were among them, after being the tools o f animal­
like desires, were arrested. There was a pregnant 
woman, about 35 years old, called Hazalo, in our vil­
lage. The woman was caught by one Kazakh and three 
Armenians. Two o f the Armenians were from Garib 
(Gapir)280 village, one was from Hanzir281 village of 
Ele?kirt, an Armenian called Mihran. The poor woman 
was going to deliver her baby at that moment by 
chance. The abdomen o f  the woman, who was forced to 
lie down, was cut by Mihran and the fetus was hung on 
the branch o f a tree. I and the other residents o f the 
village, were the eyewitnesses o f  this horrible scene.
4. Testimony with oath of Ali, from the 
immigrants of Hmis town, residing at Tadim village
(5.6.1916)
I am from Hints town, which is six hours away 
from the combat area. A group o f Armenians, living in 
our town and members o f the Dashnak Committee, at 
the beginning o f the clashes, established a gang to make 
every kind o f destruction in Turkey. Among them, I 
recognized Bertabek Arakel, from Kara £oban village, 
Sergis, son o f Monk, from Kopal282 village; Kirkor
280 Today, Gozaydin village of Ele§kirt town of Agri.
281 Today, Yiicekapi village of Ele§kirt town of Agri.
282 Today, Palak^ayiri village of Ele$kirt town of Agri
Tokaz and Manuk from Kara Koprii283 village, Misak 
Sergisian and Vahan Hazhazian, from Kahkik284 
village, Hurjid Bekesian, from Agcamelik285 village, 
Misak, from Duman286 village, Murad, son o f  Doctor 
Agob and Dikran, from Harami287 village, Saru Kahya, 
from Kozlu288 village, Kesper Hilhilian, from Yeni 
Kdy289.
One day, while I was at the back o f the frontier 
line in the town, I learned that the Moslem’s who were 
residing at the places which were occupied by the en­
emy, had been subjected to torture. For this reason, to­
gether with my family and other about 150 other 
residents o f  the village, in spite o f the freezing cold and 
snow, leaving all our goods and wealth behind, we set 
off, to be able to rescue from the massacre. When we 
came to a place which was four hours away from Hinis, 
we were surrounded by the Armenians. They separated 
the men who will be able to use weapons and killed 
them in front o f the eyes o f their wives. About 20 Ar­
menians and Russian who came later on, after raping 
the women o f a family in spite of the cold weather, cut
283 Today, Karakoprii village of Karagoban subdistrict of Hinis 
town of Erzurum.
284 Today, Goller village of Halilgavu$ subdistrict of Hinis town of 
Erzurum.
285 Today, Ak^amelik village of Halilgavu? subdistrict of Hinis 
town of Erzurum.
286 A village of Koprii subdistrict of Hinis town of Erzurum.
"87 Today, Bellita$ village of Karakoprii subdistrict of Hinis town 
of Erzurum.
“88 Today, Kozlu village of Pazaryolu subdistrict of ispir town of • 
Erzurum.
289 Today, Yenikoy of Karakoprii subdistrict of Hinis town of
Erzurum.
their organs and killed them. When the sun set, the 
Armenians and Russian, went away taking the women 
with them, and forgot me by chance in a tied up posi­
tion. After encountering with many difficulties, I could 
be able to unfasten my ties and I was able to go to a vil­
lage where where there were Ottoman soldiers.
5. Testimony with oath of Muhiddin, son of 
Goge$, from Ele?kirt town, residing at Sinel290 vil­
lage of Elazig (1916)
Originally I was from Kara Kilise (Karakose) 
town, and I was a tradesman. Last year (in 1915), when 
the town was occupied by the Russian, an Armenian 
and Kazakh gang, under the command o f Ohan from 
Hanzir (Yiicekapt), came to my house and kidnapped 
my two single sisters and the wife o f my martyred 
brother. When I applied to rescue them to those who 
kidnapped them, they arrested me also and tortured me 
for a time. In order to rescue my honor, I gave 255 liras 
in cash, all my goods of my shop in the amount o f  300 
liras and at last my furniture, in the amount o f 120 liras 
through the mediatorship of my neighbor Ha<?atur. In 
spite o f these, the miserables could not reach their 
freedom. At the end of entreats, I was able to rescue 
and go to Malazgirt291.
My two sisters were found in one o f the Arme­
nian villages o f  Ele$kirt, which was evacuated by the 
Russian and the Armenians upon the arrival o f Ottoman
290 Its name of today, can not be identified.
291 Today. Malazgirt town of Mu§. Malazgirt was a subdistrict of 
Bulanik town at that time.
forces, after a few days. They were killed at the end o f  
the torture to which they were subjected. The wife o f 
my brother, was kidnapped by the Armenians and the 
Russian.
CHAPTER FOUR
OPPRESSIN IN TRABZON PROVINCE
1. Testimony with oath of 40 years old Besim, 
son o f Alemdar, son of Mehmed, from ispila292 of 
Марка county
Two days after the occupation of Trabzon, the 
enemy occupied Ma<?ka at the same time with our vil­
lage. On the eve of the occupation, my family and I
293 294went first to Miilaka village and later on to Zanha 
and Zanoy295 villages. While I was at Zanoy village, the 
Russian soldiers raped a 12 years old girl, from Soldoy 
and furthermore, the daughter o f Osman Efendi, tax 
officer o f  Hathavur296
This vileness o f the Russian soldiers, urged us 
to leave the above mentioned village and to take a 
shelter at Hortokup297.
As regards to our village ispila; on the day when 
Russian entered into the village, the Armenian gangs 
who followed-up the same objective with them, killed 
Hasan, son o f  Alemdar, Deli Balta Hasan, Mehmed, 
son o f  Eyiib, and Osman, son o f Haci Ahmed by tor­
ture. The Armenians deflowered the 12 years old 
daughter o f Mustafa, son o f Eyiib and after cutting the 
arms o f  Hasan Aga, burned him while he was alive.
292 Today, Ocakli village of Марка town of Trabzon.
293 Its name of today, can not be identified.
294 Today, Ce$meler village of Марка town of Trabzon.
295 Today, Akmescit village of Марка town of Trabzon.
296 Its name of today, can not be identified.
297 A village of Марка town of Trabzon.
The Armenians again, plundered the houses o f  the 
Moslems and after carrying out various tortures, im pris­
oned the residents o f this village. Russian also partici­
pated in the burning and demolishing o f M oslem 
houses.
The mosques o f Cevizlik and Hagavera298 villages, 
and furthermore Orta Hisar mosque in Trabzon, w ere 
converted into churches.
One day, when I was in Trabzon, Hasan Efendi, 
one o f the police officers o f the city, was hung upon the 
incitement Greeks, who killed Hikmet Efendi, son o f  
Aldi Ka?ti, the police officer o f Ha^avera (Yefilyurt) 
village, in a barbarian way. A lot o f other people, have 
been the victims o f  the meanly plans o f these Greek 
people.
2. Testimony with oath of Fatma, wife of 
Mehmed, son of Salim and daughter of Ali Osman 
from Kalafka299 village of Yomra subdistrict.
It was the first day o f  April. Everybody was in 
preparation o f  migration, seeing that the Russian were 
approaching to our village. I went to he house of Meh­
med Aga, son o f Kolan, the head man o f Dirona300 
village, to ask what he was thinking to do. He answered 
that his sister Hatice and he would act together when 
the enemy ceased fire at the village. I stayed at their
29X Today. Ye$ilyurt village of Magka town of Trabzon.
299 There are three villages called Kalafka of Yomra town of 
Trabzon. Kalafkaardu^lu (Giilyurdu), Kalafkahatipli (Koiniir- 
cu) and Kalafkaiskcnderli (Ta$dclen). It could not be identified 
which Kalafka village it was.
1011 Its name of today, could not be identified.
house compulsorily, actually there were many people 
that I was acquainted with. Among them, there were, 
Hasan, son o f  Kolan, from Dirona village, his wife Ul- 
viye, his daughter-in-law, Hiisniye his brother Ali and 
his wife Zeliha, his relative Mehmed and his wife Gtil- 
fem and their 17 years old daughter Giillii, his mother- 
in-law and Emrullah, son o f Kolak and his wife Zakire, 
sister o f  Mehmed, son o f Kolak, Emine and her daugh­
ter Ay§e and her daughter-in-law Emine.
The next morning at 3 o ’clock the enemy occu­
pied the village. A Kazakh squadron consisting about 
150 soldiers came to the house where we were and took 
us all with men and women to a place that was a quarter 
hour away from the village. Three Greek women who 
were accompanying them, were acting as translators to 
them. We had the day there. Towards the evening, the 
Russian separated men from women and took them to 
an unknown place. They took us to another place which 
was half an hour distant from that place.
At night, they raped Emine, 18 years daughter 
o f Ali, son o f  Pash, from Dirona village, in front o f our 
eyes. The baby o f Hatice, her sister, was thrown into 
the air by the Russian and was cut into two pieces with 
a sword. The Russian killed the other children. Emine, 
wife o f Hasan, son o f  Kolak, and her 8 years daughter 
§iikriye and other lots o f  Moslem women whom I do 
not know the names, were dishonored meanly. One o f 
the Greek women, who could not endure these wildly 
behavior and wanted to interfere in favor o f the 
innocent, was immediately killed by the Russian with 
the strokes o f  butt o f the rifle and bayonet.
By taking advantage o f and the darkness o f  the 
night, I was able to succeed in escaping from this area 
to the plain and the pitiless behavior o f  the Russian. In 
the middle o f  the night, I got up from the corner where
I was crouched, and came to Komera301 village w here 
the Ottoman soldiers were located.
There, I learned that the younger daughter o f  
Zehra, daughter o f  Hur?it Pash, Nadiye, sister-in-law o f  
Haci Hatun, wife o f Osman iskenderogtu, and her 
daughters Binnaz and Meryem had been killed, after 
being raped.
301 Today, Yalincak village of central subdistrict of Trabzon. 
146
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Allen, W.E.D.- Paul MuratofF, Caucasian 
BattIefields:A history of the wars on the Turco-Cau- 
casian border 1828-1921, Cambridge University 
Press, 1953; Turkish Translation: Kafkas Harekati: 
1828-1921 Tiirk-Kafkas Sininndaki Harplerin Tari- 
hi, Ankara 1966.
2. Ar$iv Belgelerine Gore Kafkaslar’da ve Anado- 
lu’da Ermeni Mezalimi (1906-1918), I, Ankara 1995.
3 Askeri Tarih Belgeleri Dergisi, N o.81 (Arahk 
1982).
4. Bitlis Vilayeti Salnamesi (Dated 1318).
5. £elik, Hiiseyin, Gorenlerin Goziiyle Van’da Erme­
ni Mezalimi, Ankara, without any date.
6 . Demiroglu, Faiz, Van’da Ermeni Mezalimi (1895- 
1920), Ankara, 1985.
7. Ermeni Komiteleri’nin A’mal ve Harekat-i ihtila- 
liyyesi, i ’lan-i Me$rutiyyet’den Evvel ve Sonra, Is­
tanbul 1332.
8. Evans Laurence, United States Policy and the 
Partition of Turkey (1914-1924), Baltimore, The 
Johns Hopkins Press, 1965; Turkish Translation: Tevfik 
Alanay, Tiirkiye’nin Payla$ilmasi (1914-1924), Istan­
bul 1972.
9. GazT Ahmed M uhtar Pa?a, TakvTmii’s-Sinin, 
Prepared by Yticel Dagli-Hamit Pehlivanli, Ankara
1993.
10 Hocaoglu, Mehmed, Ar$iv Vesikalariyla Tarihte 
Ermeni Mezalimi ve Ermeniler, Istanbul 1976
11 liter, Erdal, Ermeni Propagandasi’nin Kaynak- 
lan, Ankara 1994
12. Kara Schemsi (Re§it Saffet Atabinen,) Turcs et 
Armeniens Devant L’Histoire (Nouveaux tem oig- 
Nages russes et turcs sur les atrocites armeniennes, de 
1914-1918), Geneve 1919.
13. “Kars-Subutan §ehitligi Kazisi,” Yakin Tarihimiz- 
de Kars ve Dogu Anadolu Sempozyumu, (K ars- 
Subatan, June 17-21, 1991), Ankara 1992, pp. 361-457.
14. Kevorkian, Raymond H.-Paul B. Paboudjian, Les 
Armeniens, Dans L’Empire Ottoman a la Veille du 
Genocide, Paris 1992.
15. Konuk?u, Enver, Ermenilerin Ye§ilyayla’daki 
Turk Soykinmi (11-12 Mart 1918), Ankara 1990.
16. Korganoff, General G., La participation des Ar­
meniens a la guerre mondiale sur le front du 
Caucase, 1914-1918, Paris 1917.
17. Koylerimiz (1981), Prepared by Ministry o f  
Interior, Ankara 1982.
18. Kurat, Akdes Nimet, Tiirkiye ve Rusya: ХУШ. 
Yiizyil Sonundan Kurtulu? Savanna Kadar Ttirk- 
Rus ili?kileri (1798-1919), Ankara 1970.
19. Mayewski (General), Van, Bitlis Vilayetleri Aske- 
ri, Istanbul 1330.
20. McCarthy, Justin, “Armenian Terrorism. History as 
Poison and Antidode,“ International Terrorism and 
the Drug Connection, Ankara 1984, pp. 85-94.
21. Mehmed Nasrullah-Mehmed Ru§di-Mehmed E§ref, 
Memalik-i Mahrfisa-i §ahaneye Mahsus Miikemmel 
ve Mufassal Atlas, Istanbul 1325.
22. Osmanli Belgelerinde Ermeniler (1915-1920), 
Ankara 1994.
23. Saral, Ahmet Hulki, Ermeni Meselesi, Ankara 
1970.
24. Shaw, Stanford J - Ezel Kural Shaw, History of the 
Ottoman Empire and Modern Turkey, Vol. II, Lon­
don 1978.
25. Son Te?kilat-i Miilkiyyede Kdylerimizin Adlan,
Tiirkiye Cumhuriyeti Dahiliye Vekaleti Ne§riyati, 
Istanbul 1928.
26. Siislu, Azmi, Ermeniler ve 1915 Tehcir Olayi,
Ankara 1990.
27. §im§ir, Bilal N., Malta Siirgunleri, Istanbul 1976.
28. §i§man, Adnan, Osmanli Devleti’nde XX. Yuzyil 
Ba^lannda Amerikan Kiiltiirel ve Sosyal Muessese- 
leri, Bahkesir 1994.
29. Tableaux indiquant le nombre de divers 
elements de la population dans 1’ Empire Ottoman 
au ler Mars 1330 (May 14, 1914), Constantinople
1919.
30. Tongerloo, Alois van, “Armeense Drang Naar 
Autonomie,” Inforient-Dossier (October 15, 1981), pp. 
25-27.
31. Tiirkiye Cumhuriyeti Devlet Salnamesi, 1926- 
1927.
32. Tiirkiye Miilki Idare Boliimleri: Belediyeler, 
Koyler, prepared by Ministry o f  Interior, Ankara 1978.
33. Van Kiitugii, Ankara 1992.
34. Van Vilayeti Salnamesi (Dated 1315).
35 Yakin Tarihimizde Van Uluslararasi Sempozyu­
mu (April 2-5, 1990, Van), Ankara 1990.
36 “Zeve §ehitligi Kazisi,” Yakm Tarihimizde Van 
Uluslararasi Sempozyumu (April 2-5, 1990, Van), 
Ankara 1990, pp. 309-406.
INDEX
-A-
Abani (daughter o f Hasan), 65. 
Abdi (from Geva$), 106. 
Abdi(Mullah;from Kesan), 113. 
Abdullah (from Komiis), 80. 
Abdullah (Mullah), 72.
Abdullah (brother of Kaleli za­
de Mustafa), 82.
Abdullah (son o f  Resul), 58. 
Abdullah (husband of Besi), 63. 
Abdullah (son o f  §ebab), 60. 
Abdullah(Tahinci zade), 82. 
Abdullah Efendi (Sheikh), 51. 
Abdurrahman (son of Hunjit 
Bey), 53, 54.
Abdurrahman(son of Mehmed),
52.
Abdurrahman (son o f tailor Puri
zade), 82.
Abdulaziz (Karaca zade), 76. 
Abdiilaziz (cousin of Mullah 
Hamza), 78.
Abdulaziz (son o f Nuri), 81. 
Abdiilbaki (son o f Amo), 64. 
Abdiilbaki (son o f Osman Aga), 
69.
Abdiilbaki (son o f Yadigar), 63. 
Abdiilbaki (son o f isa Efendi).
67.
Abdiilbaki Efendi (son of Haci 
Yusuf). 34.
Abdiilcelil, 82
Abdiilgafur (from Tatar Ciazi),
66 .
Abdiilgafur Efendi (from Avih),
69.
Abdulgani (son o f Seliin), 73
Abdulgani (Sivaci zade), 87. 
Abdulgani (Sheikh), 76. 
Abdtilhakim (from Miikiis),
107.
Abdtilhakim Efendi(son of Mul­
lah Isa), 75, 83.
Abdiilhalik Efendi (Sheikh), 34. 
Abdiilhalim Efendi (Mullah Isa
Efendi), 71.
Abdiilhamid(from Damis), 110. 
Abdiilhamid (son of Sheikh),
57.
Abdiilhamid (son of Ziilfmaz), 
78
Abdulkadiit cousin of Abdiilrez- 
zak from Bitlis), 26.
Abdtilkerim (from Giilpik), 26. 
Abdiilkerim (son of Safiye from 
Tatar Gazi), 64
Abdtilmecid (from Lahyan),
108.
Abdtilmecid (husband of Fidan, 
daughter of Musa from Mar- 
nik), 64.
Abdtilmecid (cousin of Mullah 
Hamza), 78
Abdtilmecid Efendi (Mufti of 
Hizan), 42.
Abdtilmecid Efendi (Sheikh; 
from Zeydan), 88.
Abdiilmelik (soldier), 30. 
Abdiirrezzak (son of Kamil, 
from Bitlis), 26.
Abdurrezzak(son of Ceinal), 34 
Abdiirrezzak (son o f Haci Is- 
hak), 33
Abdiirrezzak (Kaki zade), 89.
Abramayis (Armenian), 138. 
Ahmed (son of butcher from 
Ahlat), 90.
Ahmed (son of Fettah), 135. 
Ahmed (son o f H asso), 77. 
Ahmed (son o f Huseyin), 129. 
Ahmed (Kaki zade), 88.
Ahmed (Sheikh; from Kaza­
rian), 25, 35, 36, 68.
Ahmed (Kirmizi), 68.
Ahmed (son of Ku<?uk Omer), 
129.
Ahmed (from Mahalleba§i), 86. 
Ahmed Aga, 70.
Ahmed Bey (Lieutenant), 46, 
47.
Ahmed Bey(from Pekeri9), 136. 
Ahmed Efendi (Old Judge o f  
Muradiye), 34.
Ahmed Nureddin Efendi (head 
Officer), 28 ,44 , 56.
Alay Bey(from Adilcevaz), 104. 
Aleksan (son of Bagdasar Gu- 
riib), 30.
Aleksandir Asoyan (Armenian; 
from Molla Kula^), 137. 
Alemdar (son of Mehmed), 143. 
Ali (son of Hamail), 64.
All (brother o f Cafer), 81.
All (from Dirona), 145.
Ali (son of Halid), 77.
Ali (son of Halid; from Serir),
109.
All (son of Hamid Bey), 54.
Ali (from Hmis), 139.
Ali (son of Huseyin), 134.
Ali (son of Mehmed). 79.
Ali (Mullah; from (^obanoglu). 
1 2 1 .
Ali (Mullah; from Hersan). 78. 
Ali (son of Ravine), 68.
Ali (son of Suleyman), 25, 35. 
Ali (Zaza; from Ovacik), 135.
Ali Efendi, 80
Ali Efendi (Police Officer), 32. 
Ali Efendi (from Van), 114.
Ali Osman (from Kalafka), 144. 
Alican (Oorporal), 121.
Aliye(daughter o f Ki?emi§), 79. 
Amo (from Azad), 64.
Amo (mother o f Gumaz), 65. 
Andelib (from Tatar Gazi), 76. 
Antranik Pasha (son o f Aleksan 
from Kotiir), 128.
Apre (Armenian; from Norkuh), 
113.
Arafat, 68.
Aram (son of Monk), 30.
Aram (Head of the Gang, from 
Russia), 98, 99, 123.
Aram Pasha (Armenian), 43, 
55, 118, 121.
Arif (husband of Fidan), 76.
Arif (sergeant, from Pekerig), 
136.
Arif (son o f Zeynep), 73.
Ali Efendi (Police Officer), 88. 
Armenak Tako, 128.
Arslan Bey(Russian Command­
er), 126, 127.
Artin (Armenian), 108.
Artin (Armenian, from £atak), 
1 1 1 .
Artm (Armenian; from Kine- 
kas), 108.
Arijak (Armenian), 27.
Asnn (son of Hami), 57.
Asive (wife of Ibrahim Sofu),
81.'
Ash (daughter of Ahmed, son 
of butcher from Ahlat), 70, 90 
Ala Bey (from Vostan). 104.
Ayn (from Adilcevaz), 72.
Ayn (Son of Ismail). 79.
Ayo (1 lainza (,,'elebi zade). 81 
Ay$e( daughter of Abdullah ).72.
Ay?e (daughter o f Ibrahim from 
Ahlat), 73.
Ay?e (from Dirona), 145.
Ay?e (daughter o f Sulin), 67. 
Azize Neno (from Hersan), 63.
-B-
Bagdasar Gtlriib, 30.
Bahri (from Kars), 136.
Bakdo (Armenian), 107.
Bapir (Han Kulu zade), 88. 
Bartik (from Surengen), 110. 
Basri Bey (commander), 99. 
Batum (daughter o f Yusuf), 69. 
Bayram (Kose zade), 88.
Bedir (РаЬифси), 88.
Bedir (son o f Suleyman), 78. 
Bedo (Armenian; from Gebo- 
lan), 37.
Bedo (Armenian; from Sokan),
110.
Bedri (son o f Hasso), 71.
Bedriye Zaman Hamm (sister o f 
Judge Ahmed Efendi), 34.
Bedros (Armenian), 108.
Behiye (daughter of Cevahir),
76.
Behlill (son of Said), 111.
Bekir (son of Ahmed Efendi), 
88.
Bekir (son of Hamza), 82.
Bekir (Kahraman zade), 104. 
Bekir (son of Mustafa), 75.
Bekir Efendi (from Hint). 55. 
Bekir Efendi (from Mama Ha­
tun), 131.
Bertabek Arakel (Armenian),
139.
Berzo (Armenian), 107.
Besim (son of Alemdar), 143. 
Be^ir (Sheikh), 135.
Be$ir Efendi(butcher,from Та?),
87.
Be?ir Efendi (from Zeydan), 83. 
Beyaz (relative of Dilber), 74. 
Beyko (Armenian), 55.
Bided (Armenian), 27.
Bilal (son of Mullah Veli zade 
Hasan), 69.
Bi$ar (soldier), 102.
Bizinik (bishop), 113.
Bulak (plaserer), 68.
-c-
Cafer (from Zeydan), 81.
Cafer Bey(from Karfikan), 101. 
Celal (son o f Nigar Hamm), 
103.
Celal Efendi (Gendarme squad­
ron clerk of Mu?), 62.
Celal Efendi (Police Officer),
94.
Cemal (gendarme sergeant), 
131.
Cemil (son of Bilal), 34.
Cemil (son of Nigar Hanim),
103.
Cemil (cousin o f Sofu Veli), 68. 
Cemile (daughter o f Bekir), 63. 
Ceinile (daughter of Mahmud 
constructor), 68.
Cemile (daughter o f Haci), 66. 
Cemile (daughter of Sofu Veli),
67.
Cemile (daughter o f $iikrii), 83. 
Cem?id (son o f Hasso), 65. 
Cevahir (daughter of Abdulah), 
82.
Cevahir (daughter of Fehim),
76.
Cevahir (daughter of Haci Ali),
79.
Cevahirf daughter of Hasan), 82.
Cevahir (daughter o f  Omer A- 
ga), 81.
Cevher (Miizik zade), 88. 
Cihangir(husband o f Gullii), 69. 
Cuma (son o f  Ibrahim), 57. 
Cuma (from Zeydan), 80.
- c -
(^erkes (son o f Kamil from Bit­
lis), 26.
£erkes (son o f  Halid), 63. 
Qerkes Aga (Head of Hala9 
tribe), 57.
-D-
Davud Efendi (from Hizan), 43. 
Derbo (son o f Haydar), 61. 
Dervi? (son o f  Be§ir), 104. 
Dervi? Aga (from Menderi?),
116.
Dervi? Efendi(son o f Receb Re­
sul zade), 87.
Devaz (son o f §eyho), 57.
Didar (daughter o f Receb), 80. 
Didare ( wife o f Mahmud), 81. 
Dikran (Armenian), 55.
Dikran (Armenian; from Hara- 
mi), 140.
Dilber (daughter o f §emo), 74. 
Dilo (Armenian; from Russia), 
53, 54.
Durak (son o f  Mehmed), 135. 
Durak (son o f  Mustafa), 132. 
Dursun (son o f  Mahmud), 34. 
Dursun (son o f  Mustafa), 132. 
Dursun (son o f  Seyfullah Efen­
di), 82.
Dursun Aga (from Pekerif), 
136.
Dursun Efendi (son o f  Haci 
§emseddin), 34.
Dursun Efendi (Kaleli zade),
75.
-E-
Ebubekir (from Gulpik), 26. 
Edhem (son of Bayram), 131. 
Edhem Aga (Elderman), 133. 
Edhem Bey (Captain of the ter­
ritorial forces), 119.
Elmas (daughter of Abdttiga- 
fur), 66.
Elmas (daughter of Mullah Ka­
di zade Fazil), 73.
Elmas (wife of Emin son of Ha­
san), 81.
Emin (brother-in-law Kadriye 
daughter o f Cuma), 80.
Emin (son of Hasan), 81.
Emine (The daughter of the 
uncle of Abdiirrezzak, from Bit­
lis), 26.
Emine (from Dirona), 145.
Emine (daughter of Musa Aga),
71.
Emine (daughter of Ali son of 
Pash), 145.
Emir Han, 128.
Emrullah (from Avih), 69. 
Emrullah (from Karai ây), 135. 
Emrullah (son of Kolak), 145. 
Enver(Sheikh; from Alan), 112. 
Esad (fromAvzini), 111.
Esad (from Та?), 72.
Esad Efendi (Major), 95.
Esma (from Alirik), 128.
Esma (daughter of Haci Musta­
fa), 65.
Esmer (daughter of Bahri), 136. 
Esro (Chief of Armenian Com­
mittee), 19, 56.
Eyiib (Cafer zade), 88.
Eyiib (son of Elmas), 73.
Eyiib (son of Yusuf), 135.
E?ref(son o f Habib), 82.
-F-
Faik (son o f tailor Murtaza), 82. 
Fakih Hasan. 89.
Fans (from Ayn-el Band), 79. 
Faris (Dilan zade), 80.
Fans (Hamza Qelebi zade), 80. 
Faris (son o f  MUnteha), 72 
Fatma (from Antep), 86.
Fatma (wife o f Davud), 67. 
Fatma (daughter of Hacer), 76. 
Fatma (daughter o f Bedri son of 
Hasso), 71.
Fatma (from Hizan), 69 
Fatma (daughter o f Hoti Musta­
fa), 135.
Fatma (wife o f Mahmud Kadi 
zade), 83.
Fatma (daughter of Mehmet E- 
fendi), 66.
Fatma (daughter o f Mullah ijuk- 
rii Efendi), 128.
Fatma (daughter of Mustafa),
72.
Fatma(wife ofNuri), 81 
Fatma (wife o f Mehmed son of 
Salim), 144.
Fatma (sister-in-law of bath at­
tendant Nezir), 67.
Fatma Hamm (wife of Mehmed 
Bey head), 117.
Fazil Efendi (Clerk; from Vi- 
ran), 33.
Fehim (son of Musa), 129 
Fehim Bey (son of Kahraman
Bey), 97, 99.
Fehime (wife of Refet. son of 
Be$ir), 126
Ferhat ( from Kotni), 6 1 
l end (son of Kibar), 129,
Feride (daughter of Mahmud),
68.
Feride (daughter of Suleyman),
78.
Feriha (from Zeydan), 63. 
Fethiye Hamm (from Zaza Var­
tik), 132.
Fethullah (son of Hamid Bey), 
54
Fethullah (son o f Bulak plas­
terer), 68.
Fevzi Aga (from Molla Kasim),
115.
Fevzi Bey (from Та?), 67.
Fevzi Efendi (Hakif town Di­
rector), 39
Feyzullah Efendi (immigrant),
122 .
Fidan (daughter of Andelib),
76.
Fidan (daughter of Musa from 
Mamik), 64.
Fidan (mother-in-law of Ziilfi- 
ye, daughter of Sadik), 72. 
Firdevs Haiuin, 114.
-G-
Garabet (teacher), 107. 108 
Garabet Efendi (Judge), 96. 
(iarib (counsin o f Sofu Veli),
68 .
Ciazar (Annenian; from Abri),
37, 55.
(iazar (Annenian; from Russia), 
53.
Grandiik (from Baghdad), 129 
Gill (from Koiniis), 80.
Giilbevaz (daughter of Ceva­
hir), 76.
Giii^in (wife o f Birader zade), 
80.
Giilfem (from Dirona), 145.
Gtili (son o f  Zeynel), 135.
Gtillu (daughter o f Emrullah), 
69.
Gullu (mother o f Haci Ctindi), 
82.
Gtillu (daughter of Mahmud), 
82.
Gtillu (daughter of Mehmed), 
145.
Gtillu (daughter o f Mehmed son 
ofYagiz), 126.
Gulperi, 72.
Gtilsum (daughter o f Mehmed 
Efendi), 76.
Gtil$o, 82.
Gtircu (daughter of Ahmed), 67. 
Gtimaz (daughter o f Hasso), 65.
-H -
Habib Efendi (son of Kurum),
67.
Habib Efendi(from Zevdan), 82. 
Hacer (daughter of Halid from 
Yako), 76.
Haci (son of Giillu), 75.
Haci (from ijirvan Sheikh), 66. 
Haci Ali (son o f Baymdir). 68. 
Haci Ali (from Hersan), 35, 36. 
Haci Bey, 54.
Haci Cundi(from Melen-ze). 82. 
Haci llamza (from Zevdan), 87. 
Haci Hasan, 34.
Haci Ibrahim (son of Ahmed), 
136.
Haci Ismail (from Kjzil Mes­
cid), 76.
Haci ismail (from Ta^), 80.
Haci Mahmud Efendi, 81.
Haci Mehmed, 34.
Haci Mehmed (Birader zade). 
80.
Haci Mehmed Salih Efendi. 87.
Haci Musa Bey (from Kanfi- 
kan), 100.
Haci Mustafa (from Damascus), 
65.
Haci Nasrullah, 35, 36.
Haci Osman Nasir zade, 83.
Haci Omer Efendi, 73.
Haci Rifat (son of Top^u), 104. 
Haci Rustem, 67.
Haci Rtistem (from Zeydan),
88.
Haci Sjemseddin (from Ta$), 34. 
Haci $erif (Haci Latif zade),
104.
Haci Yakub (Cebeci zade), 104. 
Haci Yusuf (from Hersan), 34,
36.
Haci Yusuf Aga (from Karkar), 
100.
Haijatur, 141.
1 latfik Muluk (Armenian), 108. 
Ha^o (Armenian; from Horo- 
tis), 106, 107.
Ш 90 (Armenian; from Muktis),
108.
Hadid(son of Feyzullah), 69. 
Hadiye (daughter of Veli Sofu),
67.
Hadiye (sister-in-law of bath at­
tendant Nezir), 67.
Hafiz Yakub Efendi, 81.
Hafi Efendi (Sheikh), 35, 36. 
Hakki Bey (Acting Secretary in 
Bitlis), 74, 83. 90.
Hako (Armenian). 106.
Hakverdi (husband of Dilber 
daughter of Mehmed), 74. 
Hakverdi (son of Receb Puri 
zade), 82.
Hakverdi (Tahinci zade), 87. 
Halef (son of Haydar), 81 
Halef Efendi (Police Officer). 
87.
Halid (from Ayn-el Barid), 79. 
Halid (cousin of Re?id, son of 
Cafer), 81.
Halid (£uriik zade), 82.
Halid (son-in-law of Kalelioglu 
Osman), 77.
Halid (son of Mamagii zade Os­
man), 82.
Halid (son of Mehmed), 35. 
Halid(brother of Muhabbet), 80. 
Halid (son of Nuri Halid zade), 
82.
Halid (corporal), 34.
Halid (from Ozkavak), 61.
Halid (son ofPolad), 63.
Halid (son of Ridvan; Sofu), 77. 
Halid (son o f  Suleyman), 35. 
Halid (brother o f Ziynet), 65. 
Halid Efendi (Commander of 
Border Protection Unit), 103. 
Halid Efendi (Lieutenant), 121. 
Halil (sQn o f Gtilsenem), 89.
Halil (son o f Haci Yakub), 104. 
Halil (son o f Hafiz), 135.
Halil (son o f Haydar), 57.
Halil Bey (from Hersan), 88.
Halil Bey (Division Comman­
der), 105.
Halil Efendi (Captain; from Er- 
ci§), 121.
Halime (wife o f  (,'uriik zade Ha­
lid), 82.
Halo (son of Ayo), 81.
Hamail (daughter of AbdUla-
ziz), 64.
Hamdi Efendi (Police Officer 
Bitlis), 32.
Hami (son of Memi). 66.
Hamid (from Ayn-el Band ),
79.
Hamid (son o f Receb), 34.
Hamid (cousin Sofu Veli), 68. 
Hamo (wife o f Mustafa), 83.
Hamza (son o f Alay Bey), 104. 
Hamza (son o f Memi), 66. 
Hamza (Mullah; Hatib zade), 
78.
Hangir (from Damis), 110. 
Hamm (from Ta$), 67.
Hanife (daughter of Halil), 74. 
Hanife(sister of Sofu Halid), 77. 
Hanife(daughter of Zeynep), 79. 
Hano (wife of Polad Dilan za­
de), 80.
Harime (wife of Stileyman), 65. 
Haro (Armenian), 107.
Hasan (son of Alemdar), 143. 
Hasan (from Bitlis), 25.
Hasan (Deli Balta), 143.
Hasan (son of Dursun), 125. 
Hasan (son of Dunblil), 122. 
Hasan (from Gokta?), 127. 
Hasan (son of Han£er), 134. 
Hasan (son of Haydar), 77 
Hasan (from Hersan), 69.
Hasan (son of Hiiseyin), 71. 
Hasan (son of Ismail), 36.
Hasan (son of Kolan), 145. 
Hasan (Kose zade), 80.
Hasan (son of Musa), 77.
Hasan (son of Mustafa), 35. 
Hasan (son of Yusuf), 136. 
Hasan Aga (from Ispila), 143. 
Hasan Aga (from Van), 78. 
Hasan Efendi (Police), 144. 
Hasan Fahri Efendi (Supply of­
ficer), 117.
Haso(Husband o f Ebani, daugh­
ter o f Hasan), 65.
Hasso (son of K1I19), 68.
Hasso (from Patnos), 76 
Ha§im Efendi, 94.
Hatice (wife of Mahmud), 57. 
Hatice ( sister o f Pash oglu Ali), 
145.
Havva (wife of Mehmed, son of 
Ahmed from Seki), 126.
Haydar (son of isa from Bitlis),
34.
Haydar (Hamza £elebi zade), 
80.
Haydar Aga, 135.
Haydar Efendi(Kaleli zade), 75. 
Haydar Efendi (Sheikh), 42. 
Haydarov (Russian comman­
der), 138.
Hayriye (daughter o f Ibrahim), 
63.
Hazalo, 139.
Hazhazian, Vahan (Armenian; 
fromKahkik), 140.
Haznur (from Alirik), 128.
Hazo (mother of Dervi?), 83. 
Hediye (daughter of Re$id from 
Adilcevaz), 75.
Hediye (wife o f Mehmed Bu- 
dak zade), 83.
Hediye (daughter-in-law o f  Ma­
il), 127.
Hezar(mother of Cemile daugh­
ter of Bekir), 63.
Hezar (mother-in-law o f Mullah 
Mehmed), 77.
Hifzi (from Yavi), 126.
Hikmet (son o f §6hret daughter 
Mehmed), 64.
Hikmet Efendi (Police), 144. 
Hilhilian, Kesper (Armenian; 
from Yeni Koy), 140.
Horzi (aunt o f Rabia, daughter 
of Haci), 66.
Horzi (counsin Sofu Halid), 77. 
Hovik (Armenian; from £atak),
1 1 1 .
Hrant (Armenian, attomey-in- 
law from Mu§), 30, 62.
Hulusi Bey (Director o f Post- 
Telegram Administration), 48.
Huri (daughter o f Mahmud 
from Gevar), 82.
Hur?it Aga ,104.
Hur?id Bekesian (Armenian),
140.
Hur?id Efendi (son o f Huseyin), 
123.
Httnkar Hanim, 73.
Hurriyet (daughter o f  Nuri), 81. 
Huseyin (from Ahlat), 70. 
Huseyin (sergeant; from Gok- 
ta?),127.
Huseyin (son of Dede), 131. 
Huseyin (soldier), 29.
HUseyin (son of Kadriye), 80. 
Huseyin (son of Mehmed), 136. 
Huseyin (elderman), 125.
Huseyin (son of Ridvan), 135. 
Huseyin (son of §emo from Ya- 
zik), 121 .
Hiiseyin Efendi (Hodja; servant 
of finance office), 104.
Huseyin Efendi (son o f Kadik),
105.
Hiiseyin Efendi (Lieutenant),
95.
HUseyin Efendi (from Hizan), 
43.
Hilsniye (from Dirona), 145.
-i-
Ibrahim (from Ahlat), 65.
Ibrahim (husband of Cemile, 
daughter of HUseyin), 65.
Ibrahim (Kazanci zade), 82. 
Ibrahim (Mullah), 78 
Ibrahim (Sofu), 81.
Ibrahim Halil, 67.
Iffet (wife o f Haci Mehmed Bi­
rader zade), 80.
Ilyas (from Kizil Mescid), 76.
Irfan (Dizdar zade), 82.
Irfan (from Melenze), 82.
Isa (son of Abdullah), 82.
Isa (son of Abdtissamed), 89.
Isa Efendi, 67.
Isa Efendi (Mullah; from Avih), 
71.
Ishak (Nasir zade), 83 
Ismail (from Ayn-el Barid), 79. 
ismail (Celo zade), 36.
Ismail (son of Suleyman from 
Bitlis, brother of All), 35. 
ismail (Camu?cu zade), 104. 
Ismail (soldier), 40. 
ismail (brother of Kma Meh­
med Efendi), 125.
Ismail (husband of Fatma), 66 
Ismail (from Pakiz), 101. 
ismail (son of Polad), 68.
Ismail Aga (son o f Karahan),
133.
ismail Bey (‘Gendarme Com­
mander o f Bitlis), 34.
Ismail Bey (from /.ivistan), 
101
ismet (from Komiis), 80.
iso (Armenian; from Anzak).
113.
i§han (Armenian; from O/.im),
49, 118. 123.
izzet (son of Hasan), 25,36.
I/.zet (son of Ravine, daughter 
of Mustafa). 68.
I/.zet Efendi, 65.
I/.zet Hatun (wife of Hasan, son
of Dursun), 125
izzet Hatunffrom Pekerii;), 136
- K -
Kadir (son of Fans), 72.
Kadri (son of brother-in-law of 
Av$e, daughter of Ibrahim from 
Ahlat), 73.
Kadriye(daughter of Cuma), 80. 
Kahraman Bey (from Muradi­
ye), 97.
Kalosar (from Sekur), 40.
Kamil Bey (son of Sefer Bey), 
80.
Kamil(husband of Ay$e, daugh­
ter of Abdullah), 72.
Kamil (from Bitlis), 26.
Kamil (sergeant; from Muradi­
ye), 101.
Kamil (brother-in-law of Zulfi-
ve), 72.
Kasim (husband of Muhabbet), 
80.
Kasim (from Hersan), 68 
Kasim (from Ta§), 79.
Kasim (Zulkadir zade), 82.
Kaya (son o f Ako), 135 
Kemal (Legal adviser), 136. 
Keinal (son of Nigar Hamm),
103.
Kerim (son of Ilyas), 86.
Kevork (Armenian; from MU- 
kiis). 108
Kinyaz (son of Monk from Bu- 
lanik). 37
Kirkor (Armenian; from Par) 
107
Kirkor Tokaz (Armenian), 139. 
Kisvo Kivo (Armenian), 27.
Ki$ (Armenian). 48, 50.
Kifemi? (daughter of Ahmed),
66
Ki^emi? (daughter o f I lalil), 81 
Ki^emi? (daughter of Носа $a- 
ban Efendi). 75
Ki^eini^ (daughter of Osman 
Bev), 79
Ki$eini$ (niece of Sofu Veli),
67
К i semi $ (from Ta$), 72.
Kulcan (son o f §emo from Ya- 
zik), 121 .
Kotas (from Sokan), 111.
Kudret (daughter o f Ali Efendi),
80.
Kudret (wife o f Hafiz), 83. 
Kudret (mother o f Nasir zade 
§emseddin Efendi), 83.
Kuy (daughter of §ero), 64.
-L-
Lali (daughter of Ismail Aga),
117.
Lato (Armenian from Ozim), 
40,49, 50, 53, 108.
Latife Hamm (wife o f Hasan 
Fahri Efendi), 117.
Leo (Armenian; from Havasur).
110.
Leyla (daughter o f Haci, daugh- 
ter-in-law of Rabia), 66.
Leyla (from Hizan), 43.
Leyla (daughter of Ilyas), 76. 
Leyla Hamm (wife o f corporal 
Halid), 34.
-IM-
М.Arif Bev (Acting Police 
Chief), 74, 83, 9].
Mahbube (wife of Dilan zade 
Ians), 80.
Mahmud (son o f Ali), 57. 
Mahmud (constructor), 68. 
Mahmud ( from Gokta?), 127 
Mahinud (son o f Haci Hey), 54. 
Mahmud (son o f I Iasan), I 34 
Mahinud (from Hersan), 34. 71 
Mahmud (Gendarme Sergeant).
118.
Mahmud (from Kara^av). 135.
Mahmud (Kaya Qelebi zade),
104.
Mahmud (son of Kotas), 111. 
Mahmud (son of Me?ko ), 68. 
Mahmud (son of Mevlud), 36. 
Mahmud (son of Gill; Mullah),
80.
Mahmud Efendi(Tahtavi zade), 
87.
Mahmud Siddik Bey (from Bar- 
giri), 105.
Mail (from Gokta?), 127.
Mail (son of Mustafa), 132. 
Maksud (son of Kasim), 68. 
Manuk (Armenian; from Kara 
KoprU), 140.
Mardiros (Armenian), 107. 
Markere (Lame; Armenian), 49. 
Maruf (brother of Besi, daugh­
ter of Suleyman), 63.
Mecid (son of Bekir), 89.
Mecid (son of Polad Efendi), 
87.
Mecid (son of Ibrahim), 65.
Mecid (son of Tabir), 57. 
Mecidiye (daughter of Ayn 
from Adilcevaz), 72.
Mecin (Annenian Major), 50, 
51.
Medine (daughter in-law-of A- 
mo), 64.
Medine (daughter of Osman),
77.
Mehmed (Budak zade), 83. 
Mehmed (son ofBulmaz), 136. 
Mehmed (from Cede), 135. 
Mehmed (son of Cevahir), 79. 
Melimet (sergeant; from Hizan). 
101.
Mehmed (from Dirona), 145. 
Mehyied (son of Eyiib ). 143. 
Mehmed (Faki). 78.
Mehmed (son o f Mahmud from 
Gevar), 82.
Mehmed (son o f Hamid), 79. 
Mehmed (son o f Hasan), 69. 
Mehmed (son o f Kadriye), 80. 
Mehmed (son o f Kirmizi Ah­
med), 68.
Mehmed (Mullah; son of Ab­
durrahman), 99.
Mehmed (son o f Mullah Ali),
78.
Mehmed (son o f Re?id), 70. 
Mehmed (from Та?), 79. 
Mehmed (son of Yakub), 73. 
Mehmed (son of Ismail), 71. 
Mehmed Aga (son of Kolan), 
144.
Mehmed Ali Efendi (Officer), 
144.
Mehmed Ali (from Kizil Mes- 
cid), 76.
Mehmed Ali (husband o f Kfly 
daughter of §ero), 64.
Mehmed Bey (Head Officer),
117.
Mehmed Bey (from Kurukol), 
128.
Mehmed Efendi (from Kars; 
Kina), 125.
Mehmed Efendi (from Kizil 
Mescid), 76.
Mehmed Efendi (from Mabe- 
kor), 66.
Mehmed Efendi (Saatyi zade), 
87.
Mehmed Efendi (Sheikh), 5 1. 
Mehmed Efendi (Captain), 116 
Mehmed Emm (soldier), 56. 
Mehmed Hulusi Efendi (Deputy 
Mayor), 102.
Mehmed Kufrevi (Sheikh), 34. 
Mehmed Nuri (son of Sheikh 
Yusuf Efendi), 70.
Mehmed Resul (son of Abdur­
rahman), 29.
Mehmed Siddik Efendi (Sheikh; 
Mufti of Van), 51, 102.
Mehmed Salih (son of Halid),
81.
Mehmed Salih (son of Ki$e- 
mi?), 79.
Mehmed Tufan Efendi (Deputy 
Judge), 95.
Mehmed Vehbi Efendi (Deputy 
police officer), 32.
Mehmed $irin (husband of Mii- 
nevver daughter o f Veli), 74. 
Mehr (from Vilas; Armenian 
Lieutenant), 51.
Melek (daughter o f $emseddin 
Haci Yusuf zade), 68.
Melkon (Armenian; from Mu?),
37.
Memi (son-in-law of Zeyneb, 
daughter of Halid), 79 
Menu (son of Suleyman), 65. 
Memi (from Tatar Gazi), 66. 
Mennan (from Та?), 72.
Mercan (daughter of Abdurrah­
man), 76.
Mercan (daughter o f $akir), 35,
36.
Merd (son of Sabit), 125.
Merik Ahmed Efendi, 135. 
Meryem (wife of Nuri), 81. 
Mesrob (Armenian; from §i- 
dan), 110.
Mevlud (from Altinta?), 135. 
Mevlud (sergeant; from G6k- 
ta?), 127.
Mevlud(son of Yusuf), 135.
Mi gird (Armenian), 107. 
Mihran (Annenian; from Han- 
zir), 139.
Mihran (Armenian Colonel), 
51, 52.
Mikdad (son of Ahmed), 36. 
daughter o f Fevzi Bey), 67. 
Mikdad (brother o f Kirmizi Ah­
med), 68.
Mikdad (son o f Sadik), 81. 
Mikdad (son o f Sadik Zulkadir 
zade), 82.
Minnet (daughter o f Yakub),
35.
Mirmeti (daughter o f Ibrahim),
65.
Minto Sembat (Armenian), 108. 
Minneti (wife o f son o f Polad),
63.
Mirbek (Armenian), 113.
Mirza (soldier; from Kaplica), 
'56.
Mirza (Birader zade), 80.
Misak (Armenian; from Hu­
man), 140.
Mullah (son o f  Memi), 135. 
Mosik (Armenian), 128.
Mosis (Armenian), 55.
Muhabbet (daughter o f Haci Is­
mail), 80,
Muhiddin Efendi (son of Hiise- 
yin), 33.
Muhiddin (son ofGoge$), 141. 
Muhiddin (husband Ki$emi§), 
75.
Muhiddin (brother o f Musa E- 
fendi), 34.
Murad (Armenian), 55.
Murad (Armenian; son o f A- 
gob), 140.
Murad (son o f Haci), 57.
Musa (son o f Abbdurrahman),
53.
Musa (son of Giil^o), 82.
Musa (son of Haydar), 125.
Musa (son o f Hiiseyin), 33.
Musa (son o f Maksud), 77.
Musa (from Mamik), 64.
Musa (husband of Reyhan), 78. 
Musa Aga, 71,72.
Musa Efendi, 34.
Mustafa (from Avih), 68. 
Mustafa (from Avzini), 111. 
Mustafa (from Bayburt), 132. 
Mustafa (son of Eyiib), 143. 
Mustafa (Hertti?lu zade), 104. 
Mustafa (Kaleli zade), 83. 
Mustafa (Mullah), 134.
Mustafa ( Headman; son o f O s­
man), 41.
Mustafa (son of Tahir), 58. 
Mustafa Efendi (Lawyer), 87. 
Mustafa Efendi (son o f  Omer 
Efendi), 70.
Miinevver( daughter of Ali M us­
tafa), 128.
Miinevver (daughter of Veli),
74.
Mii?tak (son of §6hret, daughter 
of Mehmed), 64.
-N-
Naciye (daughter of $aban 
Efendi, Deputy Judge), 72.
Naciye (daughter of Saniye, 
daughter of Mustafa), 75.
Nadir (son of Mahmud), 34. 
Nadire (wife of Ahmed), 82 
Naime (daughter of Bahri). 136. 
Naro (Armenian), 108.
Nasir Efendi (from Van), 118. 
Nazif (Sheikh), 88.
Nazli (daughter of Rustem), 78. 
Necineddin (son of Fatma), 66 
Nasibe (wife of constructor 
Mahmud), 68.
Nasibe (daughter of Miinevver),
74.
Nezir (soldier; from Bitlis), 40 
Nezir (bath attendant), 67
Nigar (daughter of $akir from 
Alirik), 128.
Nigar (wife of Fethullah), 83. 
Nigar (daughter of Polad), 66. 
Nigar Hamm (from Ahlat), 35,
36.
Nigar Hamm (wife of Osman 
sonofMirac), 103, 104, 105, 
Nigar Hamm (mother o f Meh­
med from Sor), 70.
Nirson (Keldani), 51.
Ni§an (Armenian; from (,'ikmz). 
128.
Ni§an (Armenian), 55. 108.
Nuh Bey (Commander of light 
cavalry regiment), 58.
Nuran (daughter of .Sebab), 66. 
Nuri (son o f headman $aban),
82,
Nuri (son o f Osman), 8 1.
Nuriye (daughter of Haci Ciin- 
di), 82.
Nuriye (daughter of Osman son 
ofMencu), 133.
Nuro (headman; from I’irso- 
lan), 122.
-o-
Ohan (Armenian; from Hanzir), 
141.
Olos ( Armenian; son of Arme­
nak Tako), 128.
Onnik (Armenian), 106.
Oseb ('Armenian). 55.
Oseb (Armenian; from Arpit). 
113.
Oseb (Armenian; from (,’atak).
I I I
Oseb (son of I lai ô; Armenian). 
96
Oseb (Armenian; from Miikiis).
11) 8 ,
Osman (son of Haci Ahmed),
143.
Osman (Barut9u zade), 80. 
Osman (from Bitlis), 61.
Osman (from Horus), 41.
Osman (Kalelioglu), 77.
Osman (Mamagti zade), 82. 
Osman (son o f Mehmed), 135. 
Osman (son ofMencu), 133. 
Osman (son ofMirac), 103. 
Osman (son o f Mustafa), 134. 
Osman (husband of Giillu, 
daughter of Salih), 75.
Osman (from Zeydan), 81. 
Osman Aga (son of Kalkanci),
69.
Osman Bey (from Hersan), 79. 
Osman Efendi (Hala Ali zade),
87,
Osman Efendi(tax officer), 143
- O -
( )mer (son of Mustafa), 57, 
Omer (son o f JJafi’i), 42.
Oilier (brother of Sultan), 74 
Oilier (son of Veli), 81 
Omer Aga, 81
Oilier bin Mehmed (from Zey­
dan), 81
Omer Efendi (from Zevdan).
70
Oilier 1 la îin ( from I li/.an), 43 
Omer I Inlusi Efendi (teacher). 
75. 83.
-P-
l’aki/е  (grand-daughter of da­
ughter of Abdiilaziz). 64. 
I’apazian, Vahan. 18, 19. 47, 
123,
1’arso (Armenian). 106.
Peluka (daughter of Osman, son 
ofMencu), 133.
Pembe (wife o f §ukru), 82. 
Peren (wife of Haydar Qelebi 
zade), 80.
Peri (from Hersan), 68.
Perihan Hanim (daughter of Re­
ceb Efendi), 34.
Piruze Hamm (wife o f Nasir E- 
fendi), 118.
Polad (Dilan zade), 80. 
Polad(son o f Halid), 83.
Polad (son o f  Sadik), 78.
Polad (son o f §aban), 75.
Polad Efendi (husband o f Yadi- 
gar), 67.
Polad (grandson of Uminuhan, 
daughter o f AbdUlgafur Efendi), 
69
-R-
Rabia (daughter o f Haci), 66. 
Rabi?e (mother-in-law o f Ali, 
son of Suleyman), 25.
Rafael (Armenian teacher), 100. 
Rahime (sister of Sofu Halid), 
77.
Rahmiye (from Komus), 76. 
Rasim Efendi (teacher), 95 
Receb (son of Ahmed), 25 
Receb (from Kizil Mescid), 76 
Receb (son o f Mustafa), 36. 
Receb (Puri zade), 82.
Receb (from Та?), 67.
Receb Efendi, 34.
Refika (daughter of Osman, son 
ofMirac), 103.
Remzi Efendi (from Van). 32 
Resul (from Aleman). 58.
Resul (soldier, niece o f Celal 
Efendi), 62.
Resul (brother-in-law o f R ah m i- 
ye,;from Komiis), 76.
Resul (son of Osman), 108.
Resul (son of Mahmud), 71.
Resul (son of Suleyman: M u l­
lah), 78.
Resul (brother-in-law o f M ullah  
Mehmed), 77.
Resul (brother of Sofu H alid), 
77.
Resul bin Veli (from Zeydan),
81.
Resul Efendi (Police O fficer  
Bitlis), 32.
Resul Efendi (Haci Hasan za ­
de), 88.
Resul Efendi (from Hersan), 78. 
Re?id (son of Ahmed), 128.
Re?id (from Adilcevaz), 75.
Re?id (son of Ali), 105.
Re?id (son of Cafer), 81.
Re?id (from Gokta?), 127.
Re?id (from Liva), 121.
Re?id (Mullah; from Geva?),
106.
Re?id (Mullah, from Alan),
112 .
Re?id (Mullah Musa zade), 87. 
Re;jid (brother Besi, daughter o f  
Suleyman), 63.
Re?id Efendi (from Zeydan),
82.
Reyhan (wife of Musa, son of  
Gul?o), 82.
Reyhan (daughter of Omer), 78. 
Reyhan (son of §emseddin), 69. 
Reyhan Hamm (wife of Mah­
mud), 118.
Riza (son of Siileyman),
Riza Moha (Aga; Sheikh zade),
95.
Rifat Bey (Major), 129.
Rindi (sister o f Haci Osman 
Nasir zade), 83.
Ruben (Armenian; Cashier),
103.
Ruben (Member of Committee 
Dashnak), 19, 56.
Rukiye (aunt o f Muhabbet), 80. 
Rukiye (from Та?), 72.
Riistem Efendi (from Van), 
116.
Ru?dtt Mehmed(from Zaza Var­
tik), 132.
-s-
Sabit (son o f Saliha, daughter of 
Memi), 66.
Sabri (son o f Haci), 66.
Sadik (Dervi? Aga zade), 88. 
Sadik (Zttlkadir zade), 82. 
Sadullah Efendi (from Hirit), 
55.
Safiye (from Tatar Gazi), 64. 
Sahak (Armenian; from £atak),
111 .
Sahak (Armenian; son o f Mo- 
sik), 128.
Said (son o f Elmas), 66.
Said (son o f Hamza), 81.
Said (counsin Sofu Veli), 68.
Said Efendi (son of Deputy 
Judge Bitlis), 36.
Said Efendi (from Van), 32. 
Said-i Kilrdi (Mullah), 32.
Said-i Ktirdi (Mullah; Bedi-Uz 
zaman), 53, 54.
Salih (son of Httseyin from Ah- 
lat), 70.
Salih (son of Ibrahim), 77.
Salih (son o f Leyla, daughter o f 
Ilyas; KUlhanci), 76.
Salih (son of Saliha, daughter of 
Memi), 66.
Salih (son of corporal Halid), 
34.
Salih (from Serir), 109.
Salih Bey (headman), 98, 99. 
Saliha (daughter o f Memi), 66. 
Salim Efendi (son of Sadullah), 
93.
Sander (Armenian), 27.
Saniye (daughter of Mustafa), 
75.
Saru Kahya (Armenian; from 
Kozlu), 140.
Sayyad (from Avih), 75.
Sayyad (son o f Cemile), 65. 
Sayyad (gendarme), 102.
Sefer Bey, 80.
Selam (from Komiis), 80.
Selbi (wife o f Nasir zade ts- 
hak), 83.
Selbi (daughter o f Re?id Efen­
di), 82.
Selim (son o f Haci Bey), 54. 
Selim (from Kara9ay), 136. 
Selim (from K6mUs), 73.
Selim Han (son o f  Haci Bey),
113.
Senco (son o f §aban), 80.
Seray (mother o f Rabia, daugh­
ter o f Haci), 66.
Sergis (the elder; Armenian 
Gang), 119, 120.
Sergis (Armenian), 55. 
Sergis(Armenian;son o f Monk), 
139.
Sergis (Monk), 106.
Sergis (the younger;Armenian 
Gang), 119, 120.
Sergis, see Lato (Mihran). 
Sergisian, Misak (Armenian 
from Kahkik), 140.
Servet Bey (Mu? Governor), 28, 
44,45.
Seyfullah Efendi, 82.
Seyyid Han (son o f Yusuf Sey- 
do), 62.
Seyyid Ibrahim, 96.
Sidki (son o f  Hasan), 123.
Simon (Armenian; from £atak), 
111
Simon (Armenian; from Kaga- 
ziz), 110 .
Simon Tuluncian (Armenian),
108.
Subera (daughter o f Amo), 64. 
Sultan (from Beygiri), 40.
Sultan (wife o f  Halo), 80.
Sultan (daughter o f  Saliha 
daughter o f Memi), 66.
Sultan (daughter of Mullah Su­
leyman), 74.
Sultan (daughter o f Tilli), 76. 
Sultan (daughter o f Veli), 74. 
Suna (wife o f Mikdad), 126. 
Suleyman (son o f Ali), 129. 
Suleyman (brother-in-law o f A- 
bani), 65.
Suleyman (from Hersan), 35. 
Suleyman (Kaleli zade), 83. 
Suleyman (from Komiis), 65. 
Suleyman (KOse zade son of 
Hasan), 80.
Suleyman (Mehmedoglu), 81. 
Suleyman (son o f Nuril), 97. 
Suleyman (son o f Servet), 132. 
Suleyman (husband o f Safiye 
from Tatar Gazi), 64.
Suleyman (merchant Yakub za­
de), 88.
Suleyman (brother of Resul)
87.
Suleyman Efendi (Deputy 
police officer), 32.
Suleyman Efendi (Lieutenant),
104.
Suleyman Efendi (from Zey­
dan), 70.
§aban (from Komtis), 80.
§aban Efendi (Deputy Judge), 
71.
$aban Vehbi Efendi (Bitlis 
Clerk), 32.
§afi’i (son of Mehmed), 43. 
§akir (son of Hamail), 64.
§akir (son of Mehmed), 71. 
§ebab (son of Haci), 66.
§ebab (from Malazgirt), 66.
§efik (son o f §ohret, daughter 
of Mehmed from Hersan), 69. 
$efika (daughter of Nigar Ha­
mm), 103.
§cmo (from Avih), 74.
§emo (wife of Sheikh Ahmed 
from Kazanan), 36,68.
§emo (son o f Osman), 58.
§emo (from Yazik), 121. 
$emseddin (son of Haci Yusuf),
68.
§emseddin Arif (grandson of 
headman $abah), 82.
$emseddin Efendi (Nasir zade),
83.
$emseddin Muzik zade, 83. 
jjerif (son of Kamil), 72.
$erif (from Ta§), 72.
$erif Efendi (from Van), 114. 
$evket (son of Mustafa Efendi),
70.
§evket (Pir Musa zade), 82.
$irak (Armenian), 108.
$irin (Armenian), 119.
§ohret (daughter of Mehmed 
from Marmut), 64.
§UkrU (son of Be?ir), 83.
JJtikrU (son of contractor 
Mahmud), 68.
$Ukrii(son of Huseyin), 118.
ijukni (Ilica town governor), 
136.
$ukrii (son of Irfan Dizdar za­
de), 82.
$ukrU (husband ofGUlsUm), 76. 
$ukru (Mullah; from Pekeri9),
136.
$Ukrii Efendi (husband of Hiin- 
kar Hamm), 73.
§iikru Efendi (Mullah; from A- 
lirik), 128.
§ukrii Efendi (Lieutenant), 116.
-T-
Taha (Sheikh), 96.
Tahir (son o f Halid), 106.
Tahsin Efendi (from Hirit), 55. 
Tangasal (Armenian), 55.
Tayyib (son of AbdUlhamid),
57.
Tero (soldier), 35, 36.
Tevfik (son o f Batum), 69.
Tevfik (son o f Faris), 72.
Tevfik (son of Ibrahim Kazanci 
zade), 82.
Tevfik Efendi (Head o f the fi­
nance office), 101.
Tilli (daughter of Hasso), 76. 
Timur (from Van), 116.
- U -
Ulviye(froin Dirona), 145
-U-
Umetullah (daughter of Safiye 
from Tatar Gazi), 64.
Ummuhan (daughter of Abdiil- 
gafur Efendi), 69
Ummuhan (mother of Suleyman 
son o f Mehmed), 81.
-V-
Vahan (Armenian), 108.
Vahan (Armenian; from Mullah 
Kula$), 137.
Vano (son of Melkon from 
Mu?), 37.
Vartan (bishop), 108.
Vefik Bey (deputy Police Di­
rector Van), 32.
Veli (son of Receb; Sofu), 67. 
Veli Qavu? (Hamza (^elebi za­
de), 81.
Vreinian (parliamentarian), 18,
118, 123.
-Y-
Yadigar (daughter of Bayram),
67.
Yadigar (daughter of Hasan), 
63.
Yadigar (daughter of Suley­
man), 78.
Yadigar (daughter of §aban),
75.
Yakub (son of Ali), 57.
Yakub (son of Flaci Bey), 54. 
Yasm (Barut^u zade), 88.
Yasin Efendi, 88.
Yasin Efendi (son of Haci Meh­
med), 32.
Yunus (son of Haci Hasan), 89. 
Yusuf (son of Haci Ali), 35, 36.
68 .
Yusuf (from Hersan), 36, 77. 
Yusuf (from KomUs), 80.
Yusuf (son of Mehmed), 52. 
Yusuf (son of Polad), 78.
Yusuf (son of Saylam), 134
Yusuf (cousin of Sofu Halid),
77.
Yusuf(cousin of Mercan daugh­
ter of §akir), 63.
Yusuf (son of AbdUlgani; 
Sheikh), 76.
Yusuf (Sheikh), 96.
Yusuf Efendi (Sheikh of Kazaz- 
lar), 75, 83.
Yusuf Efendi (Sheikh; son of 
Suleyman Efendi), 70.
Yusuf Efendi (Sheikh; son of 
Haci Melik), 75, 83.
Yusuf Kenan (from Mukus), 
107.
Yusuf Seydo (Chief o f Sevdan 
tribe), 62.
Yusuf Ziyaeddin, 112.
-Z-
Zaho (Armenian), 55.
Zarife (daughter of Suleyman),
65.
Zekiye (wife of Habib), 68. 
Zekiye (daughter of §akir son 
ofBe^ir), 126.
Zekiye (wife o f Haci Ciindi),
82.
Zeliha (from Dirona), 145.
Zeliha (from Hizan), 43.
Zeliha (daughter o f tsmail Aga),
115.
Zeliha Hamm (wife o f Hiiseyin, 
son ofKadik), 105.
Zemi$an (daughter o f Sayyad),
75.
Zeynep (daughter of Halid), 79. 
Zeynep (daughter o f Mehmed),
73.
Zeynep (from Ta$), 72.
Zeynep (wife of son o f Timur), 
126.
Zihni (son o f Mustafa), 135.
Ziver (son o f Mullah Mehmed),
77.
Ziya Bey (from Van), 124.
Ziynet (daughter of Ki§emi§),
79.
Ziynet (from Van), 69.
Zubeyde (from Akta$), 133. 
Zttlfmaz (mother of Arafat), 68. 
ZUlfinaz (daughter of Isa Aga),
78.
ZUlfiye (daughter of Sadik), 72.
-A-
Abaga (subdistrict), 98.
Abbas Aga (district), 114.
Abri (today, Esenlik village of 
Muij-Bulamk-Erentepe subdis-
tnct), 37.
Acara, 23.
Adivar (village), 66.
Adilcevaz, 16, 33, 94, 104.
Adir-i Ulya (today, a village of 
Bitlis-Hizan-Sagmli subdis- 
irict), 52.
Agai;lik(Avzmi), 111.
Agarti (Ayaius), 95, 105, 115. 
Agcakale, 100.
Agcamelik (today, Ak9amelik 
village of Erzurum-Hims-Halil- 
favu$ subdistrict), 140.
Agdad (today, Yolgozler village 
of Mu$-Korkut subdistrict), 59 
Agirof (mountain), 109.
Agri,4I, 59, 97, 138, 139.
Ahkis (village of Bitlis-Hizan- 
Ak?ar subdistrict), 18, 19, 39, 
59.
Ahlat, 35, 36, 64, 65, 70, 73, 90. 
Aht (mountain), 101 
Ahtamar (island), 108.
Ak^an (today,. Mercimekkale 
subdistrict of Mij$), 28, 44, 56. 
Akfamelik (Agcjimelik), 140. 
Akmescit (Zanoy), 143.
Ak$ar (Hakil), 39, 40, 41, 43. 
Akta$ (Kom), 132, 133 
Alacabuk (Felli), 102, 112. 
Alacayar (Berho), 113.
Alan (village), 112.
Albayrak (§ikefti-I)ir), 96, 103,
116.
Aleman (today, Orenlik village 
of Bitlis-Tatvan town), 58. 
Alemdar bridge, 67, 85.
Aleppo, 17, 54, 101.
Alirik (today, Besgoze village 
of Erzincan-Tercan town), 128. 
Alniak (Bahams), 120.
Altmta§, 135.
Amik (village), 105.
Anadere (Oranis), 27.
Anatolia, 7, 8, 18, 23.
Arak (today, Kepenek village of 
Mu:;), 45,46.
Arap bridge (Bitlis), 26, 32, 73. 
Arap (today Oztoprak village of 
Agri-Ele§kirt town), 138. 
Ar9kanis (village), 109.
Arkanis (today, Ljinli village of 
Van-Q'atak town), 112.
Arpit (village), 113.
Artvin, 23.
Arvas (today, Doganyayla vil­
lage of Van-Gevas-Bahfesaray 
subdistrict)), 113.
Asba$in (today, Qavu$tepe vil­
lage of Van-GUrpmar town),
100 . 102 .
A:$agi Kale, 85, 87.
Aijkale, 134, 135.
A$nak (today liudakli village of 
Bitlis-Tatvan-Re§adive subdis- 
tnct), 113.
Atalun (village), 102. 104. 
Atmaca (Havins), 113.
Avih (district), 63, 66, 69, 71,
74, 75, 76.
Avzini (today, Aga^lik village 
of Van-£atak town), 111.
Avzut (Buvetli), 59.
Ayanis (Agarti), 94, 105, 115. 
Ayn-el Band (district), 67, 71,
79.
Azad (village), 64.
Azakpur (today, Korkut subdis­
trict of Mu?), 60.
Azerbaijan, 10, 15.
Azerkuh (village), 112.
-B-
Ba9erge, 103.
Bagpinar (Kotiir), 128.
Bagna^ik (village), 109.
Bahams (today, Alniak village 
of Van-Gtirpinar-Guzelsu sub­
district), 120.
Bah9esaray(Mukus), 50, 53. 99, 
103, 106, 107, 108, 109, 113. 
Bahik (village), 113.
Bakacik (Ke?i?oglu), 10 1. 
Bakirdagi, 130
Balakli (Komiis), 98, 99, 116. 
Bardik (village), 60.
Bargiri (Muradiye), 105.
Ba? (district), 30.
Ba?kale, 96, 97, 109, 116.
Batum ,23  
Bayezid, 59, 97.
Begendik (Vartik), 132. 
Belenoluk (Upper Hi?et), 40. 
Bellita?(Harami), 140.
Berho (village), 113 
Be?goze (Alirik), 128.
Be?kaya (Humlar), 131.
Betlevo (village), 29.
Beygiri (village o f Bitlis-Hizan- 
Ak?ar subdistrict), 19.
Beirut, 47.
Bitlis, in various places.
Bor9ka, 23.
Borem (village of Siirt-Pervari 
town), 51.
Bozoglak, 135.
Boltikyazi, 41, 56.
Boltikyazi (Simek), 56. 
Boltikyazi (Tatik), 26.
BudakJi (A?nak), 113.
Bulamk, 37, 66, 141.
Buvetli (Avzut), 59.
-c-
Camili (Magakhel), 23. 
Cankurtaran (Gebolan), 37. 
Caucasia. 10, 13, 15, 17,61. 
Cevizlik (village), 144.
Сigerkum (village), 130.
-c -
C^van (village of Bitlis-Hizan 
-Sagmh subdistrict), 52, 53, 54. 
V’akar (district), 30.
(,'akmakh (Mezgeyik), 125. 
(,'anakyayla (Viran), 33.
(,'upkis (today, Uzumveren vil­
lage of Bitlis-Qukur subdis­
trict), 59.
Vat, 56, 126.
Vatak (§atak), 16, 50, 52, 103,
107, 109, 110, 111, 112, 119. 
Vatakdibi (Sokan), 110, 111. 
V’avu^tepe (Asba?in), 100, 102. 
Vel Qemkan (village), 51. 
V’e^meler (Zanha), 143.
(,'ikmz (today, Yaylavolu vil­
lage of Erzmcan-Tercan town), 
128
V'ifllik (today, (^iftlikkoy of Er- 
zunim central subdistrict), 134. 
V'obanoglu (village), 121. 
V'obanoren (Vilas), 49.
Vokekyazi (Hirit), 27, 55, 56.
Comakli (Nabat), 104.
Qukur (subdistrict), 61. 
Qukurtarla (Hanik), 54.
-D-
Dalda (Engesor), 57.
Daldere (Karkar), 101, 106,
109.
Damascus, 55,65.
Damis-i Sufla (village), 110. 
Damis-i Ulya (today, Yukan 
Narlica village of Van-(patak 
town), 110 .
Dedeli (village), 65.
Dentas (village), 49.
Der (village), 108.
Derebey (district), 101.
Develi, 130.
Dir (Albayrak subdistrict center 
of Van-Ba?kale town), 96, 103 
Dirhas (village), 58.
Dirimpmar (Hanik), 54.
Dirona (village), 144, 145. 
Diyadin bridge, 85.
Diyarbakir, 17, 29, 64, 102,
106, 116, 118, 119.
Doganyayla (Arvas), 113, 
l)6neme9 (Engil), 51, 106, 116. 
Duman (village), 140.
-E-
Ebnren (village), 102.
Hdebiik (village), 128 
Hdrermd (district), 122 
lidremid (today, Sarmansuyu 
village of Van-Gumii?dere sub­
district), 106, 116.
Ekice (today, Saglamta? village 
of Van-Timar subdistrict), 98, 
Ekindiizii(Hertovin-i Ulya, Her- 
tovin-i Sulla), 49, 51
Elaldi (ll Aldi), 130.
Elazig, 104, 136, 141.
Ele?kirt, 138, 139, 141. 
Elmabulak (Kolosik), 59. 
Elmahk (Zivistan), 101.
End (village), 52.
Engesor (today, Dalda village 
of Bitlis-Tatvan town), 57.
Engil (today, D6neme9 village 
of Van-Giimu?dere subdistrict), 
51, 106, 116.
Er9ek, 101, 104, 124.
Erci§, 16,98, 104, 105, 113. 
Erentepe (Liz), 37.
Erge9idi (Kesan), 41.
Envan, 39.
Erzincan, 11, 110, 125, 127,
128, 129, 131, 132, 133, 134, 
135.
Erzurum, 11, 56, 73, 102, 118,
119, 125, 126, 127, 133, 134, 
135, 140.
Esbi?ad (today, Yukari Golalan 
village of Van-Er9ek subdis­
trict), 101.
Esenkiyi (Parkat), 94.
Esenlik (Abri), 37.
Esenpinar (Norevan), 113. 
Eskipolat (Sememe), 134.
Evran (Yagcilar), 28.
Eytlb Oglu (Kom), 134.
-F-
Findikli (Kursan), 129.
-G-
(iarib (Gapir), 139.
Gebolan (today, Cankurtaran 
village of Mu?-Bulanik-F,rente- 
pe subdistrict), 37.
Gedikbulak (Timar), 119.
Gevar (today, Yfiksekova town 
ofHakkari province), 82, 103. 
Geva?, 27, 50, 52, 99, 100, 101, 
102, 103, 104, 106, 107, 108,
112, 113, 116, 123.
Giresun, 129.
Gokay (Ktilat), 97.
Gokfe (Hogik), 133.
Gokfimen (Prons), 41, 112. 
Gokta? (village), 127.
Goldilzti (subdistrict), 94.
Goller (Kahkik), 140.
Gollii (village), 115, 119.
Gorele, 129.
Gozaydin (village), 139.
Gurd (village), 59.
Giilpik (today, Sutta^i village of 
Bitlis-Hizan), 26.
Giilstinler ($eyh Kara), 94, 104, 
105, 122.
Gtllyurdu(Kalafkaardu9lu), 144. 
Giimii$dere, 51, 101, 106. 
GilmUjhane, 129.
Gumii§oren (Ozim), 40, 48, 49,
50, 108.
Gunkiri (Kotni), 59, 61.
Gurpmar (Havasur), 100, 101, 
102, 105, 108, 110, 113, 119,
120.
Guzbulak (Pelegoz), 129.
Gtizelsu (subdistrict), 105, 120. 
Gtizelsu (village; Ho$ab), 105.
-H -
Hagavera (today, Ye?ilyurt vil­
lage of Trabzon-Magka town), 
144.
Hakbilir (Pekeri9), 135, 136. 
Hakif (today, Ak?ar subdistrict 
of Bitlis-Hizan town), 39, 40,
43.
Hakkari, 11, 14, 93, 96.
Halil Aga (district), 124. 
Halilfavu? (subdistrict), 140. 
Hamtos (district), 63, 64. 
Hamzikan (today, Ta$tekne v il­
lage of Agn), 59.
Hani, 29, 31,36, 37.
Hanianik (village), 54, 55.
Hanik (today, £ukurtarla v il­
lage of Bitlis-Ahlat town), 54. 
Hanik (today, Dirimpmar vil­
lage o f Mu§-Malazgirt-Nurettin 
subdistrict), 54.
Hanzir (today, Yticekapi village 
of Agn-Ele^kirt town), 139, 
141.
Harami(today Bellita? village o f  
Erzurum-Hims-Karakopril sub­
district), 140.
Hashir, 49, 50, 51.
Hathavur, 143.
Hatuniye (district), 115.
Hatuniye bridge, 85.
Havasur (today, Gilrpmar town 
of Van), 100, 101, 102, 108,
119.
Havins (today Atmaca village 
of Van-Timar town), 112. 
Herakolu (mountain), 51.
Hersan (district), 35, 68, 69, 70,
71, 74, 75, 77, 78, 79, 86, 87,
88, 90.
Hertovin-i Sufla (today, Ekin- 
diizfl village of Siirt-Pervari 
town), 49, 51.
Hertovin-i Ulya (today, Ekin- 
dtlzii village of Siirt-Pervari 
town), 49, 51.
Hezor, 23.
Hidir (today, Hidirkoy of Van- 
Timar town), 105, 122.
Hidu-кбу (Hidir), 105, 122.
Hinis, 136, 137, 139, 140.
Hirit (today, Q'okekyazi village 
of Bitlis-Hizan town), 27, 41,
55,56.
Hi?et (Lower; Onnandali), 40,
49.
Hi.set (today, Kolludere village 
of Bitlis-Hizan-Akijar subdis- 
trict), 40 ,4 8 ,4 9 . 51 
Hi?et (Upper; Belenoluk ). 40. 
Hi?t (village of Van-Gurpinar- 
Yalrnca subdistrict), 119 
Hiyoyan (village), 59.
Hizan, 18, 19, 26, 27, 39, 40, 
41 ,42 ,43 , 50, 52 ,53 ,69 , 101. 
Hogik (today, Gokfe village of 
Erzincan-Tercan town), 133 
Horavil (village), 108.
Horotis (village), 106 
Horozdere (Horus), 41 
Hortokup (village), 143 
Horns (todav. Horozdere village 
of Bitlis-Hizan town), 41 
Iloijab (today, Giizelsu village 
of Van-Gurpinar-Giizelsu sub- 
dislnct), 105.
I lumlar (today, Be^kayu village 
of Erzincan-Tercan town), 131 
liuvut (todav. Kavakba$i sub- 
district of Bitlis-Mutki town). 
62. 63.
Hiiseyin Efendi (Kom). 132.
-I-
llica. 134
l^inli (Arkanis). I 12 
-i-
idiI. 25.
II Aid] (todav. Elaldi village ol 
Erzincan-Tercan town). 130. 
imam Kullu (village). 130
iskenderun, 17.
ispila (today, Ocakli village of 
Trabzon-Magka town), 143. 
ispir, 140.
Istanbul, 110.
- K -
Kabunduruk (today, Kofbaba 
village of Erzurum-A§kaie-<pift- 
lik subdistrict), 134.
Kagaziz (village), 110.
Kahkik (today, Goller village of 
Erzurum-Hims-Halilfavu? sub- 
distnct), 140.
Kalmemiran (today, IJzuntekne 
village of Van-^atak town),
110 .
Kalafka (village), 144. 
Kalafkaardu9lu(Giilyurdu), 144. 
Kalafkahatipli (KomUrcu), 144. 
Kalafkaiskenderli (Ta$delen), 
144
Kale (district), 36 
Kalecik (village), 101.
Kaplica (village), 56.
Kara (,,'oban (today, Kara^oban 
subdistrict of Erzurum-1 Inns), 
139. 140
Karahasan (subdistrict). 64.
Kara 1 iusevin (village), 39.
Kara Kilise (Karakose), 59, 60.
141.
Kara Koprii (todav, Karakoprii 
village of Erzurum-I linis- Kara- 
(,'oban subtli stnct >. 140 
Karaagil Isubdistncl). 66 
Kyrahagh. 43 
Karacaviran (Kom). 132. 
Karai^ay (village), 135, 136. 
Karakose (Kara Kilise), 59. 60. 
141
KarakiitUk (Zigak), 59.
Karame§e (village), 30.
Karasu, 43, 44.
Karasu (Marmit Suyu), 105. 
Karbasti (Korsuh), 39,40. 
Kar^ikan (town of Van), 26, 50,
75, 100, 101, 106, 112.
Karkar (today, Daldere village 
of Van-Geva§ town), 100. 106,
109.
Kars, 136.
Kasir (today, Sevindik village 
of Van-GUrpinar-Guzelsu sub­
district), 107.
Kavakba§i (Huyut), 62, 63. 
Kayalu (village; Mardin), 25. 
Kayah (village of Mardin-Idil), 
see Kayalu, 25, 26.
Kazan, 30, 126, 138.
Kazanan (village, Mu$-Korkut), 
2 5 ,3 1 ,3 8 ,6 8 .
Kemah, 135
Kepenek (Arak), 45, 46.
Kepirli (Nurs), 52.
Kerek oglu (village), 65.
Kesan (today, Krge<;idi village 
of Agri-Tutak town), 41, I 13. 
Kesan (Sanjak), 4 1.
Ke$i$ (v i llage),  102 
Ke$i;oglu (today.  B a k ac ik  vil­
lage o f  Vail central  subdistric t) . 
101
K evar  (v i l lage  o f  Hitlis-I l i /an-  
Sagmli subdis tr ic t) .  52 
Kevenli ($u$anis) .  104 
Kilini; ( iedigi . 60.
Kirkgeyit (subd is lr ie l) .  110. 
Kirkiiv (S iron ik ) .  46. 56 
K.i.'jlak ( vil lage).  132.
Ki/.il Kilise ( today. Yiikmcak 
village o f  V a n -M u ra d iv e  central  
subdistrict) .  99
Kizil Mescid (district), 65, 67,
69. 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 
85, 89.
Kinekas (village), 108.
Kirs (village), 101.
Kocapmar, 113.
Koi;baba (Kabunduruk), 134. 
Kolludere (Hi?et), 40, 48, 51. 
Kolosik (today, Elmabulak vil­
lage of Mu$), 59.
Komera (today, Yahncak vil­
lage o f Trabzon central subdis- 
tnct), 146.
Kopal (today, Palakgayiri vil­
lage o f Agri-Ele?kirt town), 
139.
Korkut (subdistrict of Mu§-Kor- 
kut), 25, 30, 31 ,59 ,60 ,61 ,62 . 
Korsuh (today, Karbasti village 
of Hiths-Hizan town), 19, 39,
40.
Kotni (today, Gunkin village of 
Bitlis-C '̂ukur subdistnct),59, 61. 
Kotimi (today, Kiifiiksu village 
of Bitlis-Tatvan-Kui;uksu sub- 
distnct), 57, 58.
Kozlu (village), 140.
Ko/luca (village), 101.
Konuircu (Kalafkahatipli), 144. 
Koinus (district), 65, 67, 73. 75,
76. 80. 85. 86. 98, 99.
Komiis (today. Halakli village 
of Van-Muradive central sub- 
distnct). 98. I 16.
Koprii (subdistrict). 140.
Koprii Koy (village). 102, 120 
Kiirzul (todav. 1 linear village of 
Van-Muradive town). 124 
Kotiir (todav. Bagpinar village 
of Erzincan-Tercan town). 128 
Kunuis (‘village of Mu$). 46. 56 
Kursan (todav. I lndikli village 
of Erzincan-Tercan town). 129
Kuru Bulak (district), 65.
Kuru Salan (mountain), 107. 
Kurukol (village), 125, 128. 
Kurultu (Verandanis), 108. 
Ku?anli (village), 39.
Kutis-i Sufla (village of Bitlis- 
Hizan-Saginli subdistrict), 52. 
Kutis-i Ulya (village o f Bitlis- 
Hizan-Saginh subdistrict), 52, 
53.
Kuftiksu (subdistrict), 57. 
Kilfiiksu (Kotum), 58.
Kiilat (today, Gokav village of 
Bitlis-Hizan town), 97.
Kiimes (district), 69.
-L-
Lahyan (village), 108.
Liva (village), 121.
Eiz (today. Erentepe subdistriel 
of Muf-Hulaiuk town), 37
- M -
Mabekor (district), 66.
Mai^akhel (Camili), 23.
Ma^ka, 143, 144.
Ma’murat-ul Aziz (Elazig). 104. 
Mahallebasji (distnct). 63. 71.
75, 78, 80, 85, 86. 90 
Malazgirt, 55. 64. 66, 78, 141. 
Malik (village of Siirt-l’ervan 
town), 49,
Mama I latun ( Tercan), 131, 
Maradit (Muralli). 23 
Mardin. 25. 26. 32, 93. 118. 
Miinnit Suyu (Karasu). 105. 
Marmk (village). 59.
Menden^ (village), I 16. 
Mercimekkale (Ak<;an). 28. 30.
44. 56.
Merik Ali (Kom). 132.
Mermutlu (district), 64, 85. 
Mescid (district), 64.
Mezgeyik (today Qakmakh vil­
lage of Erzincan-Tercan town), 
125.
Mezraa (village), 109.
Mezraa-i End (village), 52, 53. 
Mezraa-i $eyhan (today Unliice 
village of Van-Geva^-Bahcjesa- 
rav subdistrict), 106.
Mulaka (village), 143.
Molla Davud (village of Mu§- 
Bulanik-Erentepe subdistrict),
37.
Molla Kasim (today, Mollaka- 
sim village of Van-Timar sub- 
district), 94, 115, 122.
Molla Kulav (today, Mollakulac, 
village of Erzurum-Hirus), 137. 
Molla Yahya (village), 38 
Moscow, 125.
Muradive, 34, 97, 98, 99, 101,
105, 122. 124.
Muratli (Maradit), 23.
Mustafa (today, Mustafabey vil­
lage of Erzincan-Tercan town), 
134.
Mustafabev (village; Mustafa),
134. 135. '
Mu ,̂ in various places.
Mutki. 62
Miikiis (todav. Bahi^esaray sub­
district of Van-Gevaij town), 50,
53, 99. 103. 107, 108, 109.
-N-
Nabat (todav. (,'omakli village 
of Van-Eri;ek subdistrict), 104. 
Nagomo Karabagh, 10.
Naho^niid (district), 65.
Narhca (Damis-i Ulya). I 10. 
Nev$an (district), I 18.
Nezarborum, 49.
Norduz (today, Yalmca subdis­
trict o f Van-Gurpinar town), 
102 .
Norevan (village), 113.
Norgah (village), 59.
Norkuh (today, Yola?an village 
of Van-Gtirpmar town), 113. 
Nor?in (district), 105.
Nor?in-i Ulya (district), 123. 
Nurettin (subdistrict), 54.
Nurs (today, Kepirli village of 
Bitlis - Hizan - Saginli subdis­
trict), 52.
Nusaybin, 118, 123.
-o-
Ocakli (ispila), 143.
Oranis (today, Anadere village 
of Bitlis-Tatvan-Re§adiye sub­
district), 27.
Ormandak(Lower Hi§et),40,49. 
Orta Til (village), 138.
Ota? (Zirket), 59.
Otluca ($eyh Ayne), 94, 122. 
Ovacik (subdistrict), 134.
Ovacik (village), 135.
Ozim (today, Gumu$6ren vil­
lage o f Siirt-Pervari), 40, 48, 
49, 50, 108.
- o -
Omer Aga (Kom), 132.
Orenlik (Aleman), 58.
Ozalp (Saray), 101, 102, 109. 
Ozkavak (village), "61.
Oztoprak (Arap), 138.
- P -
Palakijaym (Kopal), 139.
Papir (street), 67.
Par (village), 108.
Parkat (today, Esenkiyi village 
of Bitlis - Adilcevaz - Goldiizu 
subdistrict), 94.
Pars (village), 109.
Parsinik (village), 129.
Pasinler, 127.
Patnos (district), 76.
Pav (today, Yama^koy o f Bitlis- 
Qukur subdistrict), 59.
Pazaryolu (subdistrict), 140. 
Pekerig (today, Hakbilir village 
of Erzincan - Kemah - Bozog- 
lak subdistrict), 135, 136.
Pelegoz (today, Giizbulak vil­
lage of Erzincan-Tercan town),
129.
Pelli (today, Alacabiik village 
of Bitlis-Tatvan-Re§adiye sub­
district), 102,112.
Pervari, 28 ,40 ,49,50, 51, 108. 
Pmariisttl (Yekmal), 59.
Piroz (today, Ta$dilek village of 
Siirt-Pervari town), 49.
Pirsolan (today, SOruyolu vil­
lage of Van - Muradiye town), 
122.
Prons (today, Gokijimen village 
of Bitlis-Hizan town), 41,112.
-R -
Re^adiye, 27, 102, 112, 113,
123.
-s-
Saglamta? (Ekice), 98 
Sagmli (U9UIT1), 52, 53.
Saray(today, Ozalp town of Van 
province), 101,102.
Sankonak (subdistrict), 34. 
Sarmansuyu (Edremid), 106,
116.
Sason, 51.
Savur, 33, 34.
Sefer Bey bridge, 85.
Seki (village), 126.
Sekur (village), 18, 39,40.
Selim Bey (district), 118, 123. 
Sememe (today, Eskipolat vil­
lage of Er/urum-Iliea subdis­
trict), 134.
Senr (village), 109.
Sevindik (Kasir), 107.
Seyfkar (village), 52.
Silik (village), 128.
Siirt, 1 1 ,40 ,49 ,50 ,51 ,99 .
Sim Ha9 (village of Bitlis-Hi­
zan-Ak?ar subdistrict), 41.
Simek (today, Boltikyazi sub­
district of Bitlis), 56.
Sinel (village), 141.
Sipannan (village), 59.
Sironik (today, Kirkiiy of Mu?),
46, 56.
Sokan (today, (,'atakdibi village 
of Van-Giirpinar-Kirkgei;it sub- 
distnct), 110, 1 1 1 .
Sor (today, Uludere village of 
Bitlis-Ahlat town), 70.
Sortekin (village), 109.
Sogutlu (Koin), 134.
Surba? (village), 103.
Surengen (village), I 10.
Suspert (village), 59.
Siiriivolu (Pirsolan), 122.
Sutta î (Ciiilpik), 26.
-s-
§ahmanis (today, Top^udegir- 
meni village of Van-Giirpinar- 
Yahnca subdistnct), 105.
$atak (today, (^atak town of 
Van), 50, 52, 103, 107, 109,
111, 119.
$eyh Ayne (Otluca), 94, 122. 
$eyh Kara (Gulstinler), 94, 104,
105, 122.
$idan (village), 110 .
$ikefti (today, Albayrak sub­
district of Van-Ba§kale town),
96, 116.
Sirvan $eyh (today, Adivar vil­
lage of Mu$-Bulamk- Karaagil 
subdistrict), 66.
$or Pmar bridge, 85.
$orkiyan. 62.
$orlar (Kom), 132.
$ube (village), 27.
§u$anis (today, Kevenli village 
of Van central subdistrict), 104.
-T-
Tadun (village), 136, 139. 
Tah$ot, 74.
Tankas ( village), 1 12.
Tarainak (today, Yaylakonak 
village of Van-Geva$ town), 99. 
Tarvis (village), 113 
Tasmali (village), 101.
Та? (district), 33, 65, 67, 68, 71,
72, 73, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 87,
88 .
Ta$delen (Kalafkaiskenderli),
144.
Ta$dilek (Piroz), 49.
Ta^tekne (Hainzikan), 59.
Tatar Gazi (village), 64, 66.
Tatar Gazi (distnct), 76.
Tatik (BolUkyazi subdistrict of 
Bitlis), 26.
Tat van, 27, 57, 58, 102, 112,
113, 123.
Tebriz , 47.
Terbiisek (today, Yalinka? vil­
lage o f Erzincan-Tercan town), 
125.
Tercan, 125, 127, 128, 129,
130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135. 
Tifnik Karakoy (mountain), 62. 
Til (today, Korkut village of 
Mu?-Korkut subdistrict), 30, 31, 
59 ,61 ,62 .
Timar, 16, 94, 95, 98, 105, 113, 
115, 119.
Tog (village of Bitlis-Tatvan),
58, 59.
Topal Osman (village), 132. 
Top^u Oglu (district), 105. 
Top^udegirmeni ($ahmanis),
105.
Trabzon, 11, 17, 143, 144, 145. 
Tutak, 41.
Tuzla(Kom), 132.
-u-
Ugum (today, Saginli subdis­
trict of Bitlis-Hizan town), 52. 
IJlu?ar (Kdr/.ut), 124.
Uludere, 70.
IJzuntekne (Kahnemiran), 110.
- u -
U9U1V (village), 59.
IJnaldi (Yako), 34, 35, 36, 76. 
(Jnluce (Mezraa-i $eyhan), 106. 
Uziimveren (V-apkis), 59.
-V-
Van, in various places.
Varkoz (today, Yeti?en village 
of Van-Erci? - Kocapinar sub­
district), 112 .
Varifhah (village), 59
Vartik (today, Begendik village 
of Erzincan-Tercan town), 132. 
Vastin (village of Bitlis-Hizan- 
Boliikyazi subdistrict), 41. 
Vavink (village), 52.
Verandanis (today, Kurultu vil­
lage o f Van-Geva? town), 108. 
Vilas (today, Qobanoren village 
of Siirt-Pervari town), 49.
Viran (today, £anakyayla vil­
lage of Bitlis-Adilcevaz town), 
33.
Vostan (Geva?), 104, 123.
-Y-
Yagcilar (village), 28.
Yako (today, Unaldi village of 
Bitlis - Sarikonak
subdistrict), 34, 35, 36, 76. 
Yakincak (Kizil Kilise), 99. 
Yalmca (Norduz), 102, 105,
119.
Yalmcak (Komera), 146. 
Yalrnka? (TerbUsek), 125. 
Yama^koy (Pav), 59.
Yavi (today, Yavi village of Er- 
zurum-^'at town), 126.
Yavi (Yavi), 126.
Yaygm (subdistrict), 31 
Yaylakonak (Taramak), 99. 
Yaylayolu (Qikniz), 128 
Yazik (village), 121.
Yekmal (Pmariistu), 59.
Yemlice (Zorova), 95, 120.
Yeni Koy (village), 140. 
Ye?ilyurt (Haijavera), 144 
Yeti^en (Varkoz), 113.
Yola?an (Norkuh), 113.
Yolgqzler (Agdad), 59 
Yomra, 144.
Yukari Golalan (Esbi?ad), 101
Yukan Narlica (Damis-i Ulya),
110.
Yurttepe (village), 109. 
Yucekapi (Hanzir), 139, 141. 
Yiiksekova, 103.
-Z-
Zanha (village), 143.
Zanoy (today, Akmescit village 
of Trabzon-Magka town), 143. 
Zanf Bey (Kom), 130.
Zaza Vartik (Kom), 132.
Zeve, 94, 105, 120.
Zeydan (district), 63, 66, 70, 72,
73, 74, 78, 80, 81, 82, 85, 86, 
87,88,89.
Zigak (today, Karakutiik village 
of M u?), 59.
Zikoh (village), 108.
Zirket (today, Ota? village of 
Mu?-Korkut subdistrict), 59. 
Zivistan (today, Elmalik village 
of Van-Gumti?dere subdistrict),
101 .
Ziyaret (village; today Yaygm 
subdistrict o f Mu?), 31.
Zorova (today, Yemlice village 
of Van-Timar subdistrict), 94,
120 .
С. NAMES OF STATES, NATIONS, RELIGIONS, FAMILIES, 
TRIBES, VARIOUS ORGANIZATIONS
-A-
Ahtamar Church, 108, 113. 
Alemdar Mosque, 84.
Alilan Medresse, 103.
Allied Powers, 13.
America, 17.
American Institution, 115. 
Andonian Certificates, 7.
Атак Monastery, 45,46. 
Armenakan Commitee, 118. 
Armenia, 9, 10, 18,47. 
Armenian, in various places. 
Armenian Committees, 9, 13, 
14,48, 96, 97, 121.
Armenian Republic, 10. 
Armenians, in various places. 
Armenians o f Adir-i Ulya, 52. 
Armenians of Asbasjin, 100. 
Armenians o f Bitlis, 25. 
Armenians o f (,'a^van, 52. 
Armenians o f Geva§, 112. 
Armenians o f Kevar, 52. 
Armenians o f Kutis-i Sufla, 52. 
Armenians of Kutis-i Ulya, 52. 
Armenians o f Seyfkar, 52. 
Armenians o f Van, 25, 51, 93,
95, 123
Arvasi Medresse, 103.
Asuri, 51.
-B-
Britain, 17,
British, 15.
-c-
Christians o f Pervari, 51. 
Christians o f Siirt, 51. 
Constitutional Period, 9, 14, 17.
- c -
£anli Church, 45.
Cankli Monastery, 45.
(,’ehar Sanduk Mosque, 84. 
(^engelli Church, 45.
-D-
Dashnak, 19,28, 118.
Dashnak Commitee, 18, 29, 56,
137, 139.
Dashnaks, 45, 46.
-E-
Eastem Church, 49.
Egypt, 17.
Emigration Law, 8.
English, 13.
Entente Powers, 8.
Entente States, 9, 13, 23.
-F-
Farisiyye Mosque, 84.
France, 17,23.
French, 11, 13, 15, 17, 124.
First World War, 8, 23, 59, 93.
Cem Ham Dervish Lodge, 42. -G-
Gayda Dervish Lodge, 42.
Gazi Bekye Medresse, 84. 
Gokmeydan Mosque, 84. 
Gokmeydan Primary school, 85. 
Gokmeydan Medresse, 84.
Great Mosque, 84.
Greek, 144, 145.
Greeks, 144.
Kurande^t Medresse, 103. 
Kurdish, 11, 16, 41 ,43 , 54, 69,
96, 100, 108, 129.
Kurey? Mosque, 84.
Kuru Pmar Mosque, 84, 90. 
Kttfrevi Dervish Lodge, 84.
-M-
- H -
Haci Ham Tomb, 103.
Haci Zive Medresse, 103 
Hamid Aga Barracks, 16, 120. 
Han Bath, 86.
Hatuniye Mosque, 84, 90.
Hindi Baba Medresse, 103.
Носа Bey Mosque, 84.
Hoybun Association, 47. 
Hunchak Commitee, 118
-I-
Iran, 17, 90, 100.
Iranian, 13, 16 
Islamic, 15, 37.
Italian, 13
-J-
Jewish, 96.
-K-
Kazakh, 106, 139, 141, 145. 
Kazakhs, 30, 32, 56, 57. 58. 60, 
61, 111, 112, 117, 125, 138. 
Keldani, 49, 51.
Keraliye Medresse, 84.
Kizil Mescid Mosque, 84, 90. 
Kizil Monastery, 45.
Kizil Mosque, 73.
Mermud Mosque, 84.
Meydan Mosque, 83.
Ministry o f  Interior Affairs o f  
the Ottoman State, 12.
Mir Hasan Veli Medresse, 103. 
Molla Kasim Medresse, 103. 
Moslem, in various places. 
Moslems, in various places. 
Moslim Victims Issuef 10
-14-
National Congress, 11.
- o -
Orta Bath, 86.
Orta Hisar Mosque, 144. 
Ottoman, 13 ,29 ,48 ,51 ,59 , 60,
70, 93, 107, 130, 141, 146. 
Ottoman Empire, 110.
Ottoman Government, 29, 48, 
93, 118.
Ottoman State, 13, 18, 19, 23,
47. 1 15.
(Etonians, 118.
-P-
Pasha Bath, 86.
-R-
Russia, 16. 17. 18. 23. 53. 59, 
61,63, 90, 105, 1 18, 120. 122. 
Russian, in various places 
Russian Kazakh Regiment. 94 
Russian Kazakhs. 32. 60. 112. 
Russians, in various places,
-s-
Sheikh Abdullah Bcdah^ani 
Dervish Lodge, 84.
Sheikh Abdurrahman ( iazi
Medresse. 103.
Sheikh Emin Efendi Dervish 
Lodge, 84.
Sheikh Gazali Medresse, 103. 
Sheikh Hasan Mosque. 84 
Siirt Orphans Dormitory, 57. 
Sultan Arab Mosque, 84. 
Surb-Garabet Monastery, 45.
Serdiye Medresse, 84. 
ijerefiye Mosque, 84 , 90.
-T-
Ta§ Mosque, 84.
Turkish, in various places. 
Turkish Nation, 7, 8.
Turkev, 9. 10. 95, 139.
Turks, 8
-Y-
Yaplan (Sheikh Hamid) Med- 
resse, 103.,
ANNEXES 
PH O TO G R A PH S, LISTS, M APS
ш
A 
gr
ou
p 
fro
m 
A
rm
en
ia
n 
H
un
ch
ak
 
V
ol
un
te
er
 
R
eg
im
en
t
(1
91
5)
.
A group o f Armenian gang officers who fought 
against Ottoman Army at Caucasia front and known by 
their cruelty.
A 
gr
ou
p 
of 
Va
n 
D
as
hn
ak
 
ga
ng
s 
wh
o 
pa
rti
ci
pa
te
d 
in
 
Va
n 
rio
t 
in 
19
15
.
A group o f  Armenian gangs who participated 
in Van riot in 1915.
J
Tw
o 
w
ou
nd
ed
 
old
 
w
om
en
 
an
d 
a 
M
os
lem
 
gi
rl 
ra
pe
d 
by
 
the
 
A
rm
en
ia
ns
 
(F
rom
 
Er
zu
ru
m
 
op
pr
es
si
on
)
Th
e 
m
os
qu
e 
of 
G
ok
ta
§ 
vi
lla
ge
 
an
d 
th
re
e 
sm
al
l 
gi
rls
 
w
ho
 
we
re
 
ra
pe
d 
by 
the
 
A
rm
en
ia
ns
 
(F
rom
 
E
rz
ur
um
 
Op
pr
es
si
on
)
A Moslem woman who was tried to be dishonored by 
the Armenians in Bitlis, and whose two fingers were
cut.
A 
gr
ou
p 
of 
Za
za
va
ni
k 
w
om
en
 
wh
o 
we
re
 
ra
pe
d 
by 
th
e 
A
rm
en
ia
ns
 
(F
ro
m 
Er
zu
ru
m
 
op
pr
es
si
on
).
June 18, 1915 The Second Armenian
Stamp Territorial Forces”
Permission certificate given to Lato, from Van, one of the 
Armenian rebels, by the Commander of Russian Army. The 
translation of the certificate is as follows:
“The second Armenian territorial Forces.
It is a certificate explaining that four days of permission is 
given to Lato Ra$oyanis. the Chief of Miikiis gang, by the 
commander of the second Armenian Territorial Forces to go to and 
come back from Van and he is carrying a rifle with No. 106300 and 
mauser type revolver.
The population of Moslems and the Armenians in Bitlis, 
Erzurum and Van provinces as of May 14,1914*
In 1914, Bitlis Province was consisted o f Siirt, Genf and Mu? 
subdivisions; Erzurum province was consisted of Erzincan and Bayezid sub­
divisions; and Van province was consisted o f  Hakkari sub-division.
BITL S PROVINCE
% Muslims % Armenians
Central town o f  Bitlis Province 38.701 19.123
Ahlat town 10.190 9.708
Hizan town 11.624 5.023
Mutki town 12.462 4.110
Central town o f  Siirt sub-division 27.649 2.630
Eruh town 22.677 1.890
Pervar? town 6.415 1.326
§irvan town 15.181 1.169
Garzan town1 14.541 4.332
Central town o f  G enf sub-division 24.467 1.603
(,'аракуиг towrf 11.292 734
Kulp town3 15.252 3.573
Central town o f  Mu? sub-division 30.254 36.316
Bulanik town 16.372 14.662
Sason town4 7.454 6.505
Malazgirt town 30.929 4.438
Varto town 14.539 1.990
Total of the province: 70.8 309.999 27.2 119.132
* Tableaux indiquant le nombre de divers elements de la 
population dans I’Empire Ottoman au ler Mars (14 March, 
1914), Constantinople 1919.
1 Today, Yanarsu subdistrict of Kurtalan town of Siirt.
'  Today, the center of Bingol Province.
1 Today, Kulp town of Diyarbakir Province.
4 Today, Sason town of Siirt Province.
ERZURUM PROVINCE
% Muslims % Armenians
Central town of Erzurum 83.070 34.542
Province
Pasin town 56.403 10.046
Bayburt tow n' 64.289 12.025
Ispir town 40.015 2.920
Tercan tow n6 36.153 7.401
Tortum town 28.320 1.224
Keskim tow n’ 36.122 6.193
Kigi town8 35.572 14.609
Narman town 28.684 556
Hims town 33.525 8.229
Central town of Erzincan sub­ 53.898 16.291
division
Pulumflr tow n9 11.755 511
Refahiye town 23.307 1.270
Kuruyay tow n10 11.466 2.649
Kemah town 20.742 4.741
Central town of Bayezid sub­ 20.952 2.619
division11
Ele$kirttown 23.368 5.624
Diyadin town 19.640 904
Tutak town 23.873 1.070
Kara Kilise12 22.142 3.195
Total o f the province: 82.5 673.297 16.7 136.618
s Today, Bayburt town of Giimii$hane Province. 
b Today, Tercan town of Er/incan Province.
7 Today. Yusufeli town of Artvin Province.
8 Today, Kigi town of Bingol Province.
9 Today, Piiliimiir town of Tunceli Province.
Today, ill? town of Er/.incan Province.
11 Today. Agn Province.
12 Today. Karakose. which is the central town of Agn Province.
VAN PROVINCE
% Muslims % Armenians
Central town o f  Van Province 45.119 33.789
Erci$ town 27.323 8.083
(,'atak town 8.132 4.292
Adilcevaz tow n13 10.820 4.849
Geva$ town 18.123 10.520
Central town of Hakkari sub­
division 21.848 3.461
Qolemerik tow n14 7.450 296
Mahmudi tow n13 10.230 528
§emdinan tow n16 9.873 -
G evartow n17 12.771 959
Ho$ap tow n18 7.691 1.015
Total o f the province: 69.1 179.380 26.1 67.792
13 Today. Adilcevaz town of Billis Province.
u  Central town of Hakkari Province.
15 Today, Ozalp town of Van Province.
16 Today, §emdinli town of Hakkari Province.
17 Today, Yiiksekova town of Hakkari Province.
18 Today, Giizelsu subdistrict of Giirpinar town of Van.
.
BiTLlS PROVINCE
TR
A
BZ
O
N
 
PR
O
V
IN
C
E
TV
tX
JS
 
P
R
O
V
IN
C
E
H
A
K
K
A
R
I 
PR
O
V
IN
C
E
