Musa MARJANLI
ARMENIANS.
RUSSIA. THE CAUCASUS
Dubai
Khazar University press
2011
Musa MARJANLI
Armenians. Russia. The Caucasus 
Khazar University Press
ISBN: 978-9952-20-063-8
The present book by M. Marjanli dwells upon the relationships Arme-
nians have had with autochthonous peoples and Russia in the South 
Caucasus after being resettled to this region, and the attempts by Arme-
nian migrants to Armenianize territories and ethnicities. The existence 
of a total of 26 “Armenias” confirms the planned nature of the Armeni-
ans’ eastward advance: from their ancestral homeland in the Balkans, 
i.e. Europe, to Asia Minor and further southwards. Therefore, Armenian 
scholars never talk of the history of Armenia proper, but of the Arme-
nian people.
The book is meant for historians and experts in international relations, 
as well as a broad readership.
© Musa MARJANLI. 2011ISBN: 978-9952-20-063-8
Table of contents
Introduction............................................................................................4
Armenians and Russia..........................................................................7
Role and importance of the Caucasus Armenians for Russia..........13
Armenians’ attempts to realize the “Great Armenia”  
myth in the Caucasus..........................................................................20
Armenians’ Karabakh syndrome: background and realization....34 
Armenian and Georgian collisions...................................................46
Why are Armenians not Caucasians?...............................................56 
Conclusion............................................................................................75
4
Introduction
Ilia Chavchavadze
The Armenians, who have covered a centuries-long thorny 
road from Europe to Asia Minor, including the Caucasus, have al-
ways attempted to ‘Armenianize’ the territories, states, tribes and 
ethnic groups along the way. Such were their actions during the 
Roman and Byzantine Empires, the Arabic caliphate, the Seljuk 
and Mongol states, the Persian and Ottoman Empires. This is con-
firmed by the fact that there are now 26 “Armenias” by which one 
can actually trace the Armenians’ eastward advance: from the Bal-
kans, i.e. from Europe, to Asia Minor and further to the East.
The Armenians, who have covered a centuries-long thorny 
road from Europe to Asia Minor, including the Caucasus, have al-
ways attempted to ‘Armenianize’ the territories, states, tribes and 
ethnic groups along the way. Such were their actions during the 
Roman and Byzantine Empires, the Arabic caliphate, the Seljuk 
and Mongol states, the Persian and Ottoman Empires. This is 
confirmed by the fact that there are now 26 “Armenias” by which 
No matter whether we had much or 
little,we provided you with a shelter and 
treated you like brothers. So don’t treat 
us like enemies in our own home! It is 
better to have a lion sitting in your way 
than an enemy in your home. Georgians 
used to say so long ago, so do we and so 
will any reasonable Armenian.
5
 
 
one can actually trace the Armenians’ eastward advance: from the 
Balkans, i.e. from Europe, to Asia Minor and further to the East.
The Armenians, who have covered a centuries-long thorny 
road from Europe to Asia Minor, including the Caucasus, have al-
ways attempted to ‘Armenianize’ the territories, states, tribes and 
ethnic groups along the way. Such were their actions during the 
Roman and Byzantine Empires, the Arabic caliphate, the Seljuk 
and Mongol states, the Persian and Ottoman Empires. This is con-
firmed by the fact that there are now 26 “Armenias” by which one 
can actually trace the Armenians’ eastward advance: from the Bal-
kans, i.e. from Europe, to Asia Minor and further to the East.
As a matter of fact, a prominent representative of the Silver 
Age of Russian poetry and founder of Russian Symbolism, Valery 
Bryusov, added a 27th Georgian1 Armenia to the list.  
Therefore, Armenian scholars talk not so much about the his-
tory of Armenia but rather about the history of the Armenian 
people. Even Moses Khorenatsi, “the father of Armenian history” 
who lived in the 5th century, wrote the “History of the Armenians” 
(“Hayots Patmut’yun”)2, not the history of Armenia. His research 
dwells upon the First, Second, Third, Fourth and Greek Armenias3. 
Two centuries later, in the 7th century, Anania Shirakaci also point-
ed to a number of ‘Armenias’ in his “Ashharacuic” (“Geography”): 
First, Second, Third, Fourth, Minor, Great, High Armenias and 
Persarmenia4. Given the number of “Armenias”, it is quite typical 
of this people to attempt to revive Armenian statehood in places 
where it has been lost four times at different periods in history. 
Thus, the Kingdoms of Van, Vaspurakan, Kars and Ani, and the 
state of Cilicia were located in Asia Minor, but the First, Second 
and Third Armenian Republics were proclaimed on Azerbaijan ter 
 
 
1 Bryusov V, Chronicle of historical destinies of the Armenian people. M., 1918. Ch. IX.
2  Movses Khorenatsi // Soviet History Encyclopedia (SHE). T.9. M., 1966. Col. 
537; The Big Soviet Encyclopedia (BSE). 3rd edition. Vol. 16. M., 1974. P.385. 
3  Movses Khorenatsi, History of Armenia. M., 1858. P.50-51.
4  Armenian geography of the 7th century B.C. attributed to Movses Khorenatsi 
(text and translation with maps and explanatory endnotes issued by K. Patkanov). 1877. 
P. 33-35, 42-44, 47.  
Introdiction
6
Musa MARJANLI. Armenians. Russia. The Caucasus 
 
ritories, in the historical region of Chukhur-Saad5. 
To confirm the above, suffice it to refer to the work of a western 
expert on Armenia, D. Lang, who writes: “Greek author Strabo 
links Armenians to Thessaly, a region in the North of Greece. He 
adds that a resident of Thessaly Armenus visited the country to-
gether with Argonaut Jason and friends and named it after him-
self. As to Phrygians, Strabo claims that they are of Thracian origin 
and had come to Asia Minor from what is now Bulgaria after the 
Trojan War. This semi-legendary information is quite interesting 
as it enables us to link Armenian ancestors to the mysterious “peo-
ple of the Sea” who waged wars in Asia Minor in 1200 B.C.”6.
However, Armenians’ attempts to settle down on a certain ter-
ritory and establish their own statehood remained futile for a long 
time. As is the case today, they were always an ethnic minority7. 
They could always have a certain impact on the situation in the 
host country, but never change their own status dramatically. 
The Armenians’ last hope in this regard was associated with 
Russia and the Caucasus. What this has resulted in is well-known 
from the history of the Caucasus and the peoples living there. It 
is also well-known from the diverse relations of the Armenian 
people with its neighbors in different spheres, different levels of 
political, confessional, cultural, socioeconomic and ethnic life. 
5 K. Yuzbashyan, Armenian states of the times of Badratids and Byzantine of 
9th-11th centuries. P.150, 172; G. Sarkisyan, K. Khudaverdyan, K. Yuzbashyan, Ancestry 
of Hayk. Essay on history and culture of Armenia from ancient times to the formation 
of the Third Republic. P. 11,21,86, 106, 217, 235, 307; History of the Armenian people, 
1980. P. 27, 124, 145,284, 292. 
6 D. Lang, Armenians. Creative people. M., 2004.P. 25. See in detail: History 
of Armenian people, 1980. P.27; A.G. Adonts // New Brokgauz-Efron Encyclopedia. 
Vol.3 S. Petersburg, Col. 601; G. Kapancyan, Hayas – Armenians’ cradle. Ethnogenesis 
of Armenians and first history. Yerevan. 1947. P. 240, 242; same author. Historical and 
linguistic works. To Armenians’ first history. Ancient Asia Minor. Yerevan, 1956; same 
author. To the origin of the Armenian language. Yerevan, 1946; I. Diyakonov. Prehistory 
of Armenian people. Yerevan, 1968. P. 202-203; I. Chopin, New notes on ancient history 
of the Caucasus and its inhabitants, S. Petersburg., 1896. P. 26. Ancient Greeks described 
as “people of the Sea” the tribes which entered Northern Africa and Western Asia via the 
Mediterranean Sea in the 12th century. 
7 J. McCarthy, C. McCarthy. Turks and Armenians. Handbook on the Armenian 
issue. Baku, 1996, P. 18. 
7
ARMENIANS AND RUSSIA
Early information about Armenians in Russia dates back to the 
13th century when Price Daniel Romanovych (1238-1264) of Galicia 
and Volhynia invited the Armenians to his lands8. This is when 
first Armenian colonies appeared in Western Ukraine, which hap-
pens to be the home of Simeon Lehaci, 17th century Armenian 
author who described, in his Traveler Notes, a problem-free and 
happy life of his fellow tribesmen in the Ottoman Empire9. During 
the reign of Alexei Mikhailovich (1645-1676), new waves of Arme-
nians emerged in Russia, but it was Peter the Great (1682-1725) 
who helped the Armenians settle down in Russia the most and 
gave them different advantages”10. Thus, after seizing the Caspian 
coast in 1722, he attempted to settle the Muslim-populated terri-
tories of Dagestan and Azerbaijan with Christians. With this aim, 
Peter the Great ordered his envoy to Istanbul A. Rumyantsev to 
talk Armenians of the Ottoman Empire into moving to a newly-
established Caspian region of the Russian Empire that covered the 
seaside territories of Azerbaijan from Derbent in the north to Rasht 
in the south. The Armenians were promised that local people “will 
be deported and the territories given to the Armenians”. 
This is how Azerbaijan was used in starting the process of 
“Armenianization” of the Caucasus. Peter the Great wanted to re-
settle Ottoman Armenians first because most Armenians lived in 
the territories of the Ottoman sultan; second, the Ottoman Empire 
 
8      S. Solovyev. History of Russia since ancient times. Works. Book II, Vol. III-IV. 
M., 1988. P. 183, 514-515, 571, 617.
9 Simeon Lehaci. Traveler Notes. M., 1965.
10 The Central State Historical Archive of the Russian Federation (hereinafter 
CSHA RF). F. 880. Op.5, D. 387. L.6; G. Ezov. Relations of Peter I with Armenians. St. 
Petersburg, 1898, P.2
8
Musa MARJANLI. Armenians. Russia. The Caucasus 
 
was Russia’s main rival in the struggle for the Caucasus; third, 
O ttoman Armenians who knew Russia’s rival from within might 
prove useful in helping to learn the enemy better; fourth, these 
Armenians could play the role of “a fifth column” in the enemy 
camp; fifth, by resettling the Armenians, Peter the Great was also 
increasing the Christian population of the Caucasus that would 
eventually support him in the local Muslim environment.
The policies of Peter the Great in the Caucasus were continued 
by Ekaterina II (1762-1796), who “expressed a desire to restore the 
Armenian kingdom under the patronage of Russia”11. This plan 
was meant to strengthen the Christian element in the Caucasus 
by means of the Armenian satellite factor which was to be used 
in Russian geopolitics in the south. This tactic was part of a strat-
egy designed to gain a foothold in Derbent, occupy Shamakhi and 
Ganja, and then, with enough troops, seize Erevan from Karabakh 
and Sygnakh”12. Thus, the plan was to realize a strategic mission 
in the Caucasus at the expense of Azerbaijan.
However, Russia did not intend to establish an “Armenian 
state” where there had never been Armenian statehood. This is 
why the well-known Russian expert on the Caucasus, political 
analyst and journalist, V. Velichko, wrote in the early 20th centu-
ry that one of Empress Ekaterina’s favorites, “a brilliant prince of 
Taurida”, G. A. Potemkin, was a man of great imagination. He was 
fascinated with the idea of reviving a Christian kingdom in “the 
Armenian plain”13. The revival could take place, for Ekaterina II 
“was extremely kind to Armenians, which could be explained by 
moral corruption and excessive luxury during her reign”14. Judg-
ing by the fact that grateful Armenians of Nakhchivan-on-Don 
(near Rostov-on-Don) erected a monument to Ekaterina II, one can 
 
 
11 A. Anninsky. History of Armenian Church (until the 19th century). S. Petersburg, 
1889. P.305. 
12  Collection of statements relating to review of history of Armenians. 1833-
1838. M., 1838. P.69. 
13  V. Velichko. The Caucasus. The Russian affair and inter-tribal points. S. 
Petersburg, 1904. P.77 
14  Ditto.
9
 
 
agree that she was quite well-disposed to these aliens. It should be 
mentioned that in Soviet times the monument was knocked down, 
but local Armenians restored it in post-Soviet years. 
The Armenians enjoyed favorable treatment also during the 
reign of Alexander I (1801-1825) who issued a “high resolution” 
to a petition requesting to settle Armenians near Derbent. Thus, a 
document from 21 December 1802 evidenced “the rights and priv-
ileges that his ancestors had granted to the Armenian people”15. 
In the 19th century, the Russian Empire was the actual master 
in the Caspian Sea, the Sea of Azov and the Black Sea, which is 
why it gained access to the Straits and the Mediterranean. In the 
same century it seized the Caucasus and the Crimea, and was giv-
ing orders in the Balkans. Therefore, V. Velichko thought it ap-
propriate to indicate, with reference to the Ottoman Armenians, 
that “A hope for the revival of the Armenian people and state runs 
like a barely noticeable thread through the history of the Arme-
nian people, full of humiliation at the hands of great and small 
kings of other faiths… It is noteworthy that this hope grows in 
parallel to the growth of Russian territories, as its victory banner 
gets closer to Western Asia”16. Its main rival here was still the Ot-
toman Empire which was home to a great many of Armenians. 
It was from there and also from parts of the Iranian monarchy 
that a huge stream of Armenians poured into the South Caucasus, 
predominantly into the Northern Azerbaijan. In the 19th and early 
20th centuries, this process was developing with active participa-
tion of the Russian Empire and the Armenian Gregorian Church 
of Echmiadzin whose Catholicos was a theocratic leader17 of the 
Armenians following a third loss of the Armenian statehood in 
Asia Minor in the 11th century18. Therefore, the definition of “Ar-
menian geographic space” attributed to the east of Asia Minor 
 
15  CSHA RF. F. 880. Po.5. D. 389. L.17 ob.
16  V. Velichko. The Caucasus. The Russian affair and inter-tribal points. P.76-77. 
17  V. Velichko. The Caucasus. Russian affairs and inter-tribal points. Ch. 10
18  K. Yuzbashyan, Armenian states of the times of Badratids and Byzantine of the 
9th-11th centuries. P.4-5, 170; G. Sarkisyan, K. Khudaverdyan, K. Yuzbashyan. Ancestry of 
Hayk. Essay on history and culture of Armenia from ancient times to the formation of 
the Third Republic. Ch. Vi and VII.
Armenians and Russia
10
Musa MARJANLI. Armenians. Russia. The Caucasus 
 
where there were Armenian kingdoms before, started to apply 
to the territory of the Caucasus in the 19th century. This is how a 
new geographic notion, “the Caucasus Armenia”, emerged at the 
expense of Azerbaijani lands.
To confirm the above, let’s have a look at the following. When 
the Russian-Iranian War (1826-1828) ended in signing the Treaty 
of Turkmenchay, Emperor Nicolai I (1825-1855) issued a “high 
resolution” to the Senate on 21 March 1828 saying that “on the 
strength of the treaty with Persia concluded on 10 February 1828, 
I enjoin henceforth that the Khanate of Erivan and the Khanate 
of Nakhchivan annexed to Russia shall be called the Armenian 
region”19.
The Russian Empire believed that the Armenians would fit 
well into the plan on a complete Christianization of the Caucasus. 
There were enough grounds for that. First, there were much more 
Armenians than any other eastern Christians in Muslim states. 
Second, they mainly lived in Ottoman and Iranian monarchies 
which were Russia’s principal rivals in the struggle for the Cau-
casus. Third, they were indispensible in Russia’s rivalry with the 
Iranian and Ottoman states because they knew their strengths and 
weaknesses very well. Fourth, the Armenians were “light on their 
feet” and always ready for “change of place” if this promised them 
any benefit. Fifth, their motto was “ubi bene ibi patria” (where 
there is bread, there is my country). Sixth, they had not had their 
own statehood for 500 years by then. 
For these reasons, after the Russian-Iranian (1826-1828) and 
Russian-Ottoman wars (1828-1829) had ended, the Treaty of Adri-
anople with Istanbul and the Treaty of Turkmenchay with Tehran 
specifically stipulated migratory preferences for the settlement of 
Ottoman and Iranian Armenians on Russian lands. Most of them 
settled down on the territory of former Azerbaijani khanates of 
Erivan, Nakhchivan and Karabakh which were abolished in the 
early 19th century. To facilitate the mass migration of the Arme-
nians, the authorities set up special commissions that provided 
 
 
 
19  CSHA RF F. 1018. Sp. 9. D. 21. L. 1 ob
11
 
 
them with funds, vehicles and escorts20.
The Armenians played an important part in the Russian Army 
alongside senior Russian officials, including minister, diplomat 
and poet A. Griboyedov. Particularly active was Col Lazarev, who 
even addressed his fellow tribesmen with an Armenian-language 
letter listing the benefits Russia was promising them. “Christians! 
… I am announcing to you that the noble monarch of Russia grants 
you the opportunity to move to and settle down anywhere you 
like in peaceful and safe lands of Erivan, Nakhchivan and Kara-
bakh … You will have an exemption from all tax for six years. In 
Russia… you will find a new motherland populated by Christians 
and your holy faith will not be oppressed ever since! You will be 
protected by laws there and feel the benefits of that. Finally, you 
will improve your welfare there…”21.
The participation of senior officials in the migration process 
demonstrates that, first, Russia was very keen on resettling the Ar-
menians in the Caucasus; second, it was interested in the process 
running smoothly; and third, it wanted to push the “Russian 
cause” and the “Russian way” in the Caucasus. 
After completion of the Iranian Armenians’ migration to the 
Caucasus, Kh. Lazarev submitted a detailed “Report to the Earl of 
Erivan, Commander-in-Chief of the Separate Caucasus Corps, In-
fantry General and Adjutant General Pashkevich”. It said, “Among 
the glorious victories of the troops of the Separate Caucasus Corps, 
Your Excellence witnessed the dedication of the Armenian people 
who participated in the successes of the Russian weaponry… As 
a commandant of Tabriz, I was, by your will, preoccupied with 
the said people’s migration. Being of the same faith, I often com-
municated to Your Excellency the reverence of the Armenians for 
the holy name of the Great Monarch of Russia who facilitates the 
prosperity of their fellow tribesmen. After you reached a glori-
ous peace accord with Persia in 1828, Your Excellency honored 
me with the duty of serving one of your very useful plans for our 
Motherland: to resettle Christians from Persian lands to Russia’s 
 
20  S. Glinka, Resettlement of the Armenians of Adderbijan to the borders of 
Russia. M., 1831. P. 105. 
21  Ditto. P. 107-111.
Armenians and Russia
12
Musa MARJANLI. Armenians. Russia. The Caucasus 
 
newly-acquired provinces of Nakhchivan and Erivan, which are 
now called the Armenian region by the will of the Monarch. Af-
ter the enslavement that weighed upon the Armenian people and 
their Church for more than four centuries, a first resolute step to-
wards uniting this people under the protection of powerful Rus-
sia and its mild and wise laws would be the beginning of a great 
cause! This is your cause! As to me, a Russian 
officer honored by Your Excellency with such a prestigious mis-
sion, this does me enormous credit and makes me extremely hap-
py as an Armenian… On 26 February 1828, I received Your Excel-
lency’s instruction to resettle the Armenians from Adderbijan to 
Erivan, Nakhchivan and Karabakh provinces… Due to a lack of 
public lands for migration in the Nakhchivan Khanate, I attempt-
ed to persuade Armenians to settle down in the Khanates of Eri-
van and Karabakh, and they followed my advice”22. 
This is how the Armenian factor emerged on the ethno-political 
map of the Caucasus. Initially, Russia directed the Armenian mi-
gration vector towards Northern Azerbaijan. On the other hand, if 
the Russian Empire had not seen the Armenians as an important 
element in establishing control over the Caucasus, it would have 
hardly treated them favorably. 
22  S. Glinka, Resettlement of the Armenians of Adderbijan to the borders of 
Russia. M.,1831. P. 112-134. 
13
ROLE AND IMPORTANCE OF THE 
CAUCASUS ARMENIANS
FOR RUSSIA
Experts in the Caucasus affairs viewed as a clearly negative 
phenomenon the appearance, actions and influence of the Arme-
nian factor in the Caucasus, especially in its political, ethnic, con-
fessional, territorial, economic, social and commercial life. Thus, 
in the early 20th century proponents of Russian autocracy saw it 
as a threat to the “Russian cause” in a region seen as an important 
source of raw materials for the Russian economy and its south-
ward advancement. The region was rich in oil and cotton, natural 
dyes and silk, carpets and sturgeons, black caviar and copper, tim-
ber and wool; the road to Iran, India and warm seas started from 
here. Therefore, the Caucasus played a key role in the Russian Em-
pire’s strategic policies in the south. 
Along with the Armenian infiltration in all spheres of life in 
the Caucasus, there were also repeated anti-Russian campaigns 
initiated both by the Armenian triad “church-party-Diaspora” 
and by Russia’s geopolitical rivals in the Caucasus – the Ottoman, 
British, French and Iranian superpowers. Speaking about this and 
pointing to an “Armenian mark” in the region, N. Shavrov 
said in the early 20th century that over 1 million Armenians were 
settled in Northern Azerbaijan alone. This was largely facilitated 
by high-ranking Armenians serving in Russia, including Generals 
K. Lazarev, V. Madatov, G. Ter-Gukasov, V. Bebutov, L. Malikov, 
M. Loris-Melikov, M. Argutinski-Dolgorukov, S. Kishmishev, as 
well as the Catholicoses of Echmiadzin Joseph, David V, Daniel I, 
Ephraim I and Ovanes VIII. This is exactly why it was Armenians, 
not Russians, who were settled in the newly-established and high-
ly prolific Kars region of the Caucasus after the Russian-Ottoman 
14
Musa MARJANLI. Armenians. Russia. The Caucasus 
 
war (1877-1878). As a result, as N. Shavrov put it, “over the 100 
years of rule in the Caucasus, the state settled more than 1,200,000 
non-Russians and only 24,000 Russians on the vacant lands 
there”23. Back in the 1880s, N. Shavrov examined the benefits and 
importance of the South Caucasus, first of all, Azerbaijan, for the 
Russian economy24. He pointed to the importance of the Caucasus 
railway for the exports of Russian goods to Iran and India via the 
Black, Caspian and Mediterranean Seas. In a separate chapter, the 
author examined the significance of the Caspian Sea, focusing on 
Russia’s interests in the region. In fact, N. Shavrov described Baku 
as “the key to the success of our business in the Caucasus and 
Persia”25. 
Considering the importance of the Caucasus for Russia, an-
other Russian expert A. Budilovich said Russia should step up its 
influence on the outskirts of the Empire, including the Caucasus, 
given the Armenians’ activity in the region26. Another Russian 
analyst of the Caucasus affairs I. Kanadeyev called for protecting 
the peoples of the Caucasus from the pernicious influence of the 
Armenians whose separatism leads to the appearance of various 
autonomies or indeed an Armenian statehood in the Caucasus 
where it had never existed before. The Armenianism is support-
ed by the Dashnaktsutyun political party mostly made up of Ot-
toman Armenians. They are ready to take up arms to carry out 
their goals of seizing other territories, establishing an Armenian 
statehood and continuing the process of Armenian resettlement to 
the Caucasus. In other words, the author did not rule out that Ar-
menian goals in the Caucasus could lead to Russia’s defeats in its 
wars in the West. The expert added that the Armenians had settled 
down firmly in Northern Azerbaijan: there are more Armenians 
than Russians in the Baku oil industry and the richest of the local 
millionaires are Armenians A. Mantashev and A. Gukasov27.
23  N. Shavrov, A new threat to Russian affairs in the Caucasus: forthcoming sale 
of Mugan to non-Russians. S. Petersburg, 1911. P. 64-72. 
24  N. Shavrov, The Russian way to the Caucasus. S. Petersburg, 1883. 
25  Ditto. P. 53.
26  A. Budilovich, Can Russia give its suburbs to non-Russians? S. Petersburg, 1907
27  I. Kanadeyev, Essays about life in the Caucasus. S. Petersburg, 1902. P.5-33 
15
In the early 20th century, the unlawful and anti-Russian activi-
ties of the Armenians in the Caucasus were known to many. While 
pointing out these and other negative phenomena pertaining to the 
Armenians, prominent Russian expert on the Caucasus V. Velich-
ko wrote about their arrogance and cruelty towards the weak and 
servile sycophancy towards the more powerful, an amazing ability 
to advertise themselves and insatiable vanity. Velichko also point-
ed to the Armenians’ speculation with “Christianity” which they 
thought made them more privileged than their Muslim neighbors. 
Moreover, the Armenians believed that as “Christian” they were 
entitled to some benefits. Under this pretext, they controlled trade 
in the entire Caucasus. The Armenians are where there is a chance 
of making a profit. At the same time, they always have a grudge 
against others. V. Velichko also noted that every Russian war with 
its eastern neighbors increases and enriches Russia’s Armenian 
population. For instance, the oil boom in Baku made Armenians 
more powerful in economic and political affairs of the Caucasus. 
As a result, some Russians working in the Caucasus became de-
pendent on wealthy Armenians - they controlled banks and the 
Caucasus press. Besides, the Armenians of the South Caucasus, 
under pressure from Echmiadzin, revitalized the “Great Armenia” 
myth and, under the leadership of Dashnaktsutyun, even engaged 
in “revolutionary” propaganda on the territory of Russia. At the 
same time, they terrorize the local population. According to Ve-
lichko, “the horror of the Turkish massacre (the 1890s – M.M.) 
pales into insignificance in comparison with the cold-blooded Sa-
tanic cruelty of “civilized” Armenians in the deportation of Rus-
sians from the territories occupied at the cost of Russian blood”. 
The Muslim population of the South Caucasus, and indeed other 
places, is already caught in Armenian traps. The, Armenians buy 
the lands of Georgian princes, Azerbaijani agalars (men of wealth 
and status), and seize public properties. In fact, Armenian pro-
pagandists even opposed the settlement of Russian migrants on 
vacant lands in the South Caucasus28. V. Velichko concludes that 
Armenians have been de facto landlords in the Caucasus for 40 
years. In the absence of an Armenian statehood, the Armenian 
 
28  V. Velichko, The Caucasus. Russian affairs and inter-tribal points. P. 67-163
Role and importance of the Caucasus Armenians for Russia
16
Musa MARJANLI. Armenians. Russia. The Caucasus 
 
factor is supported and guided by the Armenian Church which 
puts “the secret political mission above religious”. When the Rus-
sian authorities sequestered the Echmiadzin property on 12 June 
1903 in an effort to forestall such activities, this was met with acts of 
terror, including an attempt on the life of Prince and Commander-
in-Chief in the Caucasus G. Golitsyn who initiated the sequester29.
Well-known Russian expert on the Caucasus M. Menshikov 
wrote30 that there was really no-one in charge of the Caucasus be-
cause the official Russian authorities, including Earl Vorontsov-
Dashkov, are heavily influenced by the Armenians. This is why 
Armenian “revolutionary” parties of Dashnaktsutyun and Gnchak 
feel absolutely free. Moreover, “any Armenian can finish a Rus-
sian secondary or higher school by hook or by crook and be sure 
to enjoy the rights of a public officer and introduce his alien views 
into our ruling class”. While indicating how influential Armenians 
have become both in the Caucasus and the Russian Empire as a 
whole, the author highlights that the attempt to take the Dashnaks 
to court for their terrorist activities in the Caucasus proved futile 
because the judiciary was also exposed to pressures from Arme-
nian terrorists. This is the consequence of the fact that Armenians 
are gradually taking charge of the Caucasus by seizing lands, 
money, trade and even the local administration. When the Arme-
nians complete their peaceful seizure of the Caucasus, Armenian 
patriots will get much closer to their final goal of establishing an 
Armenian state in the Caucasus, M. Menshikov writes. 
Taking into account these passages from M. Menshikov’s ob-
servations, let’s now point to a unique event in the 19th century 
Russian Empire relating to Armenians in public service. Russian 
General, Earl M. Loris-Melikov (1825-1888) served in the Cau-
casus, was in charge of the Ter region, participated in the Rus-
sian-Ottoman War of 1877-1878. Then he was governor-general 
of Astrakhan, Saratov, Samara and Kharkov. After an explosion 
in the Zimniy Dvorets (The Winter Palace) on 12 February 1880, 
he was appointed Chief of the Supreme Executive Commission 
 
29  Ditto. P. 142
30  M. Menshikov, A national Empire. M., An Imperial tradition, 2004. P. 200-201, 
204, 464-465.
17
 
 
established “to struggle against sedition”. Working in this capac-
ity, he received emergency authority: all supreme institutions of 
the Empire were subordinated to him. As a result, he “became 
a dictator”. After the commission was abolished, Loris-Melikov 
was appointed Minister of Internal Affairs of the Russian Empire. 
However, he was dismissed after the assassination of Emperor 
Alexander II on 1 March 1881 and was considered one of those 
responsible for the “1 March catastrophe”31.
Therefore, the Armenians have had considerable influence in 
Russia since then. Suffice it to enumerate their high-ranking rep-
resentatives who have been in the Russian/Soviet elite since the 
19th century. They are scattered around both vertically and hori-
zontally, and this is thanks not only to M. Loris-Melikov in the 19th 
century, but also A. Mikoyan in the 20th. 
Describing the Caucasus peoples, one of the founders of Eur-
asianism, Prince Trubetskoy, wrote in the early 20th century: “Ar-
menians are always easy to agree with. However, it would be a 
mistake to place stake on them. Economically strong and by con-
trolling economic affairs in the Caucasus, they also have the fea-
tures of a parasite nation. They are treated with aversion that quite 
often develops into hatred. To identify oneself with them would 
mean becoming an object of antipathy and hatred, too. The exam-
ple of a prerevolutionary period (early 20th century – M.M.) which 
left Russia alone with the Armenians and set other Caucasus peo-
ples against it must serve as a good lesson for the future”32.
Pointing to the Armenian radicals’ “persistence”, the outstand-
ing Azerbaijan playwright, state and political figure N. Nari-
manov, wrote in the early 20th century that there were two cat-
egories of members in the Dashnaktsutyun Party: Ottoman and 
Russian Armenians. Describing the situation in the Republic of 
Ararat, established on 28 May 1918 on the territories of the former 
Erivan Khanate and governed by the said party,  Narimanov ob-
served a difference in the political mentality of the two categories 
of Armenians: “While Russian Armenians (residents of the former 
 
31  New Brokgauz-Efron Encyclopedia. Vol. 24. S. Petersburg, 1915. Col. 912-914.
32  N. Trubetskoi, About peoples of the Caucasus // IRS-Heritage (Moscow), 2003. 
No. 7. P. 22
Role and importance of the Caucasus Armenians for Russia
18
Musa MARJANLI. Armenians. Russia. The Caucasus 
 
Russian Empire) seem to understand the objective state of things, 
realize that this practice is ruinous for the country…, Turkish Ar-
menians, on the contrary, are very belligerent and do not think 
about a negotiated solution to any problems. In fact, they are the 
ones who instigate different repressions and adventures… Turk-
ish Armenians are the leading force in Dashnaktsutyun, and, there 
fore, in the government”33.
This leads to the conclusion that Ottoman Armenians are more 
inclined to use the Armenian factor by force, including terror, than 
their fellow tribesmen. Naturally, the central role in this was played 
by Dashnaktsutyun whose activities were initially carried out on 
the territories of the Ottoman Empire. Therefore, while character-
izing the political image and “firmness” of Dashnaktsutyun, N. 
Narimanov pointed to a “omnivorous nature of the party”, its lack 
of principle and the anything goes attitude. Describing the activ-
ity of Dashnaks in general and in the Caucasus in particular, he 
wrote, “In the 30 years of their political life, Dashnaks have dem-
onstrated readiness to assume any color and wear any mask for 
the sake of their dream of a Great Armenia. The Dashnaks were 
regarded as a revolutionary party during the reign of Golitsyn, 
but later kissed the feet of Vorontsov-Dashkov and became ar-
dent counter-revolutionaries. The reason was Vorontsov’s prom-
ise to create a Great Armenia after the war. But when the Turks 
went on the offensive under Sarikamish and launched an attack 
on Tiflis, the scared Dashnak leader of Tiflis, Khatisov, started 
preparing grounds for friendship with the Turks: the Dashnaks 
have preserved this feature to the present day. If a Soviet system is 
established in the Caucasus now, Dashnaks will immediately 
change their color, become communists and want to take charge 
in Azerbaijan and Georgia”34.
Speaking about the “Great Armenia” myth in the ideology of 
Dashnaktsutyun, N. Narimanov pointed out that while leading 
the Republic of Ararat, the Dashnaks cast its population into many 
 
33  N. Narimanov, Selected works. Vol. 2. Baku, 1989. P. 323 
34  N.. Narimanov, Selected works. Vol. 2. P. 194-195. Golitsyn G. was the 
Commander-in-Chief in the Caucasus in 1897-1904; I. Vorontsov-Dashkov held the 
same post in 1905-1915.   
19
 
 
troubles. “It is no secret that this is the fault of the Dashnaks who 
have brought the unfortunate Armenian people to its current im-
passe by chanting ‘Hayastan, Hayastan’ all the time35. 
Therefore, the nature of Dashnaktsutyun’s actions invariably 
proves that it is extremely important for it to realize its goals us-
ing the Armenian factor. The last governor-general in the Cau-
casus, Prince Nikolai Nikolayevich Romanov, specifically high 
lighted “an uncomfortable element” in the region – the Armenian 
triad of the “church-party-Diaspora” and the Armenian factor. He 
said in a report to Emperor Nikolai II, “Politically, Armenians 
cause difficulties for regional authorities. Ethnically united, they, 
through their vast intelligentsia, never give up the political dream 
of an autonomous Armenia. …Having largely lost to their original 
ecclesiasticism and religiousness, Armenians hold their Catholicos 
in high esteem as a symbol of their national ideals. This is why the 
Catholicos is always at the center of political action and is inevita-
bly affected by secular leaders of the Armenian public opinion”36. 
He also noted that “Russian Armenians” were heavily influenced 
by Armenian committees in Europe and America, which “support 
the political dreams of an Armenian autonomy” thus “whipping 
up anti-government and even revolutionary sentiments among 
Russian Armenians”37.
35  N. Narimanov, Selected works. Vol. 2. P. 216.
36  Report by Prince Nikolai Nikolayevich to Emperor Nikolai II on the historical 
situation in the Caucasus on September 23, 1916 // The Caucasus and the Russian Empire: 
projects, ideas, illusions and reality. Early 19th – early  20th centuries. S. Petersburg, 2005. 
P. 551.
37  Report by Prince Nikolai Nikolayevich to Emperor Nikolai II on the historical 
situation in the Caucasus on September 23, 1916 // The Caucasus and the Russian Empire: 
projects, ideas, illusions and reality. Early 19th – early 20th centuries. S. Petersburg, 2005. 
P. 551. 
Role and importance of the Caucasus Armenians for Russia
20
ARMENIANS’ ATTEMPTS TO REALIZE THE “GREAT 
ARMENIA” MYTH IN THE CAUCASUS
Before the mass migration of the Armenians to the Caucasus 
(first third of the 19th century), the situation in the region was 
relatively stable. To improve the Russian system of local gov-
ernance, the Caucasus Governorate38 was established in Janu-
ary 1786. The security of Russian estates in the Caucasus was 
bolstered by the opening of Georgian military road from Vla 
dikavkaz to Tiflis (via the Daryal Pass) in 1799. Russia’s further 
military and political activity in the region was marked by new 
territorial gains. After seizing the entire South Caucasus in the 
first third of the 19th century, Russia got rid of Azerbaijani and 
Georgian state bodies and established districts instead. At the 
same time, Russia embarked on a mass resettlement of Ottoman 
and Iranian Armenians to the region. It was the territories of the 
local Muslims, i.e. Azerbaijanis and Meskhetian Turks, that were 
mainly used in the resettlement. 
The appearance of a significant mass of Armenians in the 
South Caucasus led to a revival of the “Great Armenia” myth in 
the minds of their leaders. The Russian Empire, for its part, was 
also interested in using the Armenian satellite factor both in the 
Caucasus proper and against its arch foes in the struggle for the 
region – the Ottoman and Iranian states. Therefore, it had no ob-
jection to backing the “Great Armenia” myth in word but did not 
make any effort to implement it. 
While looking at “the Great Armenia issue” in retrospect, it can 
observe that although the Russian Empire fell apart about a cen-
tury ago, the Ottoman Empire has also ceased to exist and there 
 
38  N. Mokievsky-Zubok, The Caucasus and Caucasian viceroys // S. Esadze 
Historical note on governance in the Caucasus. Tiflis, 1907. Vol. 1
21
 
 
is no USSR either, the “Great Armenia” myth still lives on. Its ide-
ologists are not giving up attempts to materialize this obsession. 
Armenian claims on their current neighbors are among the nu-
merous consequences of this obsession. This explains the nature of 
conflicts, because shortly after settlement to a territory, Armenian 
scholars start claiming that it originally belonged to them39. Arme-
nian leaders follow the principle that “possession is equal to nine 
tenths of ownership”.
In this connection, let’s refer to the events of 1918-1920 which 
characterize a standard behavior or a syndrome the Armenian 
triad of the “church-party-Diaspora” has followed for decades. 
After the collapse of the triune Caucasus Democratic Federa-
tive Republic (Azerbaijan, Armenia, Georgia) on 26 May 1918, as 
early as on 4 June of the same year the “independent” Republic 
of Ararat, led by the Dashnaktsutyun Party, signed a “peace and 
friendship treaty” with the Ottoman Empire. Under the treaty, the 
territory of the Republic was defined as covering 4,000 British sq. 
miles, i.e. 10,000 sq. km40. These were the Erivan and Echmiadzin 
districts, i.e. the lands of the former Erivan Khanate of Azerbaijan. 
In the same year, winner-states of World War I “presented” the 
Republic of Ararat with the Kars district of the former Caucasus 
Governorate of the Russian Empire that broke up in March 1917 
and a part of the Erivan province, i.e. also Azerbaijani lands. As a 
result, the territory of the Republic of Ararat reached 17,500 British 
 
 
39  A. Akopyan, P. Muradyan, K. Yuzbashyan, To the study of the history of 
Caucasian Albania // Historic and philological magazine of the Academy of Sciences of 
Armenia, Yerevan. 1987. No. 3; I. Chavchavadze, Armenian scholars and crying stones. 
Tiflis, 1902; V. Velichko, Russian affairs and inter-tribal points. P. 107-108; R. Karagezov 
Metamorphoses of collective memory in Russia and Central Caucasus. Baku, 2005. Ch. 
4/2. G. Marhulia, Armenian separatism in the South Caucasus // Dirchelish. 20th century, 
Baku, 2006. No. 104-105; S. Minasyan, The social and economic situation in Javakheti. // 
Central Asia and the Caucasus. Lulea, Sweden, 2005. No. 3; V. Ramishvili, An Armenian-
Georgian dispute: Javakheti or Javakhk // The Caucasus and Globalization. Sweden, 
2007. Vol. 1.   
40  T. Swientochowski, Russian Azerbaijan, 1905-1920 // Khazar. Baku. 1990. No. 
3 P. 33; V. Gurko-Kryazhin, The Armenian matter // The Big Soviet Encyclopedia. 1st 
edition. Vol. 3. M., 1926. Column 436. 
Armenians` attempts to realize the “great Armenia” myth in the Caucasus
22
Musa MARJANLI. Armenians. Russia. The Caucasus 
 
sq. miles41, i.e. 43,750 sq. km. However, “insatiable Dashnaks laid 
claims to Akhalkalaki and Borchalo territories, which were part of 
Georgia, and to Karabakh, Nakhchivan and the south of the for-
mer Elisabethpol Province which were also part of Azerbaijan”42. 
Therefore, in December 1918, the Republic of Ararat started a war 
with the Democratic Republic of Georgia which was only stopped 
after British interference. Shortly afterwards, however, Erevan be-
gan a long and bloody war with the Azerbaijan Democratic Re-
public. Only the appearance of the 11th Red Army of the Russian 
Soviet Federative Socialist Republic in the South Caucasus ended 
the hostilities, but the region ended up becoming part of Soviet 
Russia.
Armenian claims to Turkey, which was home to hundreds of 
thousands of Armenians living in Eastern Anatolia, are no less sig-
nificant. Interestingly, there are no claims to the Islamic Republic 
of Iran – a “friend” of the Republic of Armenia. Territorial claims 
to neighbors territories were stepped up in the latter half of the 
20th century. The “Union of Patriots” emerged in 1956 and the “Ar-
menian Youth Union” in 1963. Their main goal was to “revive Ar-
menian statehood in full” but the meaning of this definition and 
the part of the world in which they planned to carry it out was 
not spelled out. But the territorial claims to Azerbaijan, Georgia, 
Turkey and even Russia shed light on Armenian aspirations to cre-
ate a “Great Armenia” at the expense of their neighbors. The US 
Armenian National Committee demanded in 1945 that “the terri 
tories forcibly occupied by Turkey”43 be returned to Soviet Arme-
nia. With this aim, the “Party of national reunion” was established 
in Yerevan in 1967. Its key demand was the revival of the “Great 
Armenia” which envisaged annexation of the eastern part of Asia 
Minor, the Republic of Armenia, Nakhchivan, Nagorno-Karabakh, 
Javakheti, Borchali, Stavropol and Krasnodar Territories, Rostov 
 
 
41  V. Gurko-Kryazhin, The Armenian matter // The Big Soviet Encyclopedia. 1st 
edition. Vol. 3. M., 1926. Column 437 
42  Ditto.
43  V. Shnirelman, Wars of memory. Myths, identity and politics in The Caucasus. 
M., 2003. P.60.
23
 
 
and Astrakhan Districts, all under the Armenian tricolor44. And 
again no claims to Iran. 
Without waiting for the actual transfer of the listed territories 
to them, Armenian scholars went ahead and included them in this 
virtual geographical space on the maps of “Great Armenia”45. 
All this was not happening unbeknownst to Moscow, for the 
Kremlin wanted to capitalize on the situation after the Soviet vic-
tory in World War II. However, allies in the anti-Hitler coalition, 
the USA and Great Britain, had their own plans for the Muslim 
East, including Turkey, and did not want the existing political and 
territorial status quo to change. Nonetheless, Armenian scholars 
continue publishing researches in an attempt to prove the Arme-
nian origin of the said territories.
One of such “researches” is the work by an outstanding Arme-
nian scholar, Academician G. Kapantsian. He suggests that “the 
cradle of Armenians” is Hayas, “the territory of Hayk”, a mytho-
logical father of the Armenian ethnicity, i.e. Eastern Anatolia - in 
other words, Turkey46. 
When it turned out that they were highly unlikely to receive 
anything of Turkish territory, Armenian scholars ran to another 
extreme. They “went” eastwards and linked the ancient past of 
their people to Soviet Armenia, i.e. to the Azerbaijani historical 
district of Chukhur-Saad where Azerbaijani khanates of Erivan 
and Nakhchivan existed until 1828. Armenian scholars led by 
well-known geographer and historian, Academician S. Yeremi 
an, even provided maps to substantiate their claim of Armenia 
 
44  V. Rakachev // www.kuban.ru; M. Logina, Migration and migrants of Stavropol 
// www.rocich.ru/article/63; S. Minasyan, The social and economic situation in Javakheti 
// Central Asia and the Caucasus. Lulea, Sweden, 2005. No. 3; V. Shnirelman, Wars of 
memory. Myths, identity and politics in The Caucasus. P. 48; G. Bagdykov, Brief history 
of Armenians of Don // www.hnd.rosden.ru.
45  S. Yeremyan, Atlas and book of “History of the Armenian people”. Yerevan, 
1951; Ditto, Armenia according to “Ashharacuic” (Armenian geography of the 7th 
century); S. Ayvazyan. Historical maps of Armenia. Yerevan, 2003; A. Danielyan. 
Armenia. A Historical Atlas. M., 2003; Hewsen R., Armenia: A historical Atlas. Chicago; 
London: The University of Chicago Press, 2001; Hovhannisyan R, Atlas of Armenian 
History. Yerevan, 2007.
46  G. Kapancyan, Hayas – Armenians’ cradle. Yerevan, 1947. 
Armenians` attempts to realize the “great Armenia” myth in the Caucasus
24
Musa MARJANLI. Armenians. Russia. The Caucasus 
 
stretching “from the sea to the sea”, i.e. claims were laid to territo-
ries in the triangle of Caspian-Black-Mediterranean seas. In doing 
so, the medieval tradition of applying the definition of a “sea” to 
any body of water, including lakes, was ignored. For example, a 
well-known 15th century historian and geographer, Hafiz-I Abru, 
who served great conqueror Gurkhan (ruler) Timur and authored 
a research on general history “Zubdat at-Tavarih” (“The Creams 
of Chronicles”), wrote that lakes were called “seas” in his time. 
For example, Turks call the present Lake Sevan “Goycha-deniz”, 
i.e. the “Blue Sea”. Seas were considered “oceans” at the time. 
Therefore, the “Great Armenia” from the sea to the sea must have 
implied the territory within the triangle of the “Van-Sevan-Urmia” 
lakes at best. 
Therefore, the “Great Armenia” myth, and indeed the whole 
Armenian history, has long been inculcated in the collective mem-
ory of this people. This is exactly why “Armenian historiography” 
has a comparatively long tradition and is well equipped with his-
torical narratives47. As a result, there are several periods in the vir-
tual and mythological history of the Armenian people, not Arme-
nia proper. 
First is the 19th century when great efforts were made to sub-
stantiate a great history which, what is very important, is associ-
ated with Asia Minor. Armenian scholars did not lay claims to the 
Caucasus at the time. The reason was that the Caucasus was part 
of the Russian Empire where most Armenians lived. Therefore, if 
Armenian patriotism means “love” of Russia, hatred towards the 
Turks and neutrality towards the Persians, then they should cer-
tainly refrain from claims to the Caucasus. In fact, according to a 
contemporary author, “Russophilia in Armenia is the consequence 
of loneliness in the face of strong Muslim neighbors”48. Strange as 
it may seem, the conclusion is that if Armenians have a new goal 
tomorrow, they will not fail to “sacrifice” Russia.
The second period is the collapse of the Russian Empire and 
 
47  R. Karagezov, Metamorphoses of collective memory in Russia and Central 
Caucasus. P. 165.
48  V. Shnirelman, Wars of memory. Myths, identity and politics in The Caucasus. 
P.48. 
25
 
 
the establishment of the Republic of Ararat (1918-1920), the first 
Armenian state in the Caucasus, a place where an Armenian state 
had never existed before. The then leadership of the Republic, the 
Dashnaktsutyun Party, set it against neighbors: it started a war 
with Azerbaijan and Georgia in order to seize Karabakh, Zange-
zur, Nakhchivan, Borchali, Samtskhe-Javakheti, and Tao-Klardjeti.
The third period is the Soviet time (1920-1991) when claims 
were made to Turkey over Eastern Anatolia.
Fourth is a post-Soviet period starting in 1991 and still 
ongoing. It is called “innovation” – Armenian scholars de-
clared the Armenian people “autochthons” of the Caucasus. Con-
sequences of this announcement include:
•	 war with Azerbaijan which started in 1988, i.e. in the 
USSR time, and ended in 1994, when Armenia and 
Azerbaijan were independent republics;
•	 declaration of independence by self-styled Nagorno-
Karabakh republic;
•	 occupation of seven Azerbaijani districts;
•	 claims to Georgian regions of Samtskhe-Javakheti and 
Kvemo Kartli (Borchali);
•	 the demand of a “cultural autonomy” for ethnic Arme-
nians of Krasnodar Territory of Russia, i.e. Armenia’s 
strategic partner.
    All four periods have a few common features:
•	 “Armenia’s unending pain over a lack of an independent 
state for the greater part of the middle ages and afterwards 
until 1918”49;
•	 “Odd relationship between actual historical events on the 
one hand and the way they were interpreted through nar-
rations of various cultures and traditions on the other, 
and, finally, how this affected the formation of a collective 
memory”50;
•	 This memory was shaped as something “eternal and 
 
49  V. Shnirelman, Wars of memory. Myths, identity and politics in The Caucasus. 
P. 98.
50  R. Karagezov, Metamorphoses of the collective memory in Russia and Central 
Caucasus. P. 315-316.
Armenians` attempts to realize the “great Armenia” myth in the Caucasus
26
Musa MARJANLI. Armenians. Russia. The Caucasus 
 
irrational” because of the initiative and contribution of the 
“church-party-Diaspora” triad;
•	 It is the “church-party-Diaspora” triad that has largely 
molded the collective memory of the Armenian ethnicity, 
and this had to be done in the conditions of a lack of an 
Armenian state;
•	 Under such circumstances, the Armenian Church, the old-
est component of the triad existing for over 1,600 years, was 
at the forefront. It is the Church that has preserved the eth-
nic memory, language, culture and history of the Armenian 
people. This is why its the role and contribution are stated 
 
under Article 8.1 of the Constitution of the Republic of Ar-
menia and the Law “On relations of the Republic of Arme-
nia and the Armenian Apostolic Church”51. Therefore, the 
slogans, propositions and programs of the Dashnaktsutyun 
Party and the Armenian Diaspora rest on the ideas of  the 
Armenian Church.
As is evident, the Armenians have been trying since the start of 
the 20th century to create a “Great Armenia” in the Caucasus and 
neighboring territories. However, they seem to forget K. Marx’s 
prophetic words that history repeats itself, first as tragedy, then as 
farce. In the case of Yerevan, it repeats itself as bloody farce.
In this connection, it is worth recalling the words by prominent 
Azerbaijan politician, playwright and first leader of Soviet Azer-
baijan, N. Narimanov. “I remember several Menshevik leaders, in-
cluding Jordania, Gegechkori and others, coming to Ramishvili’s 
office in Tbilisi in the summer of 1917. We were discussing state-
ments by Armenian nationalists in St. Petersburg in support of the 
“Great Armenia” idea. They demanded control over the territories 
of Azerbaijan, Georgia and Russia, up until Rostov. I was asked, 
“What is your opinion?” I said, “This will make our people think 
 
 
51  The Constitution of the Republic of Armenia. November 27, 2005 //www.
president.am/library/rus/?task=41; Yerej Melikyan V., E. Mkrtchyan, the Republic of 
Armenia. Religion // Central Eurasia. 2007. Analytical annual. Lovene, Sweden, 2008. P. 
75.
27
 
 
about a ‘Great Azerbaijan’ and yours about a ‘Great Georgia’.”52
N. Narimanov’s view is confirmed by the opinion of a well-
known Georgian historian, Academician I. Javakhishvili. He 
wrote of a fantastic map of Armenia published in Istanbul in 1918 
on which it was “stretching from the Black to the Caspian Sea, 
from a place east of Samsun to the Mediterranean Sea, from north 
of Seleucia to Ardebil. The border of this ends by the Caspian Sea. 
Batumi, Akhaltsikhe, Miskheta and even Tbilisi are shown as part 
of Armenia, while Georgia represents a narrow strip. Yet another 
map of Armenia was published in Istanbul at about the same time. 
Armenia is shown as a huge state with the same boundaries. It in-
cluded a large part of Turkey – Trapezund, Ordu, Kesaria, Adana, 
Edessa. Even the north of Persia, including Tabriz and Ardebil (i.e. 
South Azerbaijan – M.M.), are shows as parts of Armenia. In com 
parison with the fantastic map, Georgia is slightly bigger: its bor-
der on the Black Sea begins south of Batumi and north of Makriali. 
Imerkhevi is shown as part of Armenia, Akhaltsikhe of Georgia, 
while Akhalkalaki is within the Armenian borders. From here the 
border runs north, and this line is shown as the state border be-
tween Georgia and Armenia. 
Then, the Armenian border runs along the Mtkvari (the Ala-
zan River – M.M.). Ganja is shown as Armenian territory as well. 
Obviously, this new Armenian state was not based on the eth-
nographic principle. Neither does the scheme have a historical 
foundation, because Armenia, which ceased to exist politically 
after the 11th century, has never had such borders. Authors of the 
map are unlikely to have commonsense either. A high-level Ar-
menian government delegation tabled the map at the Paris Peace 
Conference on the results of World War II and asked for approv-
al of the Armenian state with the boundaries shown... However, 
the false nature of the map and of the statistical data provided 
by the Armenian delegation were quickly exposed. This under-
mined the confidence of French, British and American representa-
tives in the Armenian delegation... The plan of a great Armenia 
 
 
 
52  I. Dubinsky-Mukhadze, Narimanov. M.,1977. P. 218.
Armenians` attempts to realize the “great Armenia” myth in the Caucasus
28
Musa MARJANLI. Armenians. Russia. The Caucasus 
 
burst like a soap bubble”53. Nevertheless, the territorial appetite of 
the Armenian grew even more in the 21st century. It is now the 
territories from the Pyrenees in the west through Central Asia in 
the east and from steppes in southern Russia in the north to North 
Africa and the Persian Gulf in the south54 that are considered to 
have been part of “Armenia” in the 6th century B.C. 
Here is the opinion of another Russian political analyst S. Lou-
rie: “A distinctive feature of Armenian political consciousness is a 
constant analysis of all external factors of Armenian existence and 
the development of a geographical map on this basis. Modern po-
litical mythology covers Armenia’s historical experience of the last 
century, i.e. a period of incessant geopolitical cataclysms which 
developed into colossal historical tragedies for the Armenian 
people. Therefore, the Armenian way of political thinking is heav-
ily dependent on geopolitical interests. Every experience of ex-
ternal contacts was reflected, interpreted and incorporated into a 
myth. Therefore, the Armenian world outlook represents some sort 
of a geopolitical picture of the world”55. The author writes further, 
“There is a phenomenon which can be described ‘political mythol-
ogy’. It represents a legend about the history of people which was 
conjured up deliberately, has specific authors… and determines a 
people’s attitude towards the present, primarily towards politics. 
The Armenians had this legend in the late 19th century. Its authors 
are writers and analysts Artsruni Grigor, Raffi, Leo and Mkrtich 
Khrimyan, who were arduously engaged in promoting Armenian 
history focusing on its heroic aspects”. The said persons have 
earned quite a reputation in both Armenian history and Arme-
nianism in general. They “made history complete, albeit mytho-
logical, because judging by their researches, Armenian history is 
53  I. Javakhishvili, The report to the government of Georgia. 1926 // The Georgian 
State Historical Archive (hereinafter GSHA). F. 476. D. 6. L. 82-111 (in Georgian) // 
Quotation by D. Berdzenishvili, Akhalkalaki in Javakheti //Artanuji. Tbilisi, 1998. No. 
7. P. 68-69; G. Marhulia, Armenian separatism in the South Caucasus // Dirchelish. 21st 
century. Baku, 2006. No. 104/105. P. 101-113. 
54  S. Ayvazian, Historical maps of Armenia. Map 27. 
55  S. Lourie, Armenian political mythology and its impact on the politics of 
Armenia and Nagorno-Karabakh // http://etnopsyhology.narod.ru/svlourie/articles/
arm-geopolit.htm.
29
 
 
nothing other than a series of heroic and beautiful legends”56.
There is a very important aspect in S. Lourie’s observa-
tions: only one of the mentioned Armenians is a historian – Leo 
(penname Babakhyan A., 1860-1932), a native of Shusha and au-
thor of publications on problems of Armenian history57. As is the 
case with the other mentioned Armenians, he was one of the au 
thors of myths about a “Great Armenia”. An active proponent of 
Armenianism, he believed that the Armenian ethnicity is superior 
to others. The others on the list are not even historians. Artsruni 
Grigor (1845-1892) is the author of a number of stories and plays, a 
founder and editor of the Mshak (The Worker) newspaper in 1872-
1892. He has authored a number of political publications58. Raffi  
is the penname of A. Melik-Akopian (1835-1888), a native of Iran. 
Judging by his surname, he is a descendant of Caucasus Albanian 
Christians resettled by Shah Abbas I  Safavid from Karabakh to 
the depths of Iran in the 17th century. He has also written a num-
ber of novels, including David-Bek and Samvel. Through the nov-
els he promoted the ideas of national liberation and anti-Ottoman 
sentiments, emphasizing that only an armed struggle could lead 
to the people’s liberation. Raffi expressed the essence of his work 
through the following phrase: “I write a historical novel not for the 
narration of historical facts, but for the modern movement I am in-
terested in”59. For this reason, Raffi’s novels are quite popular with 
Armenian nationalists. In fact, he can claim to hold a special place 
in the “church-party-Diaspora” triad. Mkrtich I Khrimyan was the 
Catholicos of Echmiadzin in 1892-1907. When the property of Ech-
miadzin was sequestrated by the decision of Russian authorities 
56  S. Lourie, Armenian political mythology and its impact on the politics of 
Armenia and Nagorno-Karabakh // http://etnopsyhology.narod.ru/svlourie/articles/
arm-geopolit.htm; ditto. Historical ethnology. M.,2004. P. 459.
57  Ani. 2nd edition. Yerevan, 1963; The Kingdom of Van. Tiflis, 1915; History 
of Armenia: In 3 volumes. Tiflis-Yerevan, 1917-1947; Griror Artsruni. Vol. 1-3. Tiflis, 
1903-1905; The Armenian matter. Tiflis, 1906.
58  The eastern matter. Tiflis, 1876; Turkish Armenians’ economic situation. M., 
1880.
59  G.. Sarkisyan, K. Khudaverdyan, K. Yuzbashyan, Ancestry of Hayk. Essay 
on history and culture of Armenia from ancient times to the formation of the Third 
Republic. Yerevan. 1998. P. 188.
Armenians` attempts to realize the “great Armenia” myth in the Caucasus
30
Musa MARJANLI. Armenians. Russia. The Caucasus 
 
dated 12 June 1903, the Armenian spiritual leader anathematized 
the ruling house of the Romanovs, what characterizes him as “a 
ardent Armenian patriot and political figure”60. 
The veracity of statements by Armenian historians, writers 
and clergy, in particular those mentioned above, is concisely but 
effectively described by another Armenian author S. Mamulov: 
“There is an Armenian myth, an Armenian way of interpreting 
history. The key symbol of the Armenian myth is the level of civi-
lization, i.e. the positioning of Armenians as an ancient nation, a 
nation possessing antique culture and spreading its civilizing in-
fluence to other nations. The second most important element is the 
introduction of Armenians as Christians and a Christian outpost 
in the East. The third element is the portraying of Armenians as 
helpless victims of uncivilized followers of different faiths (Arme-
nian people are destined to suffer like Jesus Christ himself)”61.
Further, according to French historian Marc Ferro, “works” by 
the said Armenian scholars “provide a naïve and straightforward 
account of history. There are good and bad people, traitors and 
heroes. Armenia, which has suffered many defeats, exalts its own 
history and portrays itself as a martyr. Divided, broke, persecut-
ed by the Turks and isolated from the rest of the world, Arme-
nia makes its own history resembling a golden legend. This his-
tory features giants and powerful men who overpower and crush 
bulls. One can hardly imagine this people being defeated and los-
ing statehood. An Armenian history book for children published 
by Armenian Benedictine monks in Venice in 1979 depicts Armenian 
misfortunes so skillfully that one can’t understand when Armenia was 
actually independent and when it was ruled by foreigners… The 
book dwells upon both legend and reality even when referring to 
periods studied by scientists quite well”62. 
Other researches mentioned by M. Ferro include a publication 
 
 
 
60  V. Velichko, The Caucasus. Russian affairs and inter-tribal points. P. 103.
61  S. Mamulov, A wonderful people from Wonderland (Armenia and Armenians 
– a unique phenomenon of the civilized world). Book 4. M., 2005. P. 312.
62  M. Ferro, How the Past is Taught to Children. M., 1992. P. 312.
31
 
 
by Armenian author S. Mamulov63. This is not just a continuation 
of tales and myths about the Armenian ethnicity, a “pioneer” of 
all undertakings and achievements of mankind in the past and the 
present. This is a modernized Armenian tale about human sources 
and civilization that appeared, has been preserved and fostered 
only thanks to a “wonderful people from Wonderland”. It is not 
our goal to comment on what S. Mamulov has attributed to his 
“wonderful people”. We can only observe that he sees an Arme-
nian trace even where it is not possible by definition: for example, 
in Ancient Egypt, in the genealogy of outstanding representatives 
of the Russian nation, in the study of names.
Let’s cite a few passages from S. Mamulov’s “research” (by pre-
serving the style and orthography of the author) that will hope-
fully allow us to develop an idea about the essence of his work 
sacrificed on the altar of Armenianism:
•	 Armenians are “recognized leaders” in the art of 
survival;
•	 Armenians have a long memory;
•	 Armenians can create anything from nothing;
•	 Armenians always want to surprise others; 
Every Armenian is a merchant at heart, by nature, 
passion and inclination;
•	 The Armenian alphabet is much more progressive 
than any other;
•	 The world’s first secular theatre was established in 
Armenia;
•	 First human prostitution institutions existed in an-
cient pagan temples of Armenia and Greece; 
•	 The Armenian language is the most ancient of all 
human languages;
•	 Ekaterina II considered Armenians a very industri 
 
 
63  S. Mamulov, A wonderful people from Wonderland (Armenia and Armenians 
– a unique phenomenon of the civilized world). Book 1. M,: Grenada, 1993; ditto. Book 
2. M.: Grenada, 1996; ditto. Book 3. M.: Grenada, 2000; ditto. Book 4. M.: Grenada, 2005; 
ditto. Book 5. M.: Grenada, 2007; ditto. Book 6. M.: Grenada, 2009. Note: all the editions 
are similar; the only difference is in the additions and definitions (author’s annotation).  
Armenians` attempts to realize the “great Armenia” myth in the Caucasus
32
Musa MARJANLI. Armenians. Russia. The Caucasus 
 
ous people and settled them in places where cities 
were to be built;
•	 Armenians held senior posts in L. Beria’s team;
•	 People from the Wonderland are truly wonderful;
•	 Armenians are one of the first peoples to emerge 
on the map of the ancient world;
•	 Armenian character … It has brought and still 
brings so many bitter moments and misfortunes to 
the Armenians;
•	 Armenians like hurting and humiliating each oth-
er; 
•	 Armenians suffer from self-admiration;
•	 Armenia is among the worst countries in the world 
for the rate of population decrease – the number 
of people who have left the country since 1991 ex-
ceeds 2 million, i.e. more than half of the country’s 
total (3.5 million);
•	 Armenian hill-men are Caucasus mountain Arme-
nians or Circassian Armenians (Muslims);
•	 Armenian Muslims are Hopa Hemşinli who have 
preserved the language and identity; 
•	 Armenian masochism is the cult of suffering typi-
cal of Armenians;
•	 Armenian world is an Armenian way of interpret-
ing history; 
•	 There were a lot of Armenians in Stalin’s entourage; 
•	 The Hyksos (proto-Armenian foreign rulers) ruled 
Egypt from 1710 to 1560 B.C.
•	 Nefertiti, princess of Egypt, was one of the most 
beautiful women of the ancient world;
•	 Armenians were the most numerous and dominant 
people of the Byzantine Empire; 
•	 Gaius Julius Caesar (100-44 B.C.), Augustus (63 
B.C.), Traianus (53-117), Gaius Aurelius Valerius 
Diocletianus (243-313) are of Armenian origin;
•	 In 1929-1932, the Hermitage Museum of St. Peters-
burg sold out a part of its collection. Gulbenkian, 
33
 
 
an Armenian living in Paris, became owner of the 
collection;
•	 The Duduk is a unique Armenian wind instrument; 
•	 Pop star Lolita (Milavskaya) was raised by an Ar-
menian stepfather;
•	 Shalakho is an Armenian humorous dance; 
•	 Tabaka (chicken flattened and grilled on charcoal) 
is an Armenian dish;
•	 Armenian women on the thrones of different states: 
Nefertiti (Egypt), Helene and Salome (Georgia) 
and Nur Jahan (India).
Thus, the Armenian collective memory, historical researches, 
publications and fiction are all intended by Armenians and the 
“church-party-Diaspora” triad to work for the past and present 
ideology of the Armenians and Armenianism, for their historical 
and territorial myths where the Caucasus is always at the centre. 
Armenians` attempts to realize the “great Armenia” myth in the Caucasus
34
ARMENIANS’ KARABAKH SYNDROME:
BACKGROUND AND REALIZATION
The foundation of the syndrome was laid in the first third of 
the 19th century, when the Russian Empire started organized settle-
ment of Ottoman and Iranian Armenians on Azerbaijani territories 
in the South Caucasus. They occupied the territories of the liqui-
dated Azerbaijani khanates of Nakhchivan and Erivan which were 
renamed into the Armenian region in 1828. In 1849, the region was 
named the Erivan province. In 1918-1920, the Republic of Ararat 
governed by the Dashnaktsutyun Party appeared on the same ter-
ritory. This is how a previously unknown politicized notion of the 
“Caucasian Armenia” emerged. It embodied an Armenian state in 
Asia Minor that had been lost four times before - in the 6th, 9th, 11th 
and 14th centuries64. At the same time, the Armenian-Azerbaijani 
confrontation, heavily fuelled supported from the outside, began. 
It can be classified as a 100-year-long Armenian- Azerbaijani war 
initiated by external forces. The Armenian triad of the “church-
party-Diaspora”, still dreaming of the “Great Armenia” myth, 
took an active part in the developments.
The 100-year-long Armenian-Azerbaijani war is an extensive 
campaign with “cold” and “hot” phases. The “cold” phase con-
sists of different Armenian would-be researches whereby claims 
are made to Azerbaijani lands. Another form is the regular ap-
peals to Moscow asking for the transfer of Nagorno-Karabakh to 
Armenia. “Hot” phases occur at the time of global or regional cat-
aclysms or when the Armenians become independent yet again. It 
 
64  K. Yuzbashyan, Armenian states of the times of Badratids and Byzantine of the 
9th-11th centuries. P.4-5, 170; G. Sarkisyan, K. Khudaverdyan, K. Yuzbashyan, Ancestry of 
Hayk. Essay on history and culture of Armenia from ancient times to the formation of 
the Third Republic. P. 69, 76, 78, 90.
35
 
 
is at these moments that the Armenian triad, believing that this is 
the moment of truth for reviving the “Great Armenia” obsession, 
becomes “spontaneously” but synchronically active. And aggres 
sion against neighboring states comes to the foreground.
This is what happened during the First Russian Revolution 
of 1905-1907. It followed major depression in the Russian Empire 
that affected all spheres of life: political, social, economic, confes-
sional and ethnic. In order to prevent a pandemic collapse, the 
authorities took a number of drastic measures, including ethnic 
relations. This resulted in a genocide of the Azerbaijanis executed 
by Armenian militants instigated by the triad. The first outbreak 
of the genocide was registered in Baku in February 1905, then in 
the summer and autumn of the same year; and then in Baku, Elisa-
bethpol and Erivan provinces in 1906. The genocide of Azerbai-
janis was also perpetrated after World War One in the wake of 
the establishment of the Republic of Ararat which waged unde-
clared wars with the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic (ADR) over 
Nagorno-Karabakh and Nakhchivan, with the emerging Republic 
of Turkey over “Turkish Armenia” and with the Democratic Re-
public of Georgia over Javakheti and Borchali. This was accom-
panied by the first deportation and assaults on the Azerbaijanis 
in the Republic of Ararat. The campaign was orchestrated by the 
ruling Dashnaktsutyun Party whose punitive detachments were 
implementing a plan on the extermination of the Azerbaijanis. 
Stepan Shaumyan, who headed Soviet power in Baku in 1917-
1918, contributed a lot to the genocide. On 31 March 1918, a mas-
sacre was unleashed against Azerbaijanis by the Dashnaks, Baku 
Bolsheviks and the Armenian corps of the Russian Army in the 
Caucasus65. 
At about the same time, the Republic of Ararat supported by 
the  Armenian Diaspora stepped up activities against the ADR. As 
a result, due to a major anti-Azerbaijani campaign unfolded by 
the Armenian lobby in France, the official delegation of the ADR 
was four months late for the Paris Peace Conference on the results 
 
65  History of Azerbaijan in documents and publications. Baku, 1990. P. 233; 
History of Azerbaijan. Baku: Elm (Science), 1995. P. 349; Swientochowski T. Russian 
Azerbaijan, 1905-1920. Cambridge, 1985. P. 41. 
Armenians` Karabakh syndrome: backgound and realization
36
Musa MARJANLI. Armenians. Russia. The Caucasus 
 
of World War One66. Moreover, there was global anti-Azerbaijani 
propaganda. The Armenian community of the USA was lobby-
ing the interests of the Republic of Ararat and distributing anti- 
Azerbaijani leaflets to different institutions, including the White 
House. US Congressman W. Chandler wrote to A. Topchibashev, 
leader of the ADR Parliament who was heading the Azerbai-
jani delegation to the Paris Conference, that “US Armenians are 
strongly opposed to the idea of an independent Azerbaijan”67. The 
same community succeeded in delaying the issue of visas for an 
Azerbaijani delegation to the USA following the refusal of Baku 
“to carry goods for the Armenians” through the territory of the 
ADR68.
The deportation of Azerbaijanis from the Caucasian Armenia 
continued in the Soviet time, too this time on a “lawful” basis. 
Thus, Stalin signed two identical decrees of the USSR Council of 
Ministers on 23 December 1947 and 10 March 1948 “On the reset-
tlement of Azerbaijani collective farmers from the Armenian SSR 
to the Kura-Aras lowland of the Azerbaijan SSR”. 
The Karabakh problem has “cold” and “hot” phases, too. The 
former were made up of Yerevan’s official appeals to Moscow, 
which eventually led to the establishment of the Nagorno-Kara-
bakh Autonomous Region (NKAR) in 1923. However, Armenian 
claims did not end at that. In Soviet years, the Armenian SSR put 
forward 16 proposals on renaming the NKAR into the Armenian 
NKAR and 45 on the NKAR’s right to join the Armenian SSR69. The 
Kremlin authorities invited M. Bagirov, the then Azerbaijani lead-
er, to express his opinion on the problem. On 10 December 1945, 
M. Bagirov wrote in his response: the Armenization of Nagorno-
Karabakh occurred after the Russian Empire occupied Azerbaijan 
in the first third of the 19th century. The present NKAR was part of 
Azerbaijan’s Karabakh khanate with the center of Shusha. During 
 
66  A. Topchibashev, Diplomatic talks in Istanbul (1918-1919). Baku, 1994. P. 144-
145. 
67  History of Azerbaijan in documents and publications. P. 233.
68  Ditto. P. 236.
69  A. Shevyakin, The mystery of the collapse of the USSR. History of conspiracies 
and treacheries. M., 2004. P. 30. 
37
 
 
the years of the ADR, Nagorno-Karabakh was part of the Kara-
bakh governorate with the center of Shusha. On 7 July 1923, the 
NKAR was established. Baku does not object to the joining of the 
NKAR to Armenia provided that the Azizbekov, Vedin and Ga-
rabaglar regions of Armenia, populated mainly by Azerbaijanis, 
become part of Azerbaijan70.
The “hot” phases started in 1918 and led to Yerevan’s second 
undeclared war with Azerbaijan in 1988-1994. Armenia seized 
the NKAR and turned it into a self-styled Nagorno-Karabakh re-
public. It has also occupied seven other Azerbaijan districts: La-
chin, Kalbajar, Gubadli, Jarayil, Zangilan, Fizuli and Agdam. At 
the same time, the Caucasian Armenia has “got rid of” all Azer-
baijanis. All this did not occur unbeknownst to superpowers and 
major states of the region which were interested not in the fate of 
Armenia or Azerbaijan, but were pursuing their own ends in the 
Caucasus. 
 Karabakh was part of their interest. In fact, it emerged at a 
very opportune moment for external players speculating on the 
problem and “keeping Armenia and Azerbaijan on a short leash”. 
In other words, the Karabakh problem did not appear yesterday. 
Having established an Armenian state on Azerbaijani lands in 
1918, the “church-party-Diaspora” triad revitalized the myth of a 
“Great Armenia from the sea to the sea”. Thus, the “hot” phase of 
the 1918-1920 period led to the alienation of Zangezur and Lake 
Goycha (Sevan), the westernmost lands of Karabakh, from Azer-
baijan. The “cold” phase of 1920-1988 was marked by “creeping 
annexation” and repeated deportation of Azerbaijanis from Arme-
nia. Another “hot” phase of 1988-1994 ended in the transformation 
of the NKAR into the Nagorno-KarabaKh republic and Armenian 
occupation of seven Azerbaijani districts. “Hot” phases are char-
acterized by Yerevan’s reliance on external forces. In 1918-1920, 
the Republic of Ararat relied heavily on General A. Denikin’s vol-
untary army, while in 1988-1994 Yerevan received weaponry and 
advice from abroad. 
The second “hot” phase of the Karabakh problem started in 
1988 and became the first ethnic and territorial conflict in the 
 
70  J. Hasanli, USSR-Turkey: Cold War. Baku, 2005. P. 374-378.
Armenians` Karabakh syndrome: backgound and realization
38
Musa MARJANLI. Armenians. Russia. The Caucasus 
 
USSR. The Karabakh problem was unprecedented in the Soviet 
space for the scale, brutality and duration of hostilities71. In fact, 
the word “Karabakh” was also used figuratively to describe any 
armed conflict on the territory of the FSU. The Karabakh conflict 
became a syndrome as similar stand-offs appeared. It was turned 
into an instrument in the hands of the Armenians to scare away 
adversaries, a strong argument in political games of Armenian 
politicians, an important factor for the “church-party-Diaspora” 
triad which keeps on asking the international community for help 
in resolving the “Armenian issue”.
An opinion by a western expert should be viewed in this con-
text: “I have reached two conclusions which some may view as 
disputable. The first is that the conflict was inevitable and would 
have occurred anyway. The formation of the NKAR led to politi-
cal instability which could not but cause problems that started sur 
facing as soon as centralized Soviet system of power weakened. 
The second conclusion is that both sides wrongly blame the Krem-
lin for the start of the conflict. Reasons for the conflict should be 
sought at home”72.
At the same time, the Karabakh problem has affected the Cau-
casus and global interests of many states: Russia and Georgia, 
Turkey and Iran, the USA and EU, China and Japan, the Arabic 
world, Pakistan and India, Afghanistan and South Korea. Howev-
er, the settlement of the Karabakh problem depends only on a few 
of them. Judging by the developments, a delaying solution of the 
problem plays into the hands of key external players. Therefore, 
the Karabakh problem is likely to continue glowing like a fuse 
in the Caucasus powder keg until the key players find common 
ground. 
The Karabakh problem is also at the centre of attention for the 
“church-party-Diaspora” triad, which is confirmed by the Arme-
nian media73. For instance, the Dashnaktsutyun Party has stated 
 
71  Thomas de Waal, Black Garden. Armenia and Azerbaijan between peace and 
war: Translation from English. M., 2005. P. 7-8
72  Thomas de Waal,  Black Garden. Armenia and Azerbaijan between peace and 
war: Translation from English. M., 2005. P. 9.
73  Erkramas newspaper (Moscow). 2006. No. 1, 7, 9.
39
 
 
that “unification of Nagorno-Karabakh with Armenia is the best 
option”. On the occasion of its own anniversary, the party stated 
in an address to the Armenian people: “In the last 115 years we 
have covered a long road: struggle for the liberation of Artsakh, 
its independence, formation of the Artsakh army, struggle for the 
establishment of a democratic state… Our cooperation with the 
president of the Republic of Armenia started in 1990 when there 
was still a Soviet system in Artsakh74… We always stood by Artsakh 
and struggled for it… Artsakh, the struggle for its liberation have 
always been at the center of our cooperation, its driving force… 
Together with the president, we have not made any concessions 
in the Artsakh issue and achieved progress in the “motherland-
Diaspora” system.
The Karabakh problem is discussed in the Caucasian Arme-
nia not only on weekdays, but also during celebrations. Thus, in 
a speech on the occasion of the 15th anniversary of independence, 
R. Kocharyan, the then president of Armenia, said, “The Diaspora 
has made an invaluable contribution to the cause of state build-
ing; the relations with it have become mutually complementing. 
A fair solution to the Karabakh problem is still a priority. It can 
only be based on a recognition of and respect for Artsakh people’s 
right to self-determination. Nothing should endanger the inde-
pendence and sustainable development of the Nagorno-Karabakh 
Republic”75. In a message of congratulation to the Dashnaktsutyun 
Party on the same occasion, he wrote, “A free Artsakh has become 
a new Sardarapat76 on our road to independence”. The Karabakh 
problem is regularly tabled at various “Armenia-Dashnaktsutyun” 
forums. For instance, a Dashnaktsutyun representative told a 3rd 
forum in 2006, “Our meeting is yet another opportunity to talk 
about the struggle of Artsakh for liberation, about the importance 
to solving our nationwide problem. Artsakh is ours, and we can’t 
get tired or back down in this successful struggle”. 
74  Robert Kocharyan, the leader of Nagorno-Karabakh, the then President of the 
Republic of Armenia. 
75  Erkramas. 2006. No. 1
76  The so-called battle of Sardarapat (May, 1918) in which Armenian troops 
“crushed” regular units of the Ottoman army.
Armenians` Karabakh syndrome: backgound and realization
40
Musa MARJANLI. Armenians. Russia. The Caucasus
In this connection, it might be worth recalling how the Azer-
baijani city of Erivan, the capital of the former Azerbaijani Erivan 
khanate, became the capital of the Republic of Ararat (Armenia) 
in May 1918. 
This event, truly historic for the Armenians, took place only 
thanks to the goodwill of the ADR leaders. Let’s refer to an official 
document concerning the matter77.
MINUTES NO. 3 
OF THE MEETING OF THE MUSLIM NATIONAL COUNCIL 
HELD ON 29 MAY 1918 AT THE PALACE OF TIFLIS.
CHAIRED BY AGAYEV HASAN-BEK IN THE PRESENCE 
OF SECRETARY M. MAHMUDOV AND ATTENDANCE OF: 1) 
F. KHOISKI, 2) M. JAFAROV, 3) M. HAJINSKI, 4) M. HAJINSKI, 
5) A. MAHMUDBEKOV, 6) F. KOCHARLINSKI, 7) J. MELIK-
YEGANOV, 8) R. VEKILOV, 9) G. SHAKHTAKHTINSKI , 10) A. 
AKHUNDOV, 11) M. MAMEDBEKOV, 12) A. SHEYKHUL-IS-
LAMOV, 13) M. MAGERRAMOV, 14) B. KHASMAMEDOV, 15) 
K. MELIK-ASLANOV, 16) J. HAJINSKI, 17) S. AGAMALOV, 18) 
SHARIFOV.
IN OPENING REMARKS, COUNCIL MEMBER F. KHOISKI 
INFORMED THE COUNCIL OF THE RESULTS OF TALKS OF 
COUNCIL REPRESENTATIVES WITH THE THOSE OF THE 
ARMENIAN NATIONAL COUNCIL REGARDING BORDERS 
OF THE AZERBAIJAN AND ARMENIAN FEDERATIONS. F. 
KHOISKI ENDED HIS REMARKS BY STATING THAT IN OR-
DER TO ESTABLISH AN ARMENIAN FEDERATION, A POLITI-
CAL CENTRE IS REQUIRED, AND THIS CAN ONLY BE ERI-
VAN AFTER THE JOINING OF ALEXANDROPOL TO TURKEY. 
THEREFORE, KHOISKI SAYS, THE PASSAGE OF ERIVAN TO 
THE ARMENIANS IS INEVITABLE. 
ALSO SPEAKING ON THE ISSUE WERE KH. KHASMAM-
EDOV, M. JAFAROV, SHEIKHUL-ISLAMOV (ON BEHALF OF 
THE HUMMET PARTY), M. MAGERRAMOV (ON BEHALF OF 
THE SOCIALIST MUSLIM BLOC), WHO ACKNOWLEDGED 
THAT THE CESSION OF ERIVAN TO THE ARMENIANS WAS 
 
77  The State Archive of the Azerbaijan Republic (hereinafter SAAR). F. 970. Op. 
1. D. 1. L. 51-52.
41
 
 
A HISTORICAL NECESSITY AND INEVITABLE EVIL. 15 OUT 
OF 28 MEETING PARTICIPANTS VOTED FOR THE CESSION 
OF ERIVAN, ONE PERSON VOTED AND THREE ABSTAINED. 
THEN THE ISSUE OF ESTABLISHING A CONFEDERATION 
WITH THE ARMENIANS WAS DISCUSSED. AFTER A BRIEF EX-
CHANGE OF VIEWS, THE MATTER WAS PUT TO THE VOTE. 
THIS STRUCTURE OF AZERBAIJAN AND ARMENIA WAS 
UNANIMOUSLY APPROVED BY THE COUNCIL. COUNCIL 
MEMBER F. PUT PROPOSED TO INCLUDE TEYMURBEK MA-
KINSKI ON THE NATIONAL COUNCIL BY WAY OF CO-OPTA-
TION, AND THE DECISION WAS UNANIMOUSLY ADOPTED. 
CHAIRMAN (SIGNATURE)
SECRETARY (SIGNATURE)
As is evident, on 29 May 1918, i.e. the day following the decla-
ration of independence of the Northern Azerbaijan and the Cau-
casian Armenia, the Azerbaijan National Council made a gener-
ous gift to the Armenian National Council. On the same day, the 
friendly gesture was backed up by an instruction from Fatali-Khan 
Khoiski, Chairman of ADR Council of Ministers, to Mamed Hasan 
Hajinsky, the ADR Minister of Foreign Affairs, which said, “We 
have finished all the disputes with the Armenians, they will accept 
the ultimatum and end the war. We will cede Erivan to them”78. 
However, the Armenian side did not appreciate the friendly 
step and territorial claims continued. The Armenians carried on 
insisting that Karabakh should be theirs. In this connection, on 31 
July 1918 Fatali-Khan Khoiski sent a message to Mamed Amin Ra-
sulzade, the head of the Azerbaijan delegation in Istanbul, which 
said, “I am sending you copies of maps with delineated borders 
of Azerbaijan as you requested. Please proceed from them in ev-
ery possible way. If Armenians still lay claims to Karabakh, please 
refuse to cede Erivan and part of Gazakh District to them. If they 
stick to the verbal agreement we reached earlier, a part of the Eri-
van district, which is dotted on the map, can be ceded to them”79.
78  The Azerbaijan Republic. Documents and materials: 1918-1920 / Edited by J.B. 
Guliyev, 1998. P.14.
79  The Azerbaijan Democratic Republic (1918-1920). External policy (Documents 
and materials). Baku, 1998. P. 42. 
Armenians` Karabakh syndrome: backgound and realization
42
Musa MARJANLI. Armenians. Russia. The Caucasus
The documents mentioned indicate that the ADR was pursu-
ing an amicable policy towards the Republic of Ararat and was 
even prepared to cede another part of its territory besides Erivan 
to the “fraternal” state. However, “the obstinate and unsociable 
neighbor” chose a military way. Both in 1918-1920, when it at-
tacked not only Azerbaijan, but also Georgia to occupy territories 
that it considered disputable – Lori, Karabakh and Nakhchivan – 
and in 1988-1994 when it started war against Azerbaijan.
Therefore, “the Karabakh syndrome” demonstrates that the 
Armenians will never be content with what they have, even 
though Baku has repeatedly demonstrated peacefulness towards 
Caucasian Armenia. Here is another example.
In the ADR times, leaders of the Republic took an unprecedented 
step: in May 1918, thanks to their goodwill, the Republic of Ararat 
received the “political center” of Erivan as a gift from Baku. Such 
a center should have been Alexandropol (Gyumri at present), but 
it became part of the Ottoman Empire. For this reason, the ADR 
decided to cede Erivan: as indicated in Minutes No. 3 of a meeting 
of the Azerbaijan National Council from 29 May 1918, “this was a 
historical necessity and inevitable evil”. Otherwise, Istanbul was 
threatening Baku with war. 
In Soviet times, Baku agreed to the establishment of the NKAR. 
There were Armenian departments at schools and universities; 
newspapers, magazines and books were published in Armenian; 
there was a whole district of Baku called Armenikend; there was 
an Armenian theatre named after Sundukyan in the center of 
Baku; Armenians used to hold various senior positions ranging 
from secretaries at the Central Committee of the Communist Party 
to ministers. 
In this regard, let’s have a look at the following: 
1. Nagorno-Karabakh, which Armenian scholars persistently 
call Artsakh, is a territory belonging to Azerbaijani history. Place 
name “Artsakh” is of Alban origin. In the modern Udi language 
of the Caucasian family, one of the Caucasian Albania languag-
es, the verb artsesun means “to sit, to sit down”. Hence the form 
of the verb artsi, which means “settled; or leading a settled way 
 
43
 
 
of life” is derived80. Place name Artsakh, which is derived form 
artsi and suffix akh is in the same line. It is a place name with a 
plural suffix (collectiveness). There are still dozens of place names 
with suffixes –akh, -ekh, -ikh, -ukh, -yikh, -yukh in the Cauca-
sus. They are typical of Caucasian languages81. For example, 
Adi-yukh, Ants-ukh, Botl-ikh, Darb-akh, Datt-yikh, Jin-ikh, 
Dusr-akh, Kazikum-ukh, Kar-akh, Kass-akh, Kum-ukh, Kafir-
kum-ukh, Kur-akh, Mar-ukh, Matr-akh, Mikr-akh, Mos-akh, 
Nedr-akh, Necheps-ukh, Ob-okh, Psed-ekh, Surkh-akh, Tab-
akh, Tep-ukh, Ukr-ukh, Ur-akh, Urkar-akh, Ur-ukh, Khaar-akh, 
 
Khi-akh, Khind-akh, Khunz-akh, Catan-ikh, Chir-akh, Shin-
akh. In Northern Azerbaijan, where Alban tribes belonging to 
Azerbaijani ancestors, including modern Udis, Budukhs, Qrizs, 
Khinalugs, Ingiloys, etc. are recorded, place names with the same 
suffixes are still present: Az-yikh, Arts-akh, Jimjim-akh, Kokhm-
ukh, Kurm-ukh, Mamr-ukh, Mukh-akh, Sam-ukh, Shad-ukh82. 
2. Erivan is an Azerbaijani city which happened to become 
part of the Republic of Ararat. If the Ottoman army hadn’t 
seized Alexandropol (Gyumri at present), the only city in the 
South Caucasus seized by the Dashnaks that was to become their 
capital, they would not have received Erivan. 
3. Nearly a century ago, shortly before World War One, Ste-
pan Shaumyan, a well-known Armenian chauvinist and Bolshevik 
leader of Baku, wrote, “Nations have mingled with each other so 
much that there are no national territories within which federa-
tive autonomous districts could be established”83. Despite this, the 
NKAR was established in 1923 in order to preserve “peace and 
accord” between the Armenians and Azerbaijanis. It is not very 
 
80  V. Gukasyan, The Udi-Azerbaijan-Russian Dictionary. Baku, 1974. P. 48. G. 
Kapancyan, Historical-linguistic works. Yerevan, 1956. P. 435. 
81  D. Pagirev, Alphabetical index to 5-verst map of the Caucasus. Tiflis, 1903; 
History of peoples of the North Caucasus. From ancient times to the end of the 18th 
century. M., 1988. P. 525 and glossary. 
82  Dictionary of geographical terms and other words found in place names of the 
Azerbaijan SSR / Composed by E. Bushuyeva. M., 1971.  
83  S. Shaumyan, About national cultural autonomy. M., 1959. P. 25.  
Armenians` Karabakh syndrome: backgound and realization
44
Musa MARJANLI. Armenians. Russia. The Caucasus 
 
important in the context of the Karabakh syndrome whether 
Shaumyan was right or wrong. It is much more significant that the 
establishment of the NKAR, effectively a second Armenian state 
within Azerbaijani territory, was an artificial step which proved to 
be highly explosive. This was confirmed by further developments: 
the establishment of a self-styled Nagorno-Karabakh republic 
(NKR), deportation of Azerbaijanis form Armenia, occupation of 
Azerbaijani districts. Established in this way, the NKR has a mili-
tary basis. Napoleon once said about such form of governance, 
“One can do a lot with the bayonet, but not sit on it”. 
4. As for the Karabakh problem in general, there is certainly 
a hugely important geopolitical factor in its settlement. A com-
plex game involving outside players has been under way around 
Karabakh and in the Caucasus in general for many years. This 
game actually represents an open rivalry between the USA and 
Russia for influence in the region. For Moscow, the Caucasus is 
a gate to the south, to the Middle East; the USA is interested in 
advancing in the same direction, where there is an important 
transit corridor to the Asia-Pacific region which plays an ever-in-
creasing role in the economic, oil, military, commercial and trans-
port system. Other players include the European Union, Iran, 
Turkey, China, India, Pakistan, Arab states, Japan, South Korea. 
This game is being played both transparently (a minor part) and 
latently (mostly). Therefore, it can be said that Armenia and Azer-
baijan are hostages of a great geopolitical game of important play-
ers such as the USA, Russia, Western Europe and Iran, Turkey and 
China, the Arab world and the South-East Asia.
Proceeding from the above, it can be concluded that the po-
litical situation around the Karabakh problem remains vague. Ac- 
cordingly, the Karabakh syndrome, which combines both internal 
and external factors, will continue to be on the agenda for a long 
time to come. In fact, this conclusion holds true not only for the 
situation around Karabakh, but also for the states directly or indi-
rectly involved in the problem because the problem has political, 
territorial, ethnic and confessional nature. In particular, the fol-
lowing factors may be indicated:
•	Domestic processes in societies of both the parties of the 
45
 
 
conflict;
•	Influence of key external players, i.e. superpowers;
•	Position of major states bordering on parties of the conflict;
•	Rivalry of geopolitical players for the Caucasus. 
However, the influence of key external players is the main 
factor on which a Karabakh settlement depends. After all, it is 
the superpowers that can finally decide on peace or resumption 
of hostilities because the Karabakh problem is an integral part of 
geopolitics. 
At the same time, there are about 50 situations similar to the 
Karabakh problem in the world. All of them are being dealt with 
almost without the participation of the affected states, for even an 
ordinary negotiating process quickly turns into rivalry between 
superpowers. At the same time, neighbors do play a role, espe-
cially the Islamic Republic of Iran, Yerevan’s “ally”, and Turkey, 
a fraternal state for Baku. Thus, back in 2006 Tehran displayed “a 
certain interest in developing political processes around the Kara-
bakh settlement” which manifested itself through regular consul-
tations at the level of diplomats and political figures of the two 
states84. As for Ankara, it signed a letter of intent with Yerevan in 
October 2009 whereby the Armenian side succeeded in avoiding 
the Karabakh problem. Much more important documents were 
also signed, including those “On the establishment of diplomatic 
relations” and “On the development of bilateral relations between 
the Republic of Armenia and the Republic of Turkey”.
In this connection, it might be worth recalling a view of a 
Western expert who comes from the Caucasus and is, therefore, 
well aware of the regional situation. It is indicative that his words 
apply to the Karabakh problem. “The tragedy of Armenia is not in 
the fact that Stalin included Karabakh into Azerbaijan in 1923, but 
in the fact that Lenin occupied and annexed independent repub-
lics of the Caucasus in 1920”85.
84  S. Minasyan, The Republic of Armenia. International life // Central Eurasia. 
2006. Analytical annual, Lulea, Sweden, 2007. P. 85.
85  A. Avtorkhanov, The Empire of the Kremlin. Soviet colonialism. Garmish-
partenkirchen, 1988. P.393.
Armenians` Karabakh syndrome: backgound and realization
46
ARMENIAN AND GEORGIAN COLLISIONS
Negative trends in Georgian-Armenian relations date back 
to the late 19th century when Armenians appeared in the South 
Caucasus in great numbers. And the trends are still ongoing and 
relate to territorial, cultural, confessional and historical problems. 
In Georgia, Armenians are an ethnic and confessional mi-
nority. They mainly live in Tbilisi, Javakheti, Abkhazia and 
Adzharia86. Relations between Tbilisi and ethnic Armenians liv-
ing in the Georgian region of Samtskhe-Javakheti became strained 
in the 1990s87. The jurisdiction of central authorities here is still 
limited. After bitter experience of Abkhazia and South Ossetia 
which had negative consequences for Tbilisi, the latter prefers 
to abstain from any dramatic actions in the largely Armenian-
populated Javakheti region. Things are further aggravated by the 
problem of Meskhetian Turks aspiring to return to this region 
which they see as their historical homeland88. 
Located in the country’s south-west, the region of Samtskhe-
Javakheti is one of Georgia’s biggest administrative units and a 
key geopolitical and geo-economic region of the South Caucasus. 
A section of the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan oil pipeline, which starts 
 
86  M. Komakhia, Formation of the ethnic map of Georgia and modern migration 
processes // Central Asia and Caucasus. Lulea, Sweden, 2008. No. 1 P. 180-182, 184-185. 
87  V. Ramishvili, An Armenian-Georgian dispute: Javakheti or Javakhk // The 
Caucasus and globalization, 2007. Vol. 1(5); V. Grushetski, The matter of Javakheti // 
www.vub.ac.be/rubli/crs/rus/03_05R.htm; Sh. Vadachkoria, Questions of Georgian-
Armenian interrelations in political thinking of Georgia  (1918-1920). Tbilisi, 1999; N. 
Gogoroshvili, The socio-political situation in and around Samtskhe-Javakheti // Central 
Asia and the Caucasus. Lulea, Sweden, 2006. No. 5; D. Berdzenishvili, Akhalkalaki in 
Javakheti // Artanuji. Tbilisi, 1998. No. 7; I. Javakhishvili, Report to the government 
of Georgia. 1926 // GSHA. F.476. D. 6. L. 82-111. (in Georgian) // Quotation by D. 
Berdzenishvili, Akhalkalaki in Javakheti //Artanuji. Tbilisi, 1998. No. 7
88  A. Yunusov, Meskhetian Turks: a people deported twice. Baku, 2000. Ch. II/5. 
47
 
 
in Azerbaijan and ends in Turkey, runs through the region. Tur-
key had been an Armenian “enemy” until October 2009, so the 
Samtskhe-Javakheti Armenians can always commit an act of ter-
ror on this section of the strategic pipeline. The Akhalkalaki-Kars 
railway line, which will run to Turkey, is also expected to pass 
through Samtskhe-Javakheti, which makes Armenian acts of ter-
ror possible here too. The Baku-Tbilisi-Erzurum gas pipeline, also 
ending in Turkey, is also threatened by the Armenians. Armenian 
terrorism may manifest itself on the Baku-Batumi-Supsa oil pipe-
line as well. 
Ethnic Armenians have lived in Georgia for more than 180 
years. After a successful war with the Ottoman Empire in 1828-
1829, the Russian Empire occupied the Black Sea coast from Kuban 
to Poti and a major part of Meskheti and Javakheti. This is when 
it embarked on a settlement of Ottoman Armenians in the South 
Caucasus. In Georgia, the migrants settled down in Akhalkalaki 
district (Javakheti) and soon exceeded the Georgians in number. 
The process of “Armenianization” lasted until the 20th century and 
affected not only Akhaltsikhe and Akhalkalaki, but also Abkha-
zia, Adzharia and Borchali, Tbilisi, Kutaisi, Gori, Borjomi and Ba-
tum. An active role in the process was played by Dashnaktsutyun89 
which was governed by the “Great Armenian from the sea to the 
sea” myth. Now the plan was to include the Akhalkalaki district90 
in the “Great Armenia”. Therefore, after the establishment of the 
Republic of Ararat in 1918, its ruling Dashnaktsutyun Party and the 
Armenian National Council in Georgia were conducting secret an-
ti-Georgian activities91. One of their consequences was Yerevan’s 
war with Georgia which started on 7 December 1918 and aimed at 
seizing Javakheti and Lori92. The attempt failed. 
However, after the collapse of the USSR in 1991, Armenian 
scholars, proceeding from conjured-up theories, laid claims to 
Javakheti. “Armenians have populated the region since ancient 
 
89  Sh. Vadachkoria Questions of Georgian-Armenian interrelations in political 
thinking of Georgia (1918-1920). P. 89, 91.
90  Ditto. P. 99.
91  Ditto. P. 104-111.
92  G. Marhulia, Armenian-Georgian Conference in 1919 and the establishment 
of the Lori neutral area. Tbilisi, 2005. P. 5.
Armenian and Georgian collisons
48
Musa MARJANLI. Armenians. Russia. The Caucasus 
 
times because the territory was part of historical Armenia”93. In 
connection with this, the Dashnaktsutyun Party held a conference 
“Javakhk94 facing 21st century challenges” in February 2005. It was 
stated there that, “the Javakheti issue is not only the self-determi-
nation and preservation of Armenian cultural values, but first of 
all the preservation of Armenianism. There must be an Armenian 
representative office here, the Georgian eparchy of Echmiadzin 
must have a legal status. At the same time, an autonomy for Ja-
vakheti Armenians is not a goal in itself but a means of preserva-
tion of the local Armenian population. Therefore, the shortest way 
to resolve the problem is to create a Georgian federation within 
which Javakheti will have the status of a constituent territory”95.
In September 2005, a regular conference of Armenian or-
ganizations of Javakheti was held in Akhalkalaki as part of the 
“Integration, not assimilation” initiative. It focuses on the status 
of Javakhk within the state structure of Georgia. The decision 
was made that Tbilisi must “provide the status of autonomy to 
a number of Armenian-populated regions”; “provision of an au-
tonomy to the Georgian region of Samtskhe-Javakheti was in in-
terests of Georgia” and is “an important geopolitical factor in the 
whole of the South Caucasus”96. The conference also stated that 
the implementation of its resolutions by Tbilisi would facilitate 
realization of the dream of “many generations of Javakhk’s Ar-
menian population”; that “for Armenia the autonomy of Javakhk 
would certainly be an important positive factor” because “this 
status will always be a factor of constructive influence on Arme-
nia on Georgia” and “joint influence of Armenia and Georgia 
on Azerbaijan and Turkey”. It will also help attract “significant 
investment of the Armenian Diaspora” to Javakheti97. 
Thus, the problem of Javakheti, just like Nagorno-Karabakh, 
is discussed by the Armenian movement from the standpoint of 
the “church-party-Diaspora” triad. In other words, the church 
 
93  S. Minasyan, The socio-economic and political situation in Javakheti // Central 
Asia and the Caucasus. Lulea, Sweden, 2005. No. 3. P. 170; Erkramas. 2006. No. 7.
94  This is how Armenians call Javakheti.  
95  Erkramas. 2006. No. 2.
96  Ditto. No. 6.
97  Ditto.
49
 
 
is involved as an ideological center, the party as a champion of 
ideas, and the Diaspora as a sponsor. Speculating on the current 
aggravation of relations between Tbilisi and Moscow, Yerevan has 
joined the problem by extensively mulling the Javakheti factor. 
Thus, “it stresses a huge Armenian contribution to the develop-
ment of Georgian statehood and culture for centuries”.
Let’s recall a curious fact. Ivan Javakhishvili, an outstanding 
Georgian academician, wrote in his report to the Georgian gov-
ernment in 1926: “Samtskhe, Javakheti, Erusheti and Palakatsio 
inhabited by the Georgians of Muslim faith (Meskhetian Turks – 
author) since 1828 were captured from the Turks by Russia. The 
population of the said regions was driven into such a state of mind 
that it chose to abandon the lands of their ancestors and move to 
Turkey.  Earl Paskevich did not allow the Georgians from Imereti 
to migrate here and instead moved 30,000 Armenians from Tur-
key… Thanks to Russian officials, Meskheti, where the Georgians 
had made up more than 90 per cent of the population before 1828, 
was predominantly populated by the Armenians in 1930”98. 
The process of Georgia’s Armenianization was gradual, con-
sistent and systematic. As a result, the number of ethnic Arme-
nians living there reached 122,000 in 1865 and 197,000 in 1897. 
Another 55,000 Armenians were settled there in 1897-1902. A total 
of 252,000 Armenians lived in Georgia in the early 20th century, 
including 124,900, i.e. more than half, in Tbilisi, while the rest in 
Borchali, an Azerbaijani region within Georgia99. Therefore, “the 
process was carried out consistently and envisaged the settlement 
of borderline districts so that they could subsequently be annexed 
to Armenia”100. The new settlers were “destroying churches, 
towers, fortresses, ruins, desecrating monasteries, plundering sa 
cred images and shattering the peace of local ancestors”101.
98  I. Javakhishvili, Report to the government of Georgia. 1926 // GSHA. F.476. D. 
6. L. 82-111. (in Georgian) // Quotation by D. Berdzenishvili, Akhalkalaki in Javakheti //
Artanuji. Tbilisi, 1998. No.7.
99  Sh. Vadachkoria, Role of Georgian-Armenian relations in the political 
thinking of Georgia (1918-1920). P. 112-113.  
100  Ditto. P. 112.
101  I. Javakhishvili, Report to the government of Georgia. 1926 // GSHA. F.476. D. 
6. L. 82-111. (in Georgian) // Quotation by D. Berdzenishvili, Akhalkalaki in Javakheti //
Artanuji. Tbilisi, 1998. No. 7. 
Armenian and Georgian collisons
50
Musa MARJANLI. Armenians. Russia. The Caucasus
It should also be indicated that, according to Armenians, 
“there are still unresolved religious discrepancies between Arme-
nian and Georgian churches”102. They started over 1,300 years ago 
when the Armenian Church attempted to subordinate the Geor-
gian one to itself103.  
After the establishment of Soviet rule in the South Cauca-
sus, Yerevan submitted yet another project to Moscow in 1922, re-
questing that a large part of Javakheti be joined to Borchali district 
populated by an Azerbaijani majority and also inhabited by Arme-
nians. The aim being pursued was to create an Armenian admin-
istrative unit. According to Javakhishvili, “it is obvious that this 
plan was the first step in a cunning project on separating the two 
districts from Georgia and annexing them to Armenia. The second 
step was to follow shortly afterwards. Suffice it to look through 
the maps prepared by the Dashnaks to see that struggle for the 
same goals was still under way, but this time different means were 
engaged”104. However, that attempt was doomed to fail as well. 
According to a USSR population census of 1989, Georgia 
was home to 437,211 Armenians (8.1 per cent of the country’s 
population)105. The biggest Armenian community of about 200,000 
people lived in Javakheti. According to official Georgian sourc-
es, Armenians made up 91.3 per cent of the local population106. 
Armenian political party “Virk”107 was established here and de 
manded autonomy for Javakhk. Armenians held senior posts in 
the region: heads of executive authority, the police, court, etc. In 
1990, the party prepared a draft resolution on the provision of Ja-
vakheti with “the status of a constituent region of the Georgian 
state”108. 
102  I. Melikyan, E. Mkrtchyan, The Republic of Armenia. Religion //Central 
Eurasia. 2007. Analytical annual. Lulea, Sweden, 2008. P. 83.
103  I. Javakhov, History of church disruption between Georgia and Armenia in the 
early 7th century // Info AS. S. Petersburg, 1908. Series VI No. 5-6.
104  I. Javakhishvili, Report to the government of Georgia. 1926 // GSHA. F.476. D. 
6. L. 82-111. (in Georgian) // Quotation by D. Berdzenishvili, Akhalkalaki in Javakheti //
Artanuji. Tbilisi, 1998. No. 7.
105  Soyuz. August, 1990. No. 32. 
106  Eri (nation). Tbilisi, April 10, 1991; Weekly Panorama. 1997. No. 32. 
107  The name of Georgia in medieval Armenians records.
108  Erkramas. 2006. No. 7, 9.
51
The secessionist movement in the Nagorno-Karabakh Au 
tonomous Region of the Azerbaijan SSR, which manifested itself 
openly in 1988, initiated the establishment of an Armenian nation-
alist movement in Javakheti. The Abkhaz-Georgian war of 1992-
1993 became some sort of a catalyst in the process. And when hos-
tilities triggered by Yerevan flared up in Nagorno-Karabakh, many 
volunteers from Javakheti rushed here. In this connection, Filaret 
Berikyan, who handled Karabakh issues on behalf of the Arme-
nian government for four years, stated, “Armenians of Javakheti 
have a very high national self-consciousness. There were very 
many of them in Karabakh, they even formed their own units”109.
Therefore, it was not by chance that a “Javakhk” committee 
appeared in Javakheti on 5 February 1988, a week after the start 
of the Karabakh movement in Armenia. Its objective was to sup-
port “Karabakh brothers”. In April-May 1988, the committee grew 
into a “Javakhk Popular Movement” (JPM) which quickly became 
political and military. This was facilitated by the developments 
unfolding in Georgia and the activities of the “church-party-Di-
aspora” triad. As a result, the JPM currently has its own armed 
units and authority in Javakheti. In November 1991, an ethnic Ar-
menian became the head of the JPM authority. The official goals of 
the JPM are “to preserve Armenian cultural heritage and science, 
to teach Armenian history at local schools, to protect national in-
terests and develop the region”. The actual objective is, of course, 
the annexation of the region to Armenia110. This is exactly why the 
Council of authorized representatives of the Armenian population 
of Javakheti spoke in favor of “Javakheti’s independence”. 
Analysts believe that Tbilisi is unlikely to provide the Ar-
menians of Javakheti with an autonomy. Georgian authorities are 
well aware that conflicts often break out in autonomous regions, 
no matter how formal they may have been in the Soviet time. The 
best examples of that in the South Caucasus include Karabakh, 
Abkhazia, South Ossetia, Adzharia. In other words, the autonomy 
of Javakheti will create “a new Karabakh”, this time in Georgia111. 
Meanwhile, JPM leaders are stating, “We will not follow the path 
109  V. Guretski/F. Berikyan interview. Yerevan, August 28, 1997 // V. Guretski.
110  V. Guretski/F. Berikyan, interview. Yerevan, August 28, 1997 // V. Guretski.
111  www.abkhaziainfo.f20/org/analytics.shtml.
Armenian and Georgian collisons
52
Musa MARJANLI. Armenians. Russia. The Caucasus 
 
of Nagorno-Karabakh. We would like to enjoy the rights ethnic 
minorities have in civilized countries of the world, as well as guar-
antees that these rights will be observed”112. However, judging by 
the developments, the JPM plans are of separatist nature because 
Armenians of Javakheti have “a successful” example of Nagorno-
Karabakh.
It is also worth mentioning that besides the JPM, Armenians 
of Javakheti have a military organization “Parvants”113. The JPM 
proper has 5,000 militants, while its radical leaders are always at 
the beck and call of the Armenian triad. In general, the secessionist 
movements in Abkhazia and South Ossetia threaten Georgia and 
“instigate” Armenian separatism in Javakheti114.
The importance Yerevan attaches to Javakheti is confirmed 
by the fact that the Armenian Prime Minister has a special ad-
viser on Javakheti. This adviser has stated recently, “The popula-
tion can see that it can’t take part in governing the region. People 
are beginning to think that they must resolve their problems on 
their own. The attempts to make the Georgian government tackle 
the socioeconomic problems of the region are proving futile be-
cause the authorities are too suspicious of sinister repercussions 
of separatism”115. 
One of the leaders of the local Armenian organization “Virk” 
agrees with him. He has expressed support for an autonomy, for 
“we haven’t seen any practical steps from the authorities … for 
10-12 years”116. Apparently, Yerevan has already “resolved” the 
problem of Javakheti, as it did with Karabakh earlier, in its favor. 
It is not by chance that emissaries of Yerevan have been saying 
after visiting Javakheti: “While in Akhalkalaki, one may forget 
that he is not in Armenia – the Armenian language and music are 
 
112  S. Minasyan, The situation in Samtskhe-Javakheti in the context of withdrawal 
of Russian military bases from Georgia // Central Asia and the Caucasus. Lulea, Sweden, 
2006. No. 1. P. 174-175, 179-180.
113  Armenians way of calling Lake Paravani in Georgia. 
114  Stier Ken, Discontent of a Georgian province raises concern of two states // 
www.eurasianet.org/index.shtml.
115  Stier Ken. Discontent of a Georgian province raises concern of two states // 
www.eurasianet.org/index.shtml.
116  Ditto. 
53
 
 
everywhere. Only Georgian number plates on vehicles suggest 
that Akhalkalaki belongs to Georgia”117. At the same time, officials 
from the Republic of Armenia are threatening that if Georgia re-
sorts to forceful methods, “Yerevan will not remain indifferent to 
the fate of its compatriots living in Javakheti”118. Armenian radi-
cal political structures, first of all, the Dashnaktsutyun Party, as 
well as official representatives of Yerevan, are also interfering in 
the Javakheti problem119. Thus, it was stated at the 29th Congress 
of Dashnaktsutyun (February 2004): “We have always valued our 
friendship with Georgia and may express our interest in Georgia’s 
territorial integrity if the authorities of this country realize that 
they may jeopardize the interests of entire Georgia by rejecting 
autonomy demands from the Armenians of Javakhk”. The Dash-
naktsutyun Party’s program unequivocally states that Javakheti 
must become part of the Republic of Armenia. This idea is also 
proclaimed in the program of “Javakhk”.
Therefore, the inspired Armenians of Javakheti and their 
organizations are urging the Georgian government “to give Ja-
vakheti (with its current borders) and the adjoining Kvemo-Kartli 
(i.e. the Azerbaijani district of Borchali – M.M.), mostly populated 
by the Armenians, the status of an autonomous region of Georgia 
with extensive self-government authority, including the right to be 
elected to local governments, and to make the Armenian language 
the second official language of the region”120.
Thus, Javakheti is gradually transforming, albeit latently, 
into an Armenian settlement on Georgian territory, while Tbilisi’s 
authority over it is as virtual as in Abkhazia and South Ossetia. 
It is worth indicating that the province of Kvemo-Kartli 
claimed by the Armenians is a historically Azerbaijani region of 
 
117  www.mediakavkaz.by.ru.
118  S. Minasyan, The situation in Samtskhe-Javakheti in the context of withdrawal 
of Russian military bases from Georgia // Central Asia and the Caucasus. Lulea, Sweden, 
2006. No. 1. P. 99.
119  N. Gogoroshvili, Socio-political situation in and around Samtskhe-Javakheti // 
Central Asia and the Caucasus. Lulea, Sweden, 2006. No. 5. P. 162-168.
120  S. Minasyan, The situation in Samtskhe-Javakheti in the context of withdrawal 
of Russian military bases from Georgia // Central Asia and the Caucasus. Lulea, Sweden, 
2006. No. 1. P. 99.
Armenian and Georgian collisons
54
Musa MARJANLI. Armenians. Russia. The Caucasus 
 
Borchali which was and still is populated by an Azerbaijani ma-
jority. This is how it became part of Georgia. In 1736, Nadir Shah 
Afshar took over several districts, including Borchali, from his 
political rival Beylerbey Ziyad oglu of Ganja in revenge for the 
latter’s failure to attend his crowning. He then presented the dis-
tricts to his vassal, Tsar Constantine of Kartli-Kakheti121. Later, up 
until the establishment of Soviet rule in the Caucasus, these lands 
often changed hands. When the Soviet government announced 
the establishment of “peace and order” in the Caucasus and re-
fused to revise the borders again, Borchali was part of Georgia. It 
is still there now. The province of Kvemo-Kartli, as this historically 
Azerbaijani area is called now, has a mostly Azerbaijani popula-
tion numbering around 500,000 people. They are Georgia’s big-
gest ethnic minority122. Armenian leaders of Javakheti are trying 
to set Tbilisi against Baku in an attempt to derive their own benefit 
over Kvemo-Kartli. For instance, participants of a third congress 
of local Armenian organizations in September 2005 voiced con-
cern over the growing number of Azerbaijanis in Georgia123. The 
“peacemakers” want to undermine Azerbaijani-Georgian rela-
tions and lay the groundwork for the deportation of Azerbaijanis 
from Georgia.
Besides “Javakhk”, “Virk” and “Dashnaktsutyun”, there 
are other Armenian nationalist groups in Javakheti., such as “the 
Union of Georgian Armenians”, “the committee on assistance pro-
grams to Javakheti”, a local branch of “the Armenian Assistance 
Union”124. They all work in one direction. Therefore, the address 
of the Dashnaktsutyun Party to the Armenian people over the 
115th anniversary of the party says: “The problem of Javakheti is 
the problem of all Armenian people”; the Armenians of Javakhk 
demand autonomy and the party supports the idea; there are 
250,000 Armenians in Javakhk; Javakhk is “our homeland, a 
piece of our heart and soul. It will never be alone in its struggle. 
 
121  History of Azerbaijan. Vol. I. Baku, 1958. P. 319. 
122  M. Komakhia, Forming an ethnic map of Georgia and modern migration 
processes // Central Asia and Caucasus. Lulea, Sweden, 2008. No. 1 P. 184.  
123  Erkramas. 2006. No. 11.
124  Ditto.
55
 
 
Armenian people will always be supporting it”125.
The “United Javakhk” alliance and the “Virk” party demand 
that an end be put to the discrimination of Armenians in Javakhe-
ti; that the Armenian language receive the status of a state lan-
guage together with Georgian; that Armenian-language teaching 
be preserved at Georgia’s Armenian schools; that the “history of 
Armenian people” be incorporated in the curriculum of Armenian 
schools in Georgia; and the “Virk” Party be registered126. Yerevan 
has allocated $350,000 in assistance to the Armenians of Javakheti.
Thus, the “church-party-Diaspora” triad, by speculating on 
“the problem of Javakheti”, believes that the problem is as sig-
nificant for the Armenians as Karabakh. It is not by chance that 
the Dashnaktsutyun Party wrote in its address to the Armenian 
people in 2005: “The President and the party have managed to 
avoid any concessions in the Artsakh (Nagorno-Karabakh – M.M.) 
issue, reached progress in the “homeland-Diaspora” system and 
treated the Javakhk issue with special attention (the reference is to 
the ex-president of the Republic of Armenia and former leader of 
the NKAR, R. Kocharyan - M.M.)”127. 
In other words, the Armenians do not care much about whose 
lands, Muslim or Christian, Armenians can occupy. Any territory 
would do to make the “Great Armenia” myth come true. 
In conclusion of the chapter let’s recall the words of a promi-
nent Georgian writer and humanist, I. Chavchavadze wrote in his 
book Armenian Scholars and Crying Stones in the early 20th cen-
tury what Armenians did to the Georgian cultural heritage in the 
19th century.  Chavchavadze completes his work with a remark-
able appeal to the Armenians of Georgia: “No matter whether we 
had much or little, we provided you with a shelter and treated you 
like brothers. So don’t treat us like enemies in our own home! It 
is better to have a lion sitting in your way than an enemy in your 
home. Georgians used to say so long ago, so do we and so will any 
reasonable Armenian.”128.
125  Ditto.
126  Armenian press. 2005. No. 8. 
127  Erkramas. 2006. No. 7. 
128  I. Chavchavadze, Armenian scholars and crying stones. P. 123.
Armenian and Georgian collisons
56
WHY ARE ARMENIANS NOT CAUCASIANS?
The political situation in the South Caucasus before the 19th 
century wad quite complicated. Of the 20 Azerbaijani khanates, 
particularly significant and influential were the khanates of Baku, 
Ganja, Karabakh, Guba, Urmia and Sheki129. They had their own 
dynasties and administration, army and mints. The khanate of 
Baku (1747-1806) was playing an important part in the South Cau-
casus and on the Caspian coast. Its capital Baku was an important 
commercial center, the main Caspian port and the junction of trade 
and transit roads. The khanate of Ganja (1736-1804) repeatedly re-
pelled the attacks of the Karabakh khanate and Kartli-Kakheti. Ja-
vad Khan, the Khan of Ganja (1785-1804), was a prominent state 
and military figure of the time. The khanate of Karabakh (1747-
1822) was engaged in an active external policy, for it had to rebuff 
repeated attacks from Iran and neighboring khanates. Therefore, 
Ibrahimkhalil Khan, the Khan of Karabakh (1763-1806), was in a 
military alliance with the Kingdom of Kartli-Kakheti. The khan-
ate of Guba (1724-1813) was the most powerful and influential. 
Its outstanding leader was Fatali Khan (1758-1789), whose aim 
was to unite Azerbaijan under his umbrella. To do that, he con-
cluded an alliance with the Khan of Sheki and Dagestan rulers. As 
a result, he subdued the territories along the Caspian coast and 
seized the khanates of Derbent, Baku, Shemakha and Javad. This 
led to the establishment of a North-Eastern Azerbaijani state. The 
Khanate of Urmia (1747-1830) with the capital in Tabriz, an impor-
tant trade, commercial and political center, was founded by Fa-
129  R. Huseynov, K. Verdiyeva, History of Azerbaijan. From earliest times to 1920. 
Baku, 2000. P. 81-87.
57
tali Khan (1747-1763). He was conducting an active foreign policy 
and expanding his possessions. He was the first Azerbaijani khan 
to attempt to unite the entire Azerbaijan under the dominion of 
one ruler. Fatali khan Afshar subordinated the Khoy, Karadagh, 
Maraga and Sarab khanates to himself. He made raids on the Eri-
van and Karabakh khanates and the Kingdom of Kartli-Kakheti. 
Haji Chelebi khan (1743-1819) of Sheki conducted successful raids 
against the Kingdom of Kartli-Kakheti. In 1768, Huseyn khan 
of Sheki (1759-1780) concluded a military and political alliance 
with the Khan of Guba as the two jointly attacked the khanate of 
Shemakha and divided its territory. 
Under such military and political circumstances in the South 
Caucasus, the Russian Empire, aspiring to take control over the 
entire Caucasus, was facing several strategic tasks. First, it was 
necessary was to neutralize Azerbaijani khanates. Second, it want-
ed to find a satellite factor which would facilitate the development 
of regained territories of the Caucasus. Thirdly, this is why the 
Russian Empire was looking for eastern Christians who would 
help it realize its plans in the South Caucasus. The Armenians, 
who lived mainly in the Ottoman Empire and Iran until to the ear-
ly 19th century, fit into the plan. After losing their statehood for the 
fourth time in the 11th century130, they ended up in the Diaspora 
(Spiurk)131. Living in Ottoman and Iranian lands for centuries, Ar-
menians learned local languages and customs, but also preserved 
their own Christianity and self-consciousness. The entire credit 
for that should be given to the Gregorian Church, which, in the ab-
130  K. Yuzbashyan, Armenian states of the times of Badratids and Byzantine of the 
9th-11th centuries. P.4-5, 170; G. Sarkisyan, K. Khudaverdyan, K. Yuzbashyan. Ancestry of 
Hayk. Essay on history and culture of Armenia from ancient times to the formation of 
the Third Republic. Ch. VI and IX; History of Armenian people. Yerevan, 1980. Ch. V/4, 
VI/4, VIII/1.
131  K. Yuzbashyan, Armenian states of times of Badratids and Byzantine of the 
9th-11th centuries. P.4; G. Sarkisyan, K. Khudaverdyan, K. Yuzbashyan. Ancestry of Hayk. 
Essay on history and culture of Armenia from ancient times to the formation of the 
Third Republic. Ch. IX, XIII, XX.
Why are Armenians not Caucasians?
58
Musa MARJANLI. Armenians. Russia. The Caucasus
sence of an Armenian statehood for many centuries, was the only 
factor preserving the Armenian language and literature, ideology 
and science, mentality and self-consciousness. 
It was for these reasons that the Russian Empire, competing 
with Ottoman sultans and Iranian shahs for the Caucasus, decided 
to use Armenians and their church in its own strategic interests. 
In the early 19th century, it waged two victorious wars with the 
Iranian state (1804-1813 and 1826-1628) and two with the Ottoman 
Empire (1806-1812 and 1828-1829). One of the key results of the 
two treaties signed at the end of the wars – the Russian-Iranian 
Treaty of Turkmenchay (1828) and the Russian-Ottoman Treaty of 
Adrianople (1829) – was the mass resettlement of Ottoman and 
Iranian Armenians to the Caucasus, mainly to the South Cauca 
sus and Northern Azerbaijan, which started in the early 19th cen-
tury. It was then that all 11 Northern Azerbaijani khanates were 
abolished and became districts of the Russian Empire. Therefore, 
the process of Armenian settlement in Northern Azerbaijan was 
conducted peacefully and supervised by Russian authorities. As 
we mentioned earlier, an Armenian district was established at the 
expense of Azerbaijan’s Erivan and Nakhchivan khanates.
In connection with the above it should also be noted that the 
appearance of Armenians in Asia, including the Caucasus, is a long 
territorial and chronological process of migration which started 
on the European continent. Therefore, “one of the main subjects 
of Armenian studies is the resettlement of Armenians from native 
lands”132. These words by a modern Armenian scholar are perhaps 
the best description of the “painful” topic of Armenian studies since 
the start of the search for “a homeland of the Armenian people”. The 
process began long ago but is still ongoing. The search led Armenian 
scholars to discover 26 “Armenias” in Asia Minor, what has been 
mentioned above. Unable to choose one, they found a way out by 
creating the “Great Armenia” myth of many virtual “Armenias”133. 
132  V. Arutyunova-Fidanian, Narration about Armenian affairs. 7th century. P. 68.
133  S. Yeremyan, Atlas and book of the “History of Armenian people”. Part I. 
59
For the reasons mentioned above, the slogan “Armenia, 
Armenia! Our homeland, our land!” which Armenians frequent-
ly chant is not quite clear. One is tempted to ask what particular 
“Armenia” is meant not by ordinary Armenians, but by great 
representatives of Armenianism such as “the father of Armenian 
history” Moses Khorenatsi, poet Avetik Isaakyan, artist Martiros 
Saryan, writer William Saroyan. There is another question comes 
that to mind: if Armenians are so patriotic, then why do they live 
mainly abroad? It is well known that Armenians have lived away 
from home since early Middle Ages. 
Today, there are 7 million Armenians in the world134 and they 
live in over 70 countries. According to the Ministry of Statistics 
of the Republic of Armenia, 3,803,400 people lived in Armenia as 
of 1 January 2000135, while other sources suggest that there were 
2,500,000 people left in Armenia by 1994136. According to British 
weekly The Economist, a total of 750,000 Armenians emigrated 
from the country in 1993137. In the opinion of E. Khojabekian, “the 
situation in Armenia over the last 10-15 years has made it is im-
possible to define a specific number of people living in the country 
and produce a demographic picture”138. The same author points to 
a “reduction in the natural population growth” and “an unprec-
Yerevan, 1951; Ditto, Armenia according to “Ashharacuic” (Armenian geography of the 
7th century); G. Sarkisyan, K. Khudaverdyan, K. Yuzbashyan, Ancestry of Hayk. Essay 
on history and culture of Armenia from ancient times to the formation of the Third 
Republic. P. 11-13, 21-23, 28, 76-78,86-88, 106-112, 150-158, 164-176; maps on p.13, 24-
25, 72-73, 107; V. Arutyunova-Fidanian, Narration about Armenian affairs. 7th century. 
Endpaper map and index of geographical names; K. Yuzbashian, Armenian states of the 
times of Badratids and Byzantine of the 9th-11th centuries. Ch. 1/2, II, IV/4, 5, 6, V/2, 3, 
4, 5.
134  S. Arutyunov, Y. Mkrtumyan, Armenians // Peoples and religions of the world: 
Encyclopedia. M., 1998. P. 57; www.iatp/am/economics/migr/demo-r11/htm/
135  www.iatp/am/economics/migr/demo-r11/htm/
136  Ditto.
137  Ditto. 
138  V. Khojabekyan, Demography and employment in Armenia. From the early 
19th to mid-21st centuries. Yerevan, 2006. P. 465. 
Why are Armenians not Caucasians?
60
Musa MARJANLI. Armenians. Russia. The Caucasus
edented rate of migration”139. 
At present, Armenians have settlements in Georgia and Na-
gorno-Karabakh (Azerbaijan Republic). Before the collapse of 
the USSR, 390,505 Armenians lived in Northern Azerbaijan140, 
including 137,000 in the Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Re-
gion of the Azerbaijan SSR141. Armenians live in the following 
countries of the world: Russia – 533,000, USA – 700,000, France 
– 270,000, Iran – 200,000, Syria – 150,000, Lebanon – 150,000, Tur-
key – 150,000, Argentine – 70,000, Ukraine – 54,000, Uzbekistan – 
50,000, Turkmenistan – 32,000, Bulgaria – 25,000, Canada – 20,000, 
Iraq – 20,000, Kazakhstan – 19,000, Australia – 16,000, Greece – 15,000, 
Egypt – 15,000, Uruguay – 15,000, Great Brit-
ain – 15,000, Kuwait – 10,000, Romania – 6,000142. 
The political, territorial and ethno-confessional developments in 
the history of the Armenian people are related to a number of sig-
nificant factors. It is perhaps for this reason that Armenian schol-
ars, starting from the times of “the father of Armenian history” 
Moses Khorenatsi (5th century), have not been writing “a history 
of Armenia” as a territory, but the history of the Armenian peo-
ple. Thus, Moses Khorenatsi wrote a “History of the Armenians” 
(“Hayots Patmutyun”)143. Subsequently, however, the research 
was often described as the “History of Armenia”, without speci-
fying though which of the 26 “Armenias” it was dealing with. In 
Soviet times, scholars reverted to the “original source” and there 
appeared a series of publications on the “History of the Armenian 
people”. This tradition was preserved in the post-Soviet period 
139  V. Khojabekyan, Demography and employment in Armenia. From the early 
19th to mid-21st centuries. Yerevan, 2006. P. 470.
140  Soyuz (Moscow). August, 1990. No. 32. P. 12-13.
141  National economy of the Azerbaijan SSR by the 70th anniversary of Great 
October. Anniversary statistical digest. Baku, 1987. P. 270. 
142  S. Arutyunov, Y. Mkrtumyan, Armenians // Peoples and religions of the world: 
Encyclopedia. M., 1998. P. 56-57; www.armnet.ru/armenia_html/population.htm; 
www.iatp.am/economics/migr/obd.htm/
143  Soviet Historical Encyclopedia. Vol. 9. Col. 537. M.,1966.
61
too, as the “History of the Armenian people” was published in 
Yerevan in 2003144. Otherwise, it would be impossible to present 
a theory that cannot be specified or attributed to any of the 26 
“Armenias”145. Naturally, there have been instances when a “His-
tory of Armenia” was published as well, and this referred to the 
“Caucasian Armenia” although it never covered the history of the 
Armenian people146. 
Sometimes Armenian scholars falsify both the names and 
content of works in the original language, which is Alban in this 
particular case. The language was used in the Azerbaijani state 
of Albania (3rd century B.C. – 7th century A.D.) and in ancient Ar-
menian translations. They have not survived to the present day 
in the original language and are in ancient Armenian for reasons 
known too well147. Here are some of them:
•	 The “History of Albanians” by 8th century Alban au-
thor Moses Kaghankatouatsi has reached us in ancient Armenian. 
In 1861, Armenian scholar K. Patkanyan published this research in 
his own translation into Russian148. In 1984, when the research was 
released in Russian translation with comments by S. Smbatyan, it 
was edited and “slightly” Armenianized even though we are talk-
ing about an Azerbaijani state of Albania. In fact, both the name of 
the author and the title of the work were distorted149. 
•	 The Russian version of the code of laws by Alban 
author Mkhit’ar Gos, which has survived to the present day in an-
cient Armenian, was described as Armenian Code of Laws150, even 
144  History of the Armenian people in questions and answers. Yerevan, 2003.
145  History of the Armenian people. Part I / Edited by B. Arakelyan and A. 
Johnisyan. Yerevan, 1951; History of the Armenian people. Yerevan, 1980.
146  K. Trever, Essays on the history of culture of ancient Armenia. M., L.,1953; A. 
Ter-Gevondyan, Armenia and the Arab Caliphate. Yerevan, 1977. 
147  U. Hajieva, Ethnic removal of Caucasian Albanians in the 19th century. Baku, 2004.
148  The History of the Caucasian Albanians by Moses Kaghankatouatsi, 10th 
century writer. S. Petersburg, 1861.
149  Moses Kaghankatouatsi, History of the Land of Aluank. Yerevan, 1984. 
150  Armenian Code of Laws by Mxit’ar Gos / Transl. from ancient Armenian by  A. 
Papovyan. Yerevan, 1954. 
Why are Armenians not Caucasians?
62
Musa MARJANLI. Armenians. Russia. The Caucasus
though it contains legal canons of the Azerbaijani state of Albania. 
•	 13th century Alban author Kirakos Gandzaketsi 
wrote a History, which was published in the Russian language by 
T. Ter-Grigoryan in 1947151. Almost 30 years later, it was repub-
lished in Russian translation by L. Khanlaryan and was named 
History of Armenia, although it wasn’t about the same “country”152.
After the break-up of the USSR in 1991, Armenians pub-
lished a new version of their history. However, they did not ven-
ture to call it the “History of Armenia” and gave it a poetic name, 
Ancestry of Hayk, a mythical forefather of the Armenian people. 
It was noted in a sub-headline that the work was about Armenia, 
though no detail was provided of the place name153. 
It is noteworthy that over the decades of manipulation with 
the geographical notion of “Armenia”, Armenian scholars devel-
oped a cliché which helps them avoid localizing the virtual “Ar-
menia” in publications. Laymen can hardly determine the location 
of the country called “Armenia”.
Why is it that Georgians publish the “History of Georgia”, 
Frenchmen the “History of France”, Azerbaijanis the “History of 
Azerbaijan”, Iranians the “History of Iran”, Chinese the “History 
of China”, but Armenian scholars publish the “History of the Ar-
menian people”?
In connection with the above, a rhetorical or indeed a sacra-
mental question arises: why do Armenian scholars write the “His 
tory of the Armenian people” as an ethnicity, not the “History of 
Armenia” as country?
•	 One of the most celebrated Armenian scholars, re-
searcher of the Byzantine Empire, full member of the Im-
perial Russian Archeological Society, Professor of St Peters-
burg University and the University of Brussels, researcher 
151  Kirakos Gandzaketsi. History. Baku, 1947. 
152  Kirakos Gandzaketsi History of Armenia. M., 1976.
153  See: G. Sarkisyan, K. Khudaverdyan, K. Yuzbashyan, Ancestry of Hayk. Essay 
on the history and culture of Armenia from ancient times to the formation of the Third 
Republic.
63
of problems of medieval political, economic, social, cultural 
and confessional life of the Armenian people, N. Adonts 
(1871-1942)154, wrote more than 100 years ago, “In the 8th cen-
tury B.C., under pressure from Scythians or the Saka from 
the east, Cimmerians moved westwards, to the banks of the 
Danube, entered Thrace and, by taking Thracian tribes with 
them (including Phryges and Armenians), headed for Asia 
Minor”155. Further, Adonts wrote: “Herodotus considers Ar-
menians as having come from Phrygia”156. In other words, 
before the 8th century B.C. Armenian ancestors lived in the 
historical area of Thrace in the Balkans, i.e. in Europe, from 
where they migrated, together with Cimmerian tribes, to 
Thrace in Anatolia, i.e. to Asia. Thus, during the migration 
of “peoples of the Sea”, the “Armens” entered Asia Minor to 
gether with relative tribes from the Balkans. Then, they pro-
ceeded farther to Armenian highlands (eastern part of Asia 
Minor – M.M.)”157. Therefore, Adonts goes on, “based on 
this evidence, researchers believe that Armenians belong to 
Phrygian tribes who used to live in Thrace. It is also believed 
that, seized by the Cimmerian movement, Armenians moved 
from there to Asia Minor and then, after breaking away from 
their Phrygian kinsmen, moved forward and settled down in 
the upper reaches of the Alys River on the right side of the 
Euphrates”158.
•	 According to the “father of history”, 5th century B.C. 
Greek author Herodotus, Armenian ancestors lived north of 
Assyrians, i.e. up of the Euphrates, in Phrygian territory159.
•	 Ancient Greek geographer and historian Strabo (1st 
154  V. Arutyunova-Fidanyan, N. Adonts // Orthodox Encyclopedia. Vol. I. M., 
2000. P. 309-310; The Soviet Historical Encyclopedia. Vol. I. Col. 217.
155  A. Adonts, Armenia // New Brokgauz-Efron Encyclopedia. Vol. 3. Col. 601. 
156  Ditto.
157  History of Armenian people. 1980. P.27. 
158  Armenia // New Brokgauz-Efron Encyclopedia. Vol. 3. Col. 601-602.  
159  Herodotus. I:180, 194; III:93; V:49, 52; VII:73.
Why are Armenians not Caucasians?
64
Musa MARJANLI. Armenians. Russia. The Caucasus
century B.C. – 1st century A.D.) suggested that Armenians 
originated from Armenion, a historical region of Thessaly in 
Northern Greece160. 
•	 Russian 19th century researcher of the Caucasus, 
I. Chopin, also considered “Armenians as newcomers (in 
the Caucasus. – M.M.). They are related to Phrygians and 
Ionians who moved to the northern valleys of Anatolian 
Mountains”161.
•	 Prominent Armenian linguist and historian, Acade-
mician G. Kapantsian (1887-1957), while describing the ter-
ritory occupied by Armenian ancestors in Asia Minor, wrote 
in the first half of the 20th century: “The country of Hayasa-
Azzi was mainly located between the upper reaches of the 
Euphrates (Karasu), the Ch’orokhi and the Aras”162.
•	 Well-known Armenian philologist, expert in litera-
ture and linguist, Academician of the Armenian Academy of 
Sciences M. Abegian (1865-1944)163 wrote in the latter half of 
the 20th century: “Armenian ancestors lived in Europe long 
before our era, near Phrygians and Thracians. From there 
they moved to Asia Minor, where they may have lived neat 
Phrygians for some time, because Greek writer Herodotus 
considers them a colony originating from the Phrygians. This 
indicates that back at the times of Herodotus, the 5th century 
B.C., it was clear that Armenians had come to their country 
from the west”164.
•	  Outstanding historian, philologist and linguist I. 
Dyakonov, based on an analysis of ancient Armenian lan-
160  Strabo. XI:503.
161  I. Chopin, New notes on the ancient history of the Caucasus and its inhabitants. 
S. Petersburg, 1896. P. 26.
162  G. Kapantsyan, Hayas – Armenian cradle. Armenian Ethnogenesis and prehistory. 
Yerevan, 1947. P. 240, 242. Ditto. Historical-linguistic works. To Armenian prehistory. Ancient 
Asia Minor. Yerevan, 1956; ditto. To the origin of the Armenian language. Yerevan, 1946.   
163  V. Arutyunova-Fidanian, M. Abegian // Orthodox Encyclopedia. Vol. I. P. 40-41.
164  M.. Abegyan, History of ancient Armenian literature. Yerevan, 1975. P. 12-13.
65
guage, denies its Urartian nature and considers that “the 
Proto-Armenian language, linguistic ancestor of ancient Ar-
menian, could only be Indo-European, which is not related to 
Hurrit-Urartian, Hattic, modern Caucasian languages or Se-
mitic languages”165. He adds that “since ancient Armenian is 
not related to the languages of the autochthons of Armenian 
highlands, Hurrits and Urartians, it is obvious that it comes 
from outside”166. 
•	 In the late the 20th century, Armenian scholars wrote, 
“The Armenian homeland, a place where they emerged as 
a separate people is the Armenian highlands”167, i.e. eastern 
part of Asia Minor. 
•	 As I. Magakyan writes, “Armenian highlands are in 
the middle of the three West Asia highlands. They are situated 
mainly in Turkey… From a geological and structural stand-
point, they are part of the Mediterranean Alpine zone”168.
Proceeding from objective information that Armenians are 
not autochthons, but allochtons, or newcomers, in the Caucasus, 
let’s point to the following. They appeared in Asia Minor, espe-
cially in the South Caucasus, as a result of political, military and 
migration circumstances. In addition to the above evidence which 
is confirmed by Armenian, Russian and western authors, let’s also 
refer to the following. 
First, notorious Armenian writer and journalist Zori Balay-
an wrote of an Armenian disease. “There are around 4,000 ethnici-
ties and peoples in the world, and only Armenians have their own 
‘disease’”169. The Big Medical Encyclopedia provides the following 
165  I. Dyakonov, Prehistory of the Armenian people. Yerevan, 1968. P. 202-203. 
166  Ditto. P. 202. 
167  G. Sarkisyan, K. Khudaverdyan, K. Yuzbashyan, Ancestry of Hayk. Essay 
on history and culture of Armenia from ancient times to the formation of the Third 
Republic. P. 7. 
168  I. Magakyan, Armenia in the Central Mediterranean system // Academy of 
Sciences of Armenia, 1966. Vol. 42. No. 4. 
169  Z. Balayan, Ochaq (hotbed). Yerevan, 1984. P. 289.
Why are Armenians not Caucasians?
66
Musa MARJANLI. Armenians. Russia. The Caucasus
definition of the “Armenian disease”170: “A periodic disease: (Syn.: 
Armenian Syndrome, Janeway-Mothental Paroxysmal Syndrome, 
Periodic Peritonitis Syndrome, the Reiman Syndrome, the Siegel-
Cattan-Mamou Syndrome, the Familial Mediterranean fever) is 
a rare and inherited disease characterized by recurrent serositis 
and frequent amyloidosis. The disease was first described in the 
17th century, but S. Siegal expounded and classified its clinical fea-
tures only in 1949, drawing attention to the ethnic selectivity and 
hereditary nature of the pathology… In most instances, the dis-
ease affects persons whose ancestors lived in the Mediterranean 
basin, e.g. Armenians, Jews (mostly Sephardic Jews), Arabs and 
only 6 per cent among other ethnicities (highlighted by myself 
– M.M.)… Persons affected by the disease are supposed to have 
congenital metabolic and enzymatic disorders that leads to abnor-
malities in immune and endocrine systems, protein synthesis and 
proteolysis… Abnormalities of cellular metabolism are evidenced 
by the development of amyloidosis irrespective of the seriousness 
of the disease. This attests to the genetic nature of the disease… 
The disease is diagnosed on the basis of the following criteria: 1) 
first symptoms of the disease at a child or adolescent age, mainly 
among certain ethnic groups; 2) frequent detection of the disease 
among relatives; 3) occasional short and typical relapses (abdomi-
nal, thoracal, articular, feverish) not caused by specific reasons; 4) 
frequent amyloidosis of kidneys. Laboratory indices are largely 
non-specific and indicate the degree of inflammatory response or 
the degree of kidney insufficiency… The prognosis for survival 
is favorable. The occurrence of the disease does not usually ham-
per physical or mental development or marriage. Very frequent 
relapses of the disease may lead to physical incapacity, while pa-
tients with amyloidosis (often in persons below 40) may have kid-
ney insufficiency and disability”. 
In connection with the above, a question may be asked: 
170  O. Vinogradova, Periodic Disease // The Big Medical Encyclopedia 3rd edition. 
Vol. XIX. M.,1982. Col. 181-185.
67
where did the Armenian ethnicity emerge?
 We have described the Armenian disease deliberately to 
help the reader understand where Armenian ancestors actually 
came from. The description of the disease, as well as Z. Balayan’s 
dubious pride over the Armenian “disease”, confirm that the Ar-
menian writer’s ancestors are not autochthons of the Caucasus. On 
the contrary, it is indicated again that the homeland of Armenian 
ancestors is the Mediterranean Europe, the historical area of Thrace 
in the Balkans, from where they migrated to Asia. It should also be 
noted that “according to Indo-European linguistics, the Armenian 
language represents an independent branch in the family of Indo-
European (Aryan) languages”171. At the same time, as M. Abegyan 
writes, “the Armenian language is not quite Indo-European. It is 
transitory from the family of Japhetic languages to the European 
system”172. In other words, the place of the Armenian language in 
the linguistic family has not been determined up to now. This was 
also confirmed by N. Adonts, who wrote 100 years ago, “Devel-
oping in ethnically diverse surroundings, the language could not 
preserve its purity; indeed, the Armenian language is such a com-
plex organism that it can still hardly be analyzed linguistically”173.
Second. According to Armenian scholars, the Armenian 
people emerged on Armenian highlands, i.e. in the east of Asia 
Minor, “the country of Hayas” “as a result of gradual blend-
ing of ancient tribes and unions living there”174. Further, “the 
Armenian people inherited the name of Hay from the tribal union 
of Hayas, and the territory they occupied became known as Hayk, 
171  M. Abegyan, History of ancient Armenian literature. P. 11.
172  Ditto. 
173  N. Adonts, The Armenian language // New Brokgauz-Efron Encyclopedia. Vol. 
3. Col 657. 
174  History of Armenian people, 1980. P. 27; G. Kapancyan, Hayas – Armenian 
cradle. P. 240, 242; S. Yeremyan, Atlas to the Book “History of Armenian people”. Map 
“Armenian highlands”; G. Sarkisyan, K. Khudaverdyan, K. Yuzbashyan, Ancestry of 
Hayk. Essay on history and culture of Armenia from ancient times to the formation of 
the Third Republic. P. 7.  
Why are Armenians not Caucasians?
68
Musa MARJANLI. Armenians. Russia. The Caucasus
or Hayastan”175. 
A. Adonts notes: “The blending of two ethnic elements led 
to the formation of a nucleus of the Armenian ethnicity which was 
further expanded due to the influx of ethnic streams of neigh-
boring states. Due to the dual nucleus, Armenians were referred 
to in two ways: “hai at home and armeni-us (arminiya in Darius’ 
inscription) abroad. Accordingly, ancient Armenian legends of Mo-
ses Khorenatsi also point to these two eponyms – haik and armen-ak”176. 
Armenian scholars also talk of the following: a tribal union of 
Hayas was situated in the upper reaches of the Euphrates; the 
tribes settled there were Indo-European Armenian-speaking and 
were called mushku and urumu in Assyrian cuneiforms, arims – 
in Greek records and further – armens177.
Thus, above is the data from first sources and experts 
on Armenia. It confirms that the Armenian ethnicity emerged 
outside the Caucasus, in Asia Minor. Accordingly, there is a 
theory that Armenian ancestors were a Thracian tribe which 
subsequently moved to Asia Minor. The first territory in the re-
gion which became known as “Armenia” is a mountain country 
where the Euphrates and the Tigris originate. From here they 
subsequently moved into the valley of the Aras, then into the 
valley of the Kura river, i.e. to the Caucasus.
Third. M. Abegyan writes: “The Armenian language is of In-
do-European origin only in part. Many words, particles and gram-
matical forms which have not been explained yet may be linked 
to the tribes that did not speak Indo-European languages”178. In 
particular, the author implies the tribes of Hittites, Luwians, Hur-
rits and Urartians, which inhabited Asia Minor and influenced not 
175  History of Armenian people. 1951. P. 25, 27.
176  A. Adonts, Armenia // New Brokgauz-Efron Encyclopedia. Vol. 3. Col 602; See 
also: G. Sarkisyan, K. Khudaverdyan, K. Yuzbashyan, Ancestry of Hayk. Essay on history 
and culture of Armenia from ancient times to the formation of the Third Republic. P.10-
11; History of Armenian people. 1980. P. 27.
177  History of Armenian people. 1980. P. 17-18, 27-28.
178  M. Abegyan, History of ancient Armenian literature. P. 13-14.
69
only the Armenian language but also the formation of the Arme-
nian ethnicity. M.. Abegyan also notes that Armenian culture was 
also influenced by its neighbors. Armenians adopted a lot from 
them, including the art of war, lifestyle, social life, crafts, trade, 
religion, flora and Armenian onomastics. 
•	 This influence “is primarily noticeable in the Armenian lan-
guage which has so many completely Armenianized Persian 
words adopted mainly in the Parthian epoch (3rd century B.C. 
– 3rd century A.D. – M.M.) and similar to Pehlevi words (3rd – 6th 
centuries – M.M.). For what, the Armenian language was once 
attributed to the Iranian branch of Indo-European languages. 
There are numerous proper names; approximately 800 word 
roots are borrowed from Persian… Religious beliefs and the 
cult of ancient Armenians were also considerably affected by 
Persian”179. 
•	 “simultaneously with the Iranians, Armenians established re 
lations in the south with the inhabitants of Mesopotamia and 
Assyria – the Aramaics which were described as Syrians af-
ter Christianization of the region. Armenians were influenced 
by their higher culture… As a result, the Armenians adopted 
many good things from the Syrians. The Syriac language had 
an impact on the Armenian, albeit less than Persian. There are 
many Syrian words in Armenian which have now been Ar 
menianized … Syrians, too, have had an impact on Armenian 
religion”180. 
•	 Armenian expert on Syria G. Melkonyan also points to the im-
pact of Syrian culture on Armenians of Asia Minor, in particu-
lar the adopted Syriac terms, numerous translations of differ-
ent works from Syriac into ancient Armenian181.
•	 It would be worth mentioning regarding the connection be-
179  M. Abegyan, History of ancient Armenian literature. P. 13-14.
180  Ditto. P. 14.
181  G. Melkonyan, Armenian-Syrian relations in the 3rd-5th centuries: (excerpt 
from a thesis). Yerevan, 1964. 
Why are Armenians not Caucasians?
70
Musa MARJANLI. Armenians. Russia. The Caucasus
tween Syrians and Armenians that latter adopted Christianity 
from the former in the 4th century; before the Armenian alpha-
bet, Armenians used the Syriac script; education in Armenian 
schools was conducted in Syriac; the Peshitta, Syriac version of 
the Bible, was popular; there were Syrians among Armenian 
religious hierarchs, e.g. Barkisho (426-429)182.
Fourth. Armenian scholars of the 20th century adhered to the 
following tendency. Whereas at the dawn of the century they 
claimed that Armenian ancestors had come to Asia from Europe, 
afterwards they referred to Asia Minor as a place where the Ar-
menian ethnicity emerged. At the end of the 20th century, schol-
ars already said Armenians were natives of the Caucasus. In other 
words, as Armenians moved from eastwards, experts on Armenia 
revised the origin of the Armenians. 
Fifth. Proceeding from the above, it is quite clear why 
Armenian scholars talk of a “history of the Armenian people” as an 
ethnicity, not the “history of Armenia” as a territory. Georgian his-
torians write about the “history of Georgia”, i.e. a territory on which 
Georgian forefathers used to live; Azerbaijani historians write 
about the “history of Azerbaijan”, i.e. a place where their ancestors 
lived. In other words, Armenian neighbors in the South Caucasus 
are studying not only their past, but also the history of the ethnic 
territory in which their forefathers lived. Armenians currently in-
habit an “Armenian geographic space”, which experts on Armenia 
describe as “Eastern Armenia”. However, it would be fair to call it 
“Caucasian Armenia” where Armenians appeared in the wake of 
military and political developments of 19th – early 20th centuries. 
Sixth. No other ethnicity has ever had so many definitions for 
its territory. Armenians did not and could not have lands outside 
Thrace; this is why they moved from one place to another so eas-
ily; without knowing where to settle down, they were always on 
the move and always changed the name of the place, considering 
it their another “homeland”. However, the Armenians were not 
182  Orthodox Encyclopedia. Vol. III. P. 352.
71
satisfied with that. This is how many “Armenian states” appeared 
on “the historical maps of Armenia”: “Great Armenia” (886-1045) 
with the capital in Yerazgavors (Shirakavan), Kars and Ani. Later, 
“this kingdom was divided into the kingdom of Vaspurakan with 
 
the capital in Van, the kingdom of Kars or Vanand with the capital 
in Kars, the Kingdom of Lori or Tashir-Dzoraget with the capital 
in Shamshvilde, the Kingdom of Syunik with the capital in Sisyan 
and Kapan, the kingdom of Parisos with the capital in Parisos, and 
princedom of Taron183. Thus, in the 9th-11th centuries there were six 
Armenian states. 
Also unique is the definition of “Armenia outside Armenia”184, 
which refers to Armenians in Byzantine, the Cilician Armenian 
state, Armenian settlements, i.e. the Diaspora that started form-
ing in the 4th century following first division of Armenia. “The 
specific conditions emerging in Armenia under foreign rule made 
Armenians leave their homeland and seek refuge away from home, 
within the Byzantine empire. The exodus to Byzantium began af-
ter the first division of Armenia (387) and intensified under the Ar 
abs and Seljuks. Besides emigration, there were was also overt and 
covert deportation of the Armenians”185. Nonetheless, Armenians 
settled down everywhere. Even in Byzantium, where they always 
seemed alien, they achieved a lot186. The same was subsequently 
observed in the Ottoman and Russian Empires. 
183  G. Sarkisyan, K. Khudaverdyan, K. Yuzbashyan, Ancestry of Hayk. Essay 
on history and culture of Armenia from ancient times to the formation of the Third 
Republic. P. 11, 21, 28, 76, 106, 153, 164; K. Yuzbashyan, Armenian states of times of 
Badratids and Byzantine of IX-XI centuries. P. 22, 150, 156, 172.
184  G. Sarkisyan, K. Khudaverdyan, K. Yuzbashyan, Ancestry of Hayk. Essay 
on history and culture of Armenia from ancient times to the formation of the Third 
Republic. Ch. IX.
185  K. Yuzbashyan, Armenian states of the times of Badratids and Byzantine of 9th-
11th centuries. P. 4. 
186  A. Kajdan, Armenians in the ruling class of the Byzantine Empire of the 11th-
12th centuries. Yerevan, 1975.
Why are Armenians not Caucasians?
72
The above information gives rise to yet another question: why 
have Armenians migrated from one place to another for centuries? 
The historical reality whereby the Armenian ethnicity existed 
without a state has led to the appearance of the Armenian Dias-
pora where most Armenians have lived since the 4th century187. 
“Travelling” from Thrace in Europe to Asia in the East, Arme-
nian ancestors experienced the geopolitical plans of regional su-
perpowers, communicated with different peoples, languages and 
cultures. Their earliest historical recollections are related to Hellas 
and Rome, which treated Armenians like other non-Greeks and 
non-Romans. In particular, the standard formula that “Armenia 
is a friend and ally of the Romans” is evidence of their depen-
dence during their stay in Asia Minor. The time of Byzantium and 
the Sasanids proved more severe: in 387 these superpowers di-
vided the Armenian state in Asia Minor between themselves188. 
In 591, the second division of the newly-established Armenian 
 kingdom in Asia Minor occurred189. In 1045, Byzantium liquidated the 
Armenian kingdom restored in the 9th century190. In 1080-1375, 
there was a Princedom of Cilicia in Asia Minor, which was liq-
uidated by the Mamelukes which ruled Egypt and Syria (1250-
1517)191. Between then and 1918, i.e. for over 500 years, there was 
no Armenian state. 
187  G. Sarkisyan, K. Khudaverdyan, K. Yuzbashyan, Ancestry of Hayk. Essay 
on history and culture of Armenia from ancient times to the formation of the Third 
Republic. Ch. IX, XIII, XX; K. Yuzbashyan, Armenian states of times of Badratids and 
Byzantine of 9th-11th centuries. P. 4.
188  G. Sarkisyan, K. Khudaverdyan, K. Yuzbashyan, Ancestry of Hayk. Essay 
on history and culture of Armenia from ancient times to the formation of the Third 
Republic. P. 69, 76; K. Yuzbashyan, Armenian states of times of Badratids and Byzantine 
of 9th-11th centuries. P. 4, 5.
189  G. Sarkisyan, K. Khudaverdyan, K. Yuzbashyan, Ancestry of Hayk. Essay on history 
and culture of Armenia from ancient times to the formation of the Third Republic. P. 78; K. 
Yuzbashyan.  Armenian states of times of Badratids and Byzantine of 9th-11th centuries. P. 5.
190  G. Sarkisyan, K. Khudaverdyan, K. Yuzbashyan, Ancestry of Hayk. P. 170, 172. 
191  G. Mikaelyan The Armenian kingdom of Cilicia. Yerevan., 1952; G. Sarkisyan, 
K. Khudaverdyan, K. Yuzbashyan, Ancestry of Hayk. Essay on history and culture of 
Armenia from ancient times to the formation of the Third Republic. Ch. IX.
Musa MARJANLI. Armenians. Russia. The Caucasus
73
Under such circumstances, defined as interregnum, Arme 
nians appeal to their Catholicos for moral and political support. 
As a result, on orders from the latter there appear researches de-
scribing Armenians wandering in Asia Minor and numerous “Ar-
menias”. This baton is picked up by experts on Armenia dwelling 
on a multitude of “Armenias” depending on the epoch being and 
the social order.
Thus, the beginning of the Armenian migration and the for-
mation of the Armenian Diaspora date back to the 4th century. 
There were two stages of mass migration of Armenians. The first 
stage occurred after the 4th century: the time when the Diaspo 
ra emerged and first deportation organized by Byzantium took 
place. The second stage was the mass migration of Ottoman and 
Iranian Armenians organized by the Russian Empire. Armenians 
were settled in the South Caucasus, mainly Northern Azerbaijan, 
where an Armenian area was established specifically for them in 
1828. As a result, the ethno-geographic and confessional situation 
in the region underwent dramatic change (See Table):
     
Thus, a non-Caucasian element appeared in the ethno-demo-
graphic structure of the Caucasus. However, back in the 18th-19th 
centuries the Caucasus region and its autochthons had also seen 
State
Number of Armenians 
before the first third of the 
19th century
Number of Armenians after the 
first third of the 19th century
Ottoman 2,560,000 1,000,000 (150,000 in present-day Turkey)
Iranian 70,000 (estimated)
30,000 (estimated) 
(200,000 in the present-day 
Islamic Republic of Iran, mainly 
Southern Azerbaijan)
Russian Almost no Armenians 1,300,000, mainly in Northern Azerbaijan
Why are Armenians not Caucasians?
74
tribes and peoples attracted by its natural wealth, the important 
commercial and transit roads linking north with south and east 
with west. For example, the Huns, Bulgars, Sabirs, Kurds, Tats 
and Arabs settled down here in the early middle ages. Later the 
Seljuks, Mongols, Tatars, Kalmyks and Russians appeared. The 
region’s ethnic map permanently changed, which was one of the 
geopolitical consequences of the transforming world. The tenden-
cy remained until the 19th century. In the early 19th century sepa-
ratist Germans from the Kingdom of Württemberg moved to the 
Caucasus with the permission of Russian Emperor Alexander I192. 
However, there were much more Armenians than any other set-
tlers. This is confirmed by the data as of the early 20th century. 
Among migrants to the Caucasus, there were 148,970 Kurds, in 
cluding 148,906 in the South Caucasus, Jews constituted 87,784 and 
77,226 respectively; Europeans 169,931 and 93,476; Armenians – 
1,713,169 and 1,659, 063193. Specifically in the Northern Azerbai-
jan, Germans numbered 159,900 people or 0.4 per cent of the total 
population, Russians 249,779 or 6.65 per cent, Kurds 114,001 or 
3.03 per cent, Armenians 1,208,615 or 32.8 per cent, i.e. a third of 
all residents of the country194. 
Therefore, it was Armenians who formed the majority of the 
foreign component, i.e. the core of Russia’s migration program. 
And it was them who became the Russian Empire’s satellite factor 
in the Caucasus. As a result, the rights of autochthons, primarily 
Azerbaijanis who lost part of their territory, were infringed upon. 
The number of local Muslims fell, while the ethno-demographic 
situation changed. 
192  S. Zeynalova, Germans in the Caucasus. Baku, 2008. P. 42, 46. 
193  G. Chursin, The Caucasus // The New Brokgauz-Efron Encyclopedia. Vol. 20. 
Col. 305-306. 
194  Kh. Verdiyeva, The migration policy of the Russian Empire in Northern 
Azerbaijan. 19th-20th centuries. Baku, 1999, Ch. VI. 
Musa MARJANLI. Armenians. Russia. The Caucasus
CONCLUSION
The above confirms the well-known postulate that inter-
state and ethnic relations fall under the category of the most 
topical problems of geopolitics. This conclusion applies to 
both remote past and the present. 
The said theory also holds true for the Cauca-
sus, which is at the centre of geo-strategic atten-
tion of many powerful political players of the mod-
ern world. The world’s problems include 200-year 
relations in the “Armenia-Russia-Cauca-
sus” triangle. The North and South Cauca-
sus, i.e. Russia, Azerbaijan and Georgia, are im 
portant components of this multi-functional figure. How-
ever, the problems of Nagorno-Karabakh, Javakheti and 
Borchali persistently and incessantly discussed by the Ar-
menians stand out the most. Under such circumstances, the 
Armenian triad has been using, since the 19th century, ev-
erything it possibly can and relying on those contributing 
to Armenianism in one way or another. It is not by chance 
that Russian government official K. Zubarev said in his 
Notes on the Karabakh Province: “Armenian migration to our 
provinces is one of the immortal feats in the war with Per-
sia (in 1826-1828. – M.M.). Armenians are the most faith-
ful people of the region. I would even say that they are the 
75
most honest, at least, among common people. Armenians 
from Persia are noted for diligence, most of them are crafts-
men, which is quite useful and rare in the Caucasus”195. 
Ironically enough, it is thanks to the “Church-party-Di-
aspora” triad that the role of Armenians in the Caucasus 
became increasingly important, especially in the “Arme-
nians-Russia-Caucasus” triangle.
As ancient people said, every nation deserves its own fate. 
Indeed, every nation has its own destiny, history, i.e. the 
past, the present and the future. All this is the result of the 
road passed, goals and achievements. At the same time, it 
is also the result of a people’s characteristics: its material 
and spiritual culture, historical development, self-identi-
fication and mentality, religion and self-consciousness. It 
is the indicator of the level of national cause and national 
ideology. Not only the nature of a people, but also its rela-
tions with other nations, its state and habitat are also very 
important. Other features are quite important too, because 
every people combines traits that distinguish it from others, 
confirming the concept that every nation is unique, inimi-
table and original.
Experts on Armenia use the definition of “Arme-
nians who have stayed in their historical homeland”. 
They do not accept Thrace in the Balkans, i.e. in Eu-
rope, as homeland. They consider some virtual “Arme-
nia” a homeland and refer to it every time it is required 
for a specific political aim, not scientific. This is why there 
is a great number of “Armenias”. This is why ex-
perts on Armenia have come to the conclu-
sion that “a large part of Armenian history 
195  Statements collected by the Caucasian Commission on the study and 
publication of early texts. Vol. VII. Tiflis, 1878. Doc. 411. P. 461. 
Musa MARJANLI. Armenians. Russia. The Caucasus
76
took place in the conditions of foreign rule”196. This feature of 
the Armenian ethnicity may have left a mark on the destiny, 
nature, mentality and other features of an “ethnicity”.
196  G. Sarkisyan, K. Khudaverdyan, K. Yuzbashyan, Ancestry of Hayk. Essay 
on history and culture of Armenia from ancient times to the formation of the Third 
Republic. P. 5. 
Conclusion
77
Musa MARJANLI
ARMENIANS.
RUSSIA. THE CAUCASUS
Scientific publication
Edited by the author
Please send any feedback or recommendations 
you may have to 
armyanstvo@mail.ru

