Ministry of Culture and
Tourism Republic of Azerbaijan
The “Looted Cultural Heritage and Destroyed Libraries: Victims of 
Armenian Aggression” project was developed with the purpose of the 
implementation of provision 2.2.17 of the Action Plan of the “State Program 
on the development of Azerbaijan Republic library-information sector in 
2008-2013”, approved by the decree of the President of the Republic of 
Azerbaijan on October 6,2008.
COMPILED BY:
Latifa Mammadova 
Samir Abbasov
SCIENTIFIC CONSULTANTS:
Latifa Mammadova 
Ali Eyvazov 
Mayil Ahmadov
EDITORS:
Efsun Akhmedov 
Malek Mammadova
This current publication provides brief information on the looted and 
ruined libraries of the territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan, occupied by 
the Armenian military forces as a result of the Armenian military 
aggression against Azerbaijan started in 1988.
During compilation of the statistical data on the territory of occupied 
regions of the Republic of Azerbaijan and their populations, the authors 
used information provided in the Azerbaijan National Encyclopedia (dated 
2007).
There were ethnic cleansing politics used against us. One 
million Azerbaijanis turned into refugees (IDPs) on their own lands...
We hope the negotiation process yields positive results. 
The territorial integrity of Azerbaijan will be restored, and our people 
who suffered from the occupation will return to their own lands.
Ilham Aliyev
President of the Republic of Azerbaijan 
(Speech at the opening ceremony of the 
Global Intercultural Dialogue Forum in Baku)
April 7-9, 2011
PREFACE
Prominent world scientists name Azerbaijan a natural museum and Karabakh as one of the most unique parts of 
our country. The history of Karabakh is dated to the ancient times. Scientific findings prove that Karabakh is the 
cradle of humanity. Evidence of the first human settlement in Azerbaijan (Fuzuli region) was found here. Namely, 
part of the jaw of a human being dwelling here 350-400 thousand years ago was found in Azikh cave (grotto), located 
in the territory of Karabakh.
Karabakh made a unique contribution to the world by presenting it with rare pearls of culture. Karabakh is also 
the cradle of Azerbaijani music, poetiy and other national-cultural values.
Unfortunately, the Armenian military aggression against Azerbaijan, launched since 1988, has resulted in the 
occupation of 20% of our land. In addition to our land, our precious cultural wealth has become the victim of this 
aggression. Rare samples of our material-cultural culture and samples of non-material heritage, created and 
preserved by many generations over thousands of years on the occupied lands, were destroyed by Armenians. With 
blasphemous methods, Armenians have tried to erase our national-cultural heritage from the memory of 
generations. In Shusha city the aggressor forces irrevocably destroyed 199 architectural monuments.These include 
the Upper and Lower GovharAga mosques, Saatli mosque (Clock mosque), the mausoleum of the great Azerbaijani 
poet Molla Panah Vagif, and residential buildings of the XVIII-XIX centuries.
Armenians committed unseen atrocities in Khojaly, the city known as the center of Khojaly-Gedabey 
archeological culture from the Bronze Age. Within one night the town of Khojaly was razed to the ground. Armenian 
military forces, with the support of the military forces of the 366th motorized regiment, destroyed Khojaly city and 
launched brutal carnage over the peaceful population. As a result:
•613 people were killed: 63 children, 106wsmefh----------------------- --------- —
and 70 seniors.
• 8 families were completely destroyed.
• 25 children lost both parents.
• 130 children lost one parent.
• Injured - 487 persons; of these, 76 were
A » r bay can Respubltkaat Prtiidsntinir 
!«lar idsrosl
^fdrenDENT * 'TA8*ANASI
■ People taken hostage -  1275.
' Missing persons -150  
1 Huge damage to state and private 
property, estimated at 5 billion rubles 
(valuation on 01/04/92).
Azikh and Taghlar caves, the most ancient human residences of the Near and Middle East, as well as Aquen 
temple, Ganjasar monastery, Qarakopektepe, Uzarliktepe and other historic monuments are currently used by 
Armenians for military purposes. On the occupied Azerbaijani lands, Armenian military forces have ruined, 
destroyed and looted 547 historic monuments, out of which 5 are of world, 393 of country and 149 of local 
importance. Additionally, 205 archeological monuments, 927 libraries, 808 clubs, 85 music schools, 12 monumental 
statues, 22 museums, 4 art galleries, 10 cultural and leisure parks, 4 state theatres, 2 concert halls have been de­
secrated. Armenian barbarians destroyed and ruined the globally popular Kelbajar Historic-Ethnographic museum, 
and Shusha city, which was an open-air museum and cradle of mugham art. Nowadays, you will not find the world 
renowned history museum of Karabakh, the bread museum in Aghdam, or the stone sculptures museum in Zengilan
Armenian aggressors looted and ruined around 40 thousand unique and historic museum showpieces that 
represented the heritage of many generations from the museums located in the occupied territories. Irrevocably 
destroyed are the valuable showpieces, art and sculptures, representing the history and culture of the people of 
Azerbaijan: globally famous Azerbaijan carpets, examples of decorative and applied art, manuscripts, archival 
documents, and memorable belongings of well-known public and political personalities.
There is no scale to measure the volume of moral damage maae to Azerbaijan as a result of the occupation of the
terThe'occupathonnof^20% of Azerbaijani lands, including the city of Shusha, by Armenian military forces and the 
control over those territories by the separatist forces was condemned by a number of international documents, 
namely the UN SC resolutions: 822 (dated April 30,1993), 853 (dated July 29,1993), 874 (dated October 14 1993), 884 
(dated November 11,1993), as well as Declaration 1416 of the Council of Europe. The adoption of these documents 
has yielded no result. Armenia keeps brutally violating the norms of international law and ruins the wealth of the
peogjle^of Azerb^an^s C|ear|y shOW that Armenian policy is an enemy of global human values. This brochure again 
reveals the inner face of Armenian vandalism. It speaks of the damage made to libraries that were home to the moral
treasuresof mankind and its national-cultural wealth. , ..h__
We would like to note that, in compliance with the Decree of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan, Ilham 
Aliyev, libraries of our country, including the libraries of the occupied territories, received books as gifts. These
helped to partially revitalize the book collection ofthe libraries ofthe occupied regions.
Along with the nation itself, the cultural heritage of any nation also belongs to the entire civilization. Thus, the 
cultural heritage of the nations residing in Azerbaijan is a part of our general cultural heritage. Azerbaijan is the 
common homeland of all nations living here for thousands of years. Our country has a tolerant approach to the 
culture, religion, morals, traditions and customs of all cultures and nations. \lt is obvious that one can restore the 
ruined villages and cities. They can be rebuilt, and financial damages can be paid out, but it is not possible to return 
irrevocably lost cultural values or heal the bleeding moral consciousness. We have to make the world know of the 
atrocities committed by Armenian aggressors against our national, moral and cultural values.
The booklet is one of the steps on tnis way.
region
fe ro m  i nfentppefof h is j Ia ^ M ir  Mohsoon h
SHUSHA REGION-
* •* , * • * • ‘ j
Territory of the regien: 29,0taf 
Population; 2§*700 j^eopl&Wft
• y r /  ' ’ •• v .  1
Prior to the.occupation* the Shusha
cultural monuments, 5 museums, an art gallery,’TQid 3
•) m iM v o  oi: 
s* W S i i  I tf^ 
Ib C iiry lr^ l 
M:)VV;.i!j b t 
f i ' O f ' O f t t  <:
LACHIN REGION 
Territory of the region: 1835 sq. km 
Population: 68.900 people (01.01.2006)
Armenian military forces occupied the region on May 18,1992. 
119 libraries, the Historic-Ethnographic museum, 85 clubs, and 5 
music schools were ruined and looted in Lachin as a result of the 
occupation.
Prior to the occupation, this region had a cave-temple (V 
century), tombs (XIV, XIX centuries), a fort (XVII century), a mosque 
(dated 1718), a palace (dated 1716), a bridge (XVIIJ century) and other
monuments
The Centralized Library System (CLS) of the Shusha 
region was established in 1977 as the result of the 
merging of all 32 libraries operating in the region.
Per 1991 data, CLS had 103 employees, 
and the total quantity of the library collection 
was 200,000 copies; there were 10,000 total 
readers. The Shusha region CLS actively participated 
in the promotion of reading, introduced world 
and national literature achievements to the city 
residents, organized meetings with writers and poets, 
and held “Open Doors Days” and book festivals, etc. 
Many tourists, who came for recreation to this city, 
visited the Shusha library. Shusha was 
developing and transforming into a 
poly-cultural center. Armenian military 
forces occupied Shusha on May 8,1992, 
and then the entire region was subjected 
to the ethnic cleansing operation. As a 
result of the occupation, 32 district 
libraries, rare and unique books, 
rare editions, manuscripts, photographs 
of the Karabakh khans, and correspondence 
with the Russian emperors were destroyed. All 
of that is lost forever. The ruining of the 
libraries damaged state property in the amount of 
1 mln 106 thousand Azerbaijani Manats 
libraries are currently operating
Only
)Ragteffi
The Regional Centralized Library System was established in 
the Lachin region in 1976, comprising 119 libraries. By 1991, the 
Lachin region CLS book fund had 843,000 copies of various 
publications, 20,000 readers and 119 employees. 115 branches of 
regional libraries in the villages used to have modern buildings.
Visitors of the Lachin regional Centralized Library System 
could benefit from collections of antique, unique and rare books. 
The library itself had 14 rooms and 2 reading halls for the use of the 
visitors. The Regional CLS was a key participant of region-wide 
and countrywide events.
As Armenian military forces occupied Lachin on May 18,1992, 
all of the libraries were ruined, and their collections were looted. 
The damage to the Republic of Azerbaijan equals 2,85 mln 
Azerbaijani manats.
Currently, the Lachin region Centralized Library System 
temporarily operates in the area named Takhtakorpu of Agjabedi 
region.
Even though the Lachin region is not a geographical part of 
Nagorno Karabakh, the Republic of Armenia continues its 
aggression by keeping this region under occupation and violates 
all relevant international conventions.
Librarians of this occupied region created a web site that has 
interesting data for the readers.
KELBAJAR REGION
Territory of the region: 3054 sq. km 
Population: 73.600 people (01 oi.2ooifP
Armenian military forces occupied the Kelbajar region on April 2,
■“ r  # » • »  •  r  t t i lAs a result of»the occupation, 119 libraries, 17 clubs, an art 
school, and a regional historic-ethnographic museum were ruined x s  
and looted. Prior to the occupation, Kelbajar had restored and 
preserved Alban temples of the XIII-XVIII centuries that were
' m m r m m * i m  1 P H
witnesses to our history.
kelbajar region CLS employees 
(Kelbajar region, 1992)
The Kelbajar region Centralized Library system (CLS) was 
established in 1976, based on 119 libraries serving the 
visitors. According to information from 1992, the Kelbajar 
region CLS had a book fund of 600 thousand copies, 35 
thousand readers and 175 employees. The Kelbajar region 
Central Library had been located at the special library type 
two-story building in the “New City” settlement of the city 
since 1992. At the same time, the branches of the central 
library had also been located in the new facilities and 
equipped with modern inventory and equipment. On April 2,
1993, as a result of the occupation by Armenian military 
forces, 119 library buildings, along with their book collections, 
magazines and audio materials funds, were destroyed and 
looted.
Currently the Kelbajar region Central Library and its 
branches are temporarily operating in the Gulustan settlement 
of Gandja city, where most of the IDPs from Kelbajar have 
temporarily settled.
As a result of the occupation, the whole infrastructure of 
the region and its cultural monuments, including library 
buildings, have been fully destroyed, and the state budget has 
faced damages of 2 mln 470 thousand Azerbaijan manats. On 
April 6, 1993, the UN Security Council adopted a resolution 
condemning the occupation of the Kelbajar region and other I  
regions of Azerbaijan around Nagorno Karabakh by the 
Armenian military units. Still, Armenian military forces have * 
been occupying these territories for the last 20 years.
Territory of the region!tM50^7km*  W I
Population: 167.300 people (01.01.2006)
Armenian military forces occupied the Aghdam region on July 
23,1993. * *  * ^
As a result of the occupation, 107 libraries; a historical- 
ethnographic museum; the Bread Museum; the home-museum of 
the prominent singer, Qourban Pirimov; 24 clubs; the Dramatic 
Theatre and the Picture Gallery of the Aghdam region were 
ruined and destroyed. ~
The Gutlu Musa oglu tomb (1314), the Kengerli village tomb% 
(XIV century), and 2 tombs at the Papravand village (XVIII 
century) were registered in the Aghdam region prior to the 
occupation.;-.
" Children Library of *  
Aghdam region destroyed 
by Armenian occupants
f  Prior^to jh e  occupatimyjhe region had many historical-archeological 
a n S p ^ h it^ u ^ ljm o n ^ m iS ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ a n t iq u e  population,-kursans, a
UABRAYIL*
|The Armenian military^forces^pccupied the^Jabrayil region on
August 23,1993. As a result of libraries, 3 musical
schools, and 19 clubs were ruined and looted.
The Aghdam region had many cultural sites. The 
Aghdam region Centralized Library System (CLS) was 
established in 1979 based on 107 libraries in the region.
According to the data of 1992, the Aghdam region 
CLS book fund had 970,996 books, 72,130 readers and 
170 employees.
Prior to the occupation, the region had 106 village 
libraries with 676,000 books, magazines and 
newspapers.
The Aghdam region Central Library was moved to a 
newly constructed building in 1992 and provided with 
new library inventory and equipment.
The occupation of Aghdam region on July 23,1993 
by Armenian military forces resulted in the full 
destruction of 107 libraries. Damage to the budget by 
the occupation roughly equals 2 mln 850 thousand 
Azerbaijani manats.
Currently, the Aghdam region Central Library is 
temporarily operating in the Gouzanly settlement of 
Aghdam region, where internally displaced people of 
Aghdam are settled.
10 villages of Aghdam region (20% of the region) 
that are not under the Armenian occupation are home to 
60,000 people.
The Centralized Library System (CLS) was established in the Jabrayil region in 1983 on the basis of 78 
public libraries. According to the information of 1992, the CLS had 105 employees. The book fund of the 
Jabrayil regional CLS was 552,400 thousand copies, and the readers numbered 27,800 thousand people.
The Jabrayil region CLS actively participated in “Qurbani saz bayrami” and the traditional spring 
festival ,“Novruz holidays”, was organized in the region. After the occupation of the region on August 23, |
1993 by the Armenian military forces, 78 library buildings were ruined, and unique books and rare 
ethnographic publications were destroyed.
As a result of the occupation, financial damage to regional libraries, adjusted to today's prices, equals 
1 mln 700 thousand manats. Currently, the Jabrayil region Central Library is temporarily operating at the 
camp built in Bilasuvar region, where many internally displaced people of Jabrayil have settled.
^ ? JABRAYIL REGION , $ |
Territory of the region:.1390 sq. km 
Population:J47.100 people (01.01.2006)
*~ The^Armenian rnilitary forees.occupied'FuzuTmsgPon on August
23 '? 99tf m g ?  M
As a result of the occupation, 15 historic moryjments, 90
libraries, 20 cultural houses, 45 clubs, a state dramatic theatre, 2 
m •» ♦»*
museums and other buildings were ruined and looted.
Prior to the^ccupation, sites of early population, mounds,
tombs (XIII-XVIII centuries), mosques (XVII-XIX centuries), and a
Karavansara (1684) were reg istered in the reg ion.
and other historic sites.»
occupation by Armenians'
The Fuzuli region Centralized Library System (CLS) was established in 1978 on the basis of the Central 
Library and 89 village libraries. According to 1992 information, the regional CLS had 171 employees. The 
book fund of the Fuzuli region CLS had over 900 thousand copies, and the number of readers was 45,620 
people. As a result of the occupation by the Armenian military forces on August 23,1993, all of the libraries 
in this region were ruined and looted. The total amount of damage from the occupation to the libraries of 
this region tentatively equals 1 mln 889 thousand Azerbaijani manats.
Currently, the Fuzuli region Centralized Library System operates in the village of Zobucug 1, which is 
under the control of Azerbaijani military forces. The Fuzuli region CLS launched and presented its website 
to the readers in 2009. Automated Library Information System IRBIS-64 was installed in the Central library 
of the Fuzuli region in 2012. The system enables the establishment of an e-catalogue for the library.
erritory of the region: 800 sq. km 
opu
Armc 
1,1993 
As a£
ubs, 6 
ererui
r Prior to the occupation, the region had a number of architectural
r- *  .TUf**
monuments’such as a cave-temple (IV century), forts (VJcentury),
tombs (XIV-XVI centuries), a mosque (XIX century)/^bridge (1867)
The Gubadli region Centralized Library System (CLS) was established in 1977.
The Gubadli region Centralized Library System was created by uniting 1 regional central 
library and 84 branches. According to 1992 data, the regional CLS had 132 employees. The library 
fund had 600 thousand copies and 21 thousand readers. The Gubadli region CLS annually 
participated in “Mahsul bayram” festivals of regional and countrywide importance.The Gubadli 
regional library was located in a specially designed building.
As a result of the occupation by Armenian military forces on August 31,1993,85 libraries and 
its branches were ruined and looted.
| ■- J P ”  ̂ ** sir ' & ' '?•
The occupation resulted in financial damage to the regional libraries in the amount of 1 mln 
880 thousand Azerbaijani manats. Currently, the Gubadli region Centralized Library System 
operates in the city of Sumgayit, neighborhood 41, in the cultural house named after 28th of May.
The Gubadli region CLS launched a new library website in 2009. Currently, they are creating an 
e-catalogue. Only 1 library operates in the Gubadli region.
ZENGILAN REGION
Territory of the region: 707 sq. km 
Population: 40.500 people (01.01.2006)
centuries);
t circular tower (XIV century)?
the regional I. Historical* W  , * *
AGDERE REGION
Territory.of the region: 1705 sq. km 
Population: 44:400 people (01.01.2006)
The Agdere region was established in 1930 and has 1 city-scale district and 57 villages.
i  * * + " ' . **4 - v  ■ * v *» *  h  m*
Note: As the Nagorno Karabakh Autonomous Republic was abolished in 1991, the Agdere
» ’ <*l ' r’ m - - ' **.■ ■ **\rtV '-̂ L. > V  • - m
region was split between three neighboring regions: Kelbajar, Terter and Agdam.
The Agdere region Centralized Library System (CLS) was established in 1978 on the basis of
* 'frm •* ■ ,•*“ 9 », ‘ • ***** %.v
61 village and 4 regional public libraries and had 400 thousand copies in the book fund. As a 
result of the occupation of Agdere on July 7, 1993 by the Armenian separatists, 65 library 
buildings were ruined and looted. Financial damage to Agdere regional libraries equals 1 mln 300,r » " - s ■ *- v ■ P* Wf* *.
thousand Azerbaijani manats, adjusted to today's prices. * , i'-te ...
The Zengilan region Centralized Library 
System (CLS) was established in 1976. The 
Zengilan region Centralized Library System was 
established by uniting the central library, 3 city 
libraries, 1 district and 65 village libraries. By the 
year 1991, the regional CLS had 158 employees.
Library funds in total comprised 490 thousand 
copies and 20 thousand readers. The Zengilan 
region CLS annually organized the “Mahsul 
yram” (Harvest festival) and “Novruz bayram” 
Spring new year) festivals of regional and 
countrywide importance.
Occupation of the Zengilan region by 
Armenian aggressors on October 29,1993  
resulted in the full destruction and looting of 1 
central, 1 children's, 1 youth, 1 city, and 1 district 
ibrary as well as 70 other libraries operating in 
e villages. All of the unique and valuable books 
were destroyed. The financial damage of the 
occupation equals 1 mln 660 thousand Azerbaijan 
manats at today's prices. Currently, the Zengilan 
region Central Library operates in Baku cit 
Narimanov region, at 11 H. Mammado1 
There are only 2 libraries operating curren 
the region.
mm
Populationr40
ifterltheV  Nagorno
ISI#
KHOJAVENDKHOUAbY,
Territory.of the region: 936 sq'km 
Population>25.000 people (01.01.2006)
The Khojaly region's territory was occupied by the Armenian military 
forces in the years 1991-1992. The region had 1 city, 2 districts, and 46 
villages. The centerwas
*>*> *' ........  *'
he
s, an eig 
historic 
XIV-XI 
• build 
riptior 
on, 69 
rere fu 
iry Syj 
ars of
! OCCU
cupati 
braryl 
rary bi
region 
>us Repub 
Khojaven 
ivend reg 
ents. towan
an
an
ns
rior to me 
itectural moi 
aly monume 
ly Iron Age (b< 
ne mounds, C 
ne graves, sto 
Prior to the o 
nographic mu
s established 
gle center. Pri 
As a result o 
numents, incl 
The ruining o 
naaetotheAz
1 Central Library and 81 library branches were operating in the Khojavend 
According to 1992 data, the regional CLS had 181 employees- The total voUm m ^ilibrary  
funds v^s 463 thousand copies^and the library had 17 thousand readers. ■
The Khojavend region central library and library branches were located in specially designed 
buildings. The financial damage to the libraries from the occupation of Khojavend region by the 
Armenian military forces was around 1 mln 700 thousand Azerbaijani manats at today's prices. 
Currently, Khojavend region Central Library operates in Beylagan region.
7,villages of the Gazakh region
m « . . A " * * *  - ** ...occupied by Armenian military forces
7 villages of the Gazakh region (Baghanis Ayrim, Yuxari Eskipara, 
 ̂ ^  Ashaghi Eskipara, Barxudarli, Gizilhajili, Kheyrimli, Sofulu) are also
_____________ j i j_____ J under Armenian occupation. Baghanis Ayrim village was occupied
by Armenians on March 23,1990. During the occupation, Armenians 
launched unseen atrocities against unarmed and innocent people of the village. Several families 
were murdered and burned with extreme brutality, f
This date left a bloody path in A zerbaijan’s history, know n as the tragedy o f Baghanis Ayrim.
O ther villages o f  the G azakh region: Yuxari E skipara, Ashaghi Kskipara, Barxudarli, G izilhajdi,
j I* ftMjgpi
K heyrim li, and Sofulu, w ere occupied by A rm enian aggressors in April o f 1992. As a result o f the
occupation, 8 library branches and 178.285 books belonging  
P  -  *r to them  were burned and destroyed.
I F inancial dam age to the G azakh region library -
*<=J #•>* I *  *nf ° rm at‘on netw ork is estim ated at around 180 thousand
I  t M  S  V  J A zerbaijani m anats.
INFORMATION ON THE MATERIAL AND MORAL DAMAGE MADE TO 
AZERBAIJAN LIBRARIES AS A RESULT OF 
THE ARMENIAN-AZERBAIJAN, NAGORNO-KARABAKH CONFLICT
In the early 90s of the last century, Armenian military forces pushed ungrounded claims against the 
Republic of Azerbaijan. Flagrantly violating the norms of international law, they committed armed 
aggression against Azerbaijan and occupied 20% of our territory, officially accepted by all ofthe member- 
states ofthe United Nations. Armenian aggressors brutally destroyed historic and cultural monuments of 
our nation, including libraries operating on the occupied lands. The Armenian aggressors' self-ruling, 
barbarous ruining and deterioration of historic and cultural monuments on the occupied territories of 
Azerbaijan committed vandalism against our lands. These acts are totally against the Hague Convention 
on “Protection of cultural wealth during military conflicts” of 1954, the European Convention "On 
Protection ofthe Archeological Heritage" of 1992, and the UNESCO Convention "On protection of world 
cultural and natural heritage" of 1972. As a result of the military aggression, the libraries on the occupied 
lands of Shusha, Lachin, Kelbajar, Gubdali, Khojaly, Aghdam, Agdere, Fuzuli and Jabrayil as well as 
unique and rare book collections were looted and burned. Armenian vandals destroyed the historic 
library of Panah khan; the personal library ofthe prominent scientist and artist, Mir Movsoon Navvab; the 
Upper and Lower Govharaga mosque; the Kocharli, Mardinli and Friday mosques; the home museum of 
the great composer, Uzeyir Hadjibeyov, and valuable books kept in the house ofthe founder of Azerbaijani 
professional vocal art, Bulbul. Most of them were taken to Armenia. The ruining of material culture items 
is still going on in the occupied lands.
INFORMATION ON THE MATERIAL AND MORAL DAMAGE MADE TO 
AZERBAIJAN LIBRARIES AS A RESULT OF 
THE ARMENIAN-AZERBAIJAN, NAGORNO-KARABAKH CONFLICT
On the occupied territories of Nagorno Karabakh and 9 surrounding regions, Armenian terrorists 
ruined and looted 9 Centralized Library Systems, 927 libraries and over 4,6 million books, newspapers, 
nagazines and other information resources.
Moreover, 13 sites of global importance (6 architectural and 7 archeological), 292 sites of country 
importance (119 architectural and 173 archeological), 330 sites of local importance (270 architectural and 
22 archeological), 23 monumental and commemorative statues, and 15 pieces of decorative applied art 
remain under occupation.
Along with the aforementioned, 22 museums with over 40 thousand showpieces, 808 clubs, 4 
theatres, 2 concert halls, 8 cultural and leisure parks, 4 art galleries, and 85 musical schools were left on 
the occupied territories.
Tentative calculations say the damage to the library-information sector of Azerbaijan equals 20 
million 815 thousand US dollars.
The only bread factory in the former USSR located in the city of Aghdam was fully destroyed by 
bombing. Up to 13 thousand precious and unique items from the world-known Kelbajar historic- 
ethnographic museum and 5 thousand items from Lachin ethnographic museum were taken to Armenia.
The Occupation of Shusha made a huge damage to our moral. Just in the city of Shusha, 32 libraries, 5 
museums, 17 clubs and 8 cultural houses were ruined and looted.
As a result of the Armenian aggression, the historic memories ofthe people, including books, were 
barbarously destroyed. The cultural heritage of the people of Azerbaijan is an indivisible part of the 
global culture. So, the protection and restoration of our historic and cultural monuments, located on the 
occupied territories ofthe Republic of Azerbaijan, is an internationally important problem.
