
CHAPTER	ONE
August	1940:	The	Doctor	and	his	Daughter
Dr	Iannis	had	enjoyed	a	satisfactory	day	in	which	none	of	his	patients	had	died	or	got	any	worse.	He
had	 removed	 a	 tooth,	 attended	 the	 surprisingly	 easy	 birth	 of	 a	 lamb,	 and	 had	 performed	 a	 successful,
though	minor,	operation.
He	had	been	called	to	the	house	of	old	man	Stamatis,	who	was	suffering	from	earache.	After	gazing
into	 the	 dark,	 hairy	 hole	 of	 the	 old	man's	 ear,	 the	 doctor	 had	 cleaned	 up	 the	 inside	 of	 the	 ear	 using	 a
matchstick,	cotton	wool	and	alcohol.	He	was	aware	that	old	man	Stamatis	had	been	deaf	in	that	ear	since
childhood,	 but	 was	 nevertheless	 surprised	 when	 the	 tip	 of	 the	 matchstick	 touched	 something	 hard,
something	that	had	no	excuse	for	its	presence	there.	He	took	the	old	man	to	the	window,	where	the	light
was	better,	and	stared	down	into	the	ear	again;	then	with	his	long	matchstick	he	pushed	the	grey	hairs	to
one	side.	There	was	something	round	inside.	He	scratched	its	surface	and	saw	a	pea.	It	was	undoubtedly	a
pea;	 it	 was	 light	 green	 and	 slightly	 lined.	 Dr	 Iannis	 considered	 the	 problem	 for	 some	 moments,	 then
requested	a	small	fishhook	and	a	light	hammer.
The	old	man	and	his	wife	looked	at	each	other	with	the	single	thought	that	the	doctor	must	have	lost
his	mind.	 'What	does	 this	have	 to	do	with	my	earache?'	 asked	Stamatis	 suspiciously.	But	 the	hook	and
hammer	were	fetched,	and	the	doctor	carefully	placed	the	straightened	hook	into	the	hairy	hole	and	raised
the	hammer.	There	was	a	terrible	scream.
'Oh,	oh,	the	fishhook	will	enter	his	brain.	May	God	protect	us!'	cried	the	old	wife,	hiding	her	head	in
her	hands.
This	speech	caused	the	doctor	to	pause	and	consider	the	possibility	that	the	hammer	might	only	drive
the	pea	further	into	the	ear.	'Change	of	plan,'	he	announced,	and	gave	instructions	that	Stamatis	should	lie
on	 his	 side	 till	 evening	 with	 his	 ear	 filled	 with	 warm	 water.	 He	 returned	 at	 six	 o'clock,	 hooked	 the
softened	pea	 successfully	without	 the	 aid	of	 a	 hammer,	 small	 or	 otherwise,	 and	pulled	 it	 out.	Stamatis
clapped	his	 hand	 to	 his	 ear	 and	 exclaimed,	 'It's	 cold	 in	 there.	My	God,	 it's	 loud.	 I	mean	 everything	 is
loud!'
'Your	 deafness	 is	 cured,'	 announced	 Dr	 Iannis.	 'A	 very	 satisfactory	 operation,	 I	 think.'	 Shortly
afterwards	 he	walked	 home	with	 a	 fat	 chicken	 under	 each	 arm,	 and	 an	 ancient	 pea	wrapped	 up	 in	 his
handkerchief.
The	doctor	was	now	left	with	an	entire	evening	in	which	to	write	his	'New	History	of	Cephallonia',	a
project	which	he	had	begun	at	least	a	dozen	times.	He	seemed	unable	to	achieve	objectivity	and	so	had
never	been	satisfied	with	the	result.	He	sat	down	and	wrote:
'The	ancient,	half-forgotten	island	of	Cephallonia	rises	from	the	Ionian	Sea,	its	rocks	and	red	earth
heavy	with	 the	 heat	 of	 the	 sun	 and	 the	weight	 of	memory.	 In	 the	 stories	 of	 ancient	Greece,	 the	 island
played	its	part	and	had	its	gods	-	among	them	Poseidon,	the	god	of	the	Sea	and	Apollo,	the	god	of	the	Sun.
Yes,	once	this	 island,	with	 its	brilliant	 light,	 its	 transparent	waters,	was	an	 island	filled	with	gods.	But
today	Cephallonia	 has	 become	 a	 factory	 that	 breeds	 babies	 for	 export.	 There	 are	more	Cephallonians
abroad	or	at	sea	than	there	are	at	home.	There	is	no	industry	here	that	keeps	families	together,	there	is	not
enough	agricultural	land,	there	are	not	enough	fish	in	the	ocean.	Our	men	go	abroad	and	return	here	to	die.
The	only	good	thing	about	it	is	that	only	the	beautiful	women	find	husbands	among	the	men	who	are	left,
and	consequently	we	have	the	most	beautiful	women	in	all	of	Greece...'
The	doctor	refilled	his	pipe	and	read	this	through.	He	listened	to	Pelagia	moving	about	in	the	kitchen,
preparing	 the	 evening	meal.	He	 read	what	 he	 had	written	 about	 beautiful	women	 and	 remembered	 his
wife,	who	had	died	from	lung	disease	despite	all	his	efforts	and	who	had	been	as	lovely	as	his	daughter
was	 now.	 'This	 island	 betrays	 its	 own	 people,'	 he	wrote,	 then	 seized	 the	 sheet	 of	 paper	 and	 threw	 it
forcefully	into	the	corner	of	the	room.	This	was	not	good	enough.	Why	could	he	not	write	like	a	writer	of
histories?	Why	could	he	not	write	without	passion,	without	anger	at	the	many	betrayals	and	oppressions
that	the	island	had	suffered	in	the	past?	He	went	outside	for	a	breath	of	fresh	air,	returning	indoors	just	in
time	to	catch	Pelagia's	 little	goat	eating	his	writings	with	a	 look	of	satisfaction	on	 its	 face.	He	 tore	 the
paper	from	the	animal's	mouth,	chased	it	outside,	then	marched	into	the	kitchen.	'That	unpleasant	animal	of
yours	has	eaten	everything	I've	written	tonight,'	he	exclaimed	crossly.	 'Any	more	incidents	like	this,	and
it'll	end	up	on	our	plates.'
Pelagia	looked	up	at	her	father	and	smiled.	'We'll	be	eating	at	about	ten	o'clock.'
'Did	 you	 hear	 what	 I	 said?	 No	more	 goats	 inside	 the	 house.'	 Pelagia	 paused	 in	 her	 slicing	 of	 a
tomato,	brushed	her	hair	from	her	face	and	replied,	'You're	as	fond	of	him	as	I	am.'
Dr	Iannis	turned	away,	defeated.	It	was	an	annoying	thing	when	a	daughter	spoke	cheekily	to	him	and
reminded	him	of	her	mother	at	the	same	time.	He	returned	to	his	table,	took	the	title	page,	'A	New	History
of	Cephallonia',	and	crossed	out	the	first	two	words,	writing	instead,	'A	Personal'.	Now	he	could	express
his	opinions	as	freely	and	unpleasantly	as	he	wished.
When	 Pelagia	 heard	 from	 a	 neighbour	 that	 a	 strongman	 was	 giving	 a	 performance	 in	 the	 village
square,	she	put	away	her	broom	and	hurried	to	join	the	group	of	curious	islanders	that	had	gathered	there.
Megalo	Velisarios,	famous	all	over	the	islands	of	Ionia	as	one	of	the	strongest	men	who	had	ever	lived,
was	jumping	up	and	down	in	time	to	the	clapping	of	hands.	On	each	of	his	outstretched	arms	sat	a	full-
grown	 man.	 One	 of	 them	 held	 on	 tightly	 to	 his	 body	 while	 the	 other	 calmly	 smoked	 a	 cigarette.	 On
Vehsarios's	head	sat	an	anxious	little	girl	of	about	six	years,	who	was	making	matters	more	complicated
by	holding	her	hands	firmly	across	his	eyes.
'Lemoni!'	he	roared.	'Take	your	hands	from	my	eyes	and	hold	on	to	my	hair,	or	I'll	have	to	stop.'
Lemoni	was	 too	 frightened	 to	move	 her	 hands	 and	Megalo	Velisarios	 stopped.	With	 one	 graceful
movement	he	 threw	both	men	 to	 their	 feet,	 lifted	Lemoni	 from	his	head,	 threw	her	high	 into	 the	air	and
caught	her,	kissed	her	dramatically	upon	the	tip	of	her	nose	and	set	her	down.	Raising	himself	to	his	full
height,	he	cried,	'I	will	lift	anything	that	it	takes	three	men	to	lift.'
The	village	priest,	Father	Arsenios,	chose	just	this	moment	to	walk	with	a	self-important	expression
across	the	square	on	his	way	to	the	church.	He	lacked	respect,	not	because	he	was	completely	round	but
because	he	was	greedy	for	both	money	and	food	and	was	much	too	interested	in	women.
'Lift	Father	Arsenios,'	someone	called.
'Impossible,'	called	another.
Father	Arsenios	quite	suddenly	found	himself	grasped	around	his	chest	and	lifted	up	on	to	the	wall.
He	 sat	 there	 speechless	with	 surprise,	 his	mouth	 opening	 and	 closing	 like	 a	 fish,	 and	 a	 guilty	 silence
descended.	Pelagia	felt	her	heart	overflow	with	pity	for	the	poor	man.	She	stepped	forward	and	extended
a	 hand	 to	 help	 him	 down,	 and	 the	 priest	 walked	 off	 without	 a	 word.	 Pelagia	 now	 spoke	 sharply	 to
Velisarios.	She	was	only	seventeen	but	she	was	proud	and	knew	her	own	mind,	and	her	position	as	the
doctor's	 daughter	 meant	 that	 even	 the	 men	 were	 forced	 to	 respect	 her.	 'You	 shouldn't	 have	 done	 that,
Velisarios,'	she	said.	'It	was	cruel	and	horrible.	You	must	apologize.'
He	looked	down	at	her	from	his	great	height.	This	was	without	doubt	a	difficult	situation.	He	thought
of	lifting	her	above	his	head.
'We	want	to	see	the	cannon,'	called	an	old	lady,	and	others	in	the	crowd	echoed	her.
Velisarios	was	 immensely	proud	of	his	ability	 to	raise	 the	old	Turkish	cannon,	which	had	the	date
1739	 on	 it	 and	was	much	 too	 heavy	 for	 anyone	 else	 to	 lift.	He	 looked	 down	 at	 Pelagia	 and	 said,	 'I'll
apologize	later,	pretty	one,'	then	announced,	'Good	people	of	the	village,	to	see	the	cannon,	you	must	bring
me	your	old	nails,	your	broken	pots,	and	the	stones	of	the	streets.	Find	me	these	things	while	I	pack	the
gun	with	powder.'
People	ran	off	eagerly	in	all	directions	to	seek	out	these	objects,	and	the	cannon	was	soon	prepared
for	 the	 great	 explosion.	 'I	will	 fire	 the	 gun	 down	 the	 road,'	 said	Velisarios	when	 all	was	made	 ready.
'Everybody	out	of	the	way	now.'
With	a	theatrical	expression,	the	enormous	man	put	a	match	to	the	cannon	and	lifted	it	to	his	waist.
Silence	fell.	Breaths	were	held.	There	was	a	great	roar	as	the	old	pots	and	nails	burst	from	the	gun...	and
then	a	long,	low	cry	of	pain.	There	was	a	moment	of	confusion	and	hesitation.	People	looked	around	at
each	other	to	see	who	had	been	hit,	and	Velisarios	dropped	his	cannon	and	ran	forward	to	a	young	man
lying	in	the	dust.
Mandras	later	thanked	Velisarios	for	firing	at	him	as	he	came	round	the	bend	at	the	entrance	to	the
village.	But	at	the	time	he	greatly	disliked	being	carried	in	the	arms	of	the	strongman	to	the	doctor's	house
and	he	did	not	enjoy	having	a	bent	nail	removed	from	his	shoulder.	What	he	thanked	Megalo	Velisarios	for
was	that	in	the	doctor's	house	he	first	set	eyes	on	Pelagia.	There	was	a	moment	when	he	became	aware
that	he	was	being	bandaged,	that	a	young	woman's	long	hair	was	brushing	against	his	face.	He	opened	his
eyes	 and	 found	 himself	 gazing	 into	 a	 pair	 of	 anxious	 eyes.	 'At	 that	 moment,'	 he	 liked	 to	 say	 later,	 'I
recognized	my	future	wife.'
Dr	Iannis	put	on	a	fresh	shirt	in	readiness	for	his	daily	visit	to	the	kapheneion,	and	stepped	out	into
the	yard.	He	was	entirely	unsurprised	to	see	Mandras	there,	talking	to	Pelagia.	The	young	fisherman's	face
went	red	when	he	saw	him.	'Oh,	good	evening,	doctor.	I've	brought	you	some	fish,'	he	said.
The	doctor	twisted	his	mouth	and	pretended	to	sigh.	'Mandras,'	he	said,	'you	know	perfectly	well	that
I	know	perfectly	well	that	you	have	only	come	here	to	flirt	with	Pelagia.'
'Flirt?'	repeated	the	young	man,	attempting	to	appear	both	innocent	and	shocked.
'Yes.	 Flirt.	Yesterday	 you	 brought	 us	 another	 fish	 and	 then	 flirted	with	 Pelagia	 for	 an	 hour.	Well,
you'd	better	get	on	with	it.'
'Then	I	have	your	permission	to	talk	to	your	daughter?'
'Talk,	talk,	talk,'	said	Dr	Iannis,	waving	his	hands,	and	he	set	off	for	the	kapheneion.
'Your	dad's	a	funny	fellow,'	Mandras	said	to	Pelagia.
'There's	nothing	wrong	with	my	father,'	she	exclaimed,	'and	anyone	who	says	there	is	gets	a	broom	in
the	face.'	She	pushed	the	broom	at	him	and	he	caught	it	and	twisted	it	out	of	her	grasp.	'Give	it	back,'	she
said	laughing.
'I'll	give	it	back...	in	return	for	a	kiss.'
Pelagia	gave	the	young	man	a	flirtatious	smile.
At	the	kapheneion,	the	doctor	collected	his	tiny	cup	of	coffee	and	sat	next	to	Kokolios,	as	he	always
did.	 The	 coffee	 shop	 was	 full	 of	 the	 usual	 characters:	 the	 Communist	 Kokolios,	 with	 his	 splendid
moustache;	 old	 man	 Stamatis;	 Father	 Arsenios,	 round	 and	 sweating.	 'What's	 the	 news	 of	 the	 war?'
Kokolios	asked.
The	doctor	twisted	the	ends	of	his	moustache	and	said,	'Germany	is	taking	everything,	the	Italians	are
behaving	like	fools,	the	French	have	run	away,	the	Americans	have	been	playing	ball	games,	the	British
have	been	drinking	tea,	the	Russians	have	been	sitting	on	their	hands.	Thank	God	we	are	out	of	it.	Why
don't	we	turn	on	the	radio?'
The	large	British	radio	in	the	corner	of	the	room	was	switched	on,	its	whistles	reduced	to	a	minimum
by	moving	it	around.	Just	 then,	Pelagia	appeared	at	 the	door,	gesturing	urgently,	greatly	embarrassed	by
her	presence	 in	 the	men-only	kapheneion.	The	doctor	 raised	his	 eyes	 to	 the	ceiling,	put	his	pipe	 in	his
pocket	and	went	to	the	door.	'What	is	it,	girl?'
'It's	Mandras,	he's	fallen	out	of	a	tree	on	to	a	pot.'
The	doctor	shook	his	head	in	disbelief	and	allowed	his	daughter	to	hurry	him	home.	There,	he	made
Mandras	 lie	on	 the	kitchen	 table	while	he	 removed	 tiny	pieces	of	 the	broken	pot	 from	 the	young	man's
muscular	back.	'You're	a	fool,'	he	told	his	patient.
'I	know,	doctor,'	said	Mandras,	biting	his	lip	as	another	piece	came	out.
'Stop	being	so	polite.	I	know	what	you're	planning.	Are	you	going	to	ask	her	to	marry	you	or	not?'
'Not	yet,	doctor.	Everyone	says	 there's	going	to	be	a	war,	and	I	don't	want	 to	 leave	a	widow.	You
know	how	people	treat	a	widow.'
'Quite	right,'	said	the	doctor	and	wondered,	as	he	wiped	away	a	spot	of	blood,	whether	his	body	had
ever	been	as	beautiful	as	this	young	fool's.
It	was	several	hours	before	he	returned	to	 the	kapheneion.	When	he	entered,	he	knew	immediately
that	something	was	wrong.	Warlike	music	came	from	the	radio	and	Dr	Iannis	was	astonished	to	see	that
the	faces	of	several	of	the	men	were	shiny	with	tears.	'What's	going	on?'	he	asked.
'Those	Italian	pigs	have	sunk	one	of	our	ships	at	Tinos.	And	they	fired	on	the	harbour	there.	It	was
full	of	people.	On	a	holy	day	too.'
The	doctor	put	his	hands	to	his	face	and	felt	his	own	tears	fighting	to	appear.	He	was	possessed	by	a
feeling	of	helpless	anger.	He	did	not	stop	to	question	whether	war	with	Italy	was	inevitable.	Although	he
did	not	believe	in	God	he	found	himself	saying,	'Come	on	boys,	we're	all	going	to	the	church.'	The	men	of
the	kapheneion	rose	and	followed	him.
CHAPTER	TWO
Pelagia	and	Mandras
Pelagia	(resting	in	the	afternoon):	Papas	says	that	Mandras	is	going	to	have	tiny	pieces	of	that	pot	in
his	back	for	the	rest	of	his	life.	I	like	his	body,	what	I've	seen	of	it.	God	forgive	me,	I	have	such	wicked
thoughts.	Thank	God	no	one	can	read	my	mind,	or	I'd	be	locked	up	and	all	the	old	women	would	throw
stones	at	me.	I	wonder	what	Mandras	is	doing.	He's	so	beautiful	and	so	tunny	too.	He	made	my	stomach
ache	with	 laughing	before	he	fell	out	of	 the	 tree.	That's	when	I	knew	I	 loved	him;	 it	was	 the	fear	 I	 felt
when	he	fell	on	the	pot.
When	will	he	ask	me	to	marry	him?	But	he's	not	a	serious	fellow,	and	it	gives	me	doubts.	He's	so
funny,	but	I	can't	talk	to	him	about	anything	and	you	have	to	be	able	to	discuss	things	with	a	husband,	don't
you?	I	say,	'Is	there	going	to	be	a	war?'	and	he	just	grins	and	says,	'Who	cares?	Is	there	going	to	be	a	kiss?'
I	don't	want	there	to	be	a	war.	Let	there	be	Mandras	standing	in	the	yard	with	a	fish	in	his	hands.	Let	there
be	Mandras	every	day	with	a	fish.
Mandras	(leaving	the	harbour	in	his	boat):	It's	going	to	be	too	hot	again	today,	I	know	it,	and	all	the
fish	will	hide	in	the	rocks	and	go	to	the	bottom.	Let	the	clouds	hide	the	sun,	let	me	catch	some	fine	fish	and
I'll	 take	one	to	Pelagia	and	she'll	ask	me	to	eat	with	them,	and	I	can	rub	her	leg	with	my	foot	under	the
table	while	the	doctor	discusses	ancient	poetry.	I	know	he	likes	me,	but	he	doesn't	think	I'm	good	enough
for	her	-	he's	always	calling	me	a	fool.
The	trouble	is	that	I	can't	be	myself	when	I'm	with	her.	I	mean,	I	am	a	serious	man.	I	follow	politics,	I
want	to	improve	the	world.	But	when	I'm	with	Pelagia	it's	as	if	I'm	twelve	again.	I	want	to	amuse	her	and
what	else	am	I	supposed	to	do?	I	can't	imagine	myself	saying,	'Come	on,	Pelagia,	let's	talk	about	politics.'
Women	aren't	interested	in	that	sort	of	thing,	they	want	you	to	entertain	them.	Perhaps	she	thinks	I'm	a	fool
as	well.	I'm	not	in	her	class,	I	know	that.	The	doctor	taught	her	Italian	and	a	bit	of	English,	and	they're	not
a	 typical	 island	family.	 I	mean,	 the	doctor's	 sailed	all	over	 the	world,	he's	even	been	 to	America.	And
where	have	I	been?	What	do	I	know?	I	love	Pelagia,	but	I	know	that	I	will	never	be	a	man	until	I've	done
something	important,	something	people	can	respect	me	for.	I	feel	so	useless	and	insignificant	here	on	the
island.
Pelagia	(taking	roast	lamb	from	the	village	oven):	Where	is	Mandras?	He's	usually	here	by	now.	I
want	him	to	come,	I	can	hardly	breathe,	I	want	him	so	much.	My	hands	are	shaking	again.
I'd	better	 take	 this	silly	smile	off	my	face	or	everyone	will	 think	I'm	mad.	Come,	Mandras,	please
come,	stay	for	dinner	and	stroke	my	ankles	with	your	feet,	Mandras.
Mandras	(mending	his	nets):	We're	going	to	go	to	war	with	Italy	very	soon.	I've	got	a	letter	saying
that	I'll	be	ordered	to	join	the	army	in	the	next	few	weeks.	I	know	one	thing,	I'm	going	to	ask	Pelagia	to
marry	me	before	I	 leave.	With	no	 jokes.	 I'm	going	 to	make	her	understand	 that	 in	defending	Greece	I'm
defending	her	and	every	woman	like	her,	and	if	I	die,	I'll	die	with	the	name	of	Pelagia	and	the	name	of
Greece	equally	on	my	 lips.	And	 if	 I	 live,	 I'll	walk	with	my	head	held	high	 for	 the	 rest	of	my	 life,	 and
everyone	will	say,	'That's	Mandras,	who	fought	in	the	war.	We	owe	everything	to	people	like	him.'
The	island's	saint,	St	Geronimos,	dead	for	five	centuries,	had	lived	a	genuinely	holy	life	and	had	left
his	ancient	blackened	body	in	an	island	church	as	evidence	of	this.	He	was	so	loved	by	the	islanders	that
he	 had	 two	 feast	 days,	 one	 in	August	 and	 another	 in	October,	 and	 on	 these	 days	 he	 tolerantly	 looked
elsewhere	as	the	population	of	the	island	became	excessively	drunk.	It	was	eight	days	before	Greece	and
Italy	declared	war	on	each	other,	but	it	might	have	been	any	October	feast	day	in	the	last	hundred	years.
The	cruelty	had	gone	out	of	the	sun,	and	the	delightfully	warm	day	was	made	even	more	pleasant	by	a	light
wind	from	the	sea	that	wandered	in	and	out	of	the	trees.	From	all	over	the	island,	people	made	their	way
to	 the	 church	where	 the	 saint's	 body	 lay,	 packing	 the	 church	 tightly	 and	 squeezing	 together	 in	 the	 yard
outside.	At	different	points	in	the	crowd,	Velisarios,	Pelagia,	Dr	Iannis,	Kokolios	and	Stamatis	all	turned
their	 heads	 sideways	 to	 hear	 the	 distant	 prayers	 of	 the	 priest.	The	 sun	 climbed	 higher	 and	 the	 people,
packed	 together,	 began	 to	 sweat.	 The	 heat	was	 just	 becoming	 unbearable	when	 the	 service	 ended,	 the
bells	rang	out	and	the	celebrations	began.
A	small	band	began	playing	while	a	line	of	pretty	girls	stepped	from	side	to	side	at	the	back,	and	a
row	of	young	men	danced	with	 their	 heads	 twisted	backwards.	Those	who	were	drunk	began	 to	 insult
each	other,	and	in	some	places	fighting	had	already	begun.	Pelagia	moved	nearer	the	church	and	sat	on	a
bench.	Someone	 tapped	on	her	 shoulder	and	she	 looked	up	and	saw	Mandras.	He	 fell	drunkenly	 to	his
knees	and	declared	dramatically,	'Pelagia,	will	you	marry	me?	Marry	me	or	I	die!'
She	regarded	him	silently	for	a	moment,	then	said	quietly,	'Of	course	I'll	marry	you,'	When	he	heard
this,	Mandras	leapt	joyfully	but	unsteadily	into	the	air,	then	suddenly	became	extremely	serious	and	said,
'My	darling,	I	love	you	with	all	my	heart,	but	we	can't	get	married	until	I	get	back	from	the	Army.'
'Go	and	speak	to	my	father,'	said	Pelagia.	Then,	worried	by	the	strange	way	in	which	she	did	not	feel
as	happy	as	 she	ought,	 she	made	her	way	back	 to	 the	 church	 in	order	 to	be	alone	with	 the	 saint.	Time
passed,	and	Mandras	failed	to	find	the	doctor	before	drink	overcame	him.	He	slept	sweetly	in	a	pool	of
something	disgusting	but	unidentifiable,	while,	 nearby,	Lemoni	 attempted	 to	 set	 fire	 to	 the	beard	of	 the
sleeping	Father	Arsenios,	and	Kokolios	and	Stamatis	became	lost	in	the	bushes	while	searching	for	their
wives.
Pelagia	walked	back	 from	 the	 feast	with	her	 father,	bursting	with	a	painful	mixture	of	anxiety	and
happiness,	desperate	to	mention	Mandras's	proposal.	But	the	doctor	was	in	a	much	too	drunken	state	to	be
sensitive	 to	his	 daughter's	 feelings,	 and	when	 they	 reached	 the	house,	 he	danced	 about	 the	yard	before
falling	onto	his	bed	fully	clothed.
Pelagia	went	 to	bed	and	could	not	 sleep.	 'I	 love	you,	Mandras,'	 she	declared,	at	 the	same	 time	as
doubts	 rose	 in	 her	 like	 an	 invasion	 of	 tiny	 devils.	 How	 much	 did	 she	 really	 know	 Mandras?	 What
evidence	 did	 she	 have	 that	 he	was	 patient	 and	 kind?	Can	 you	 trust	 someone	who	 replies	 immediately,
without	thought?	She	was	frightened	by	the	suspicion	that	there	was	something	hard	about	his	heart.	If	it
were	not	 love	 that	she	felt	 for	Mandras,	 then	why	this	breathlessness,	 this	endless	desire	 that	made	her
heart	beat	fast?	She	imagined	that	Mandras	had	died,	and	as	the	tears	came	she	was	shocked	to	discover
that	she	also	felt	relief.
In	the	morning	she	took	herself	to	the	yard	and	created	tasks	that	would	cause	her	to	see	him	as	soon
as	he	came	around	the	curve	of	the	road.	But	he	did	not	come,	and	Pelagia	passed	the	day	with	feelings	of
impatience	 that	 soon	 turned	 into	 real	 concern.	That	evening,	when	he	had	 still	not	 appeared,	her	 father
said,	quite	unexpectedly,	'I	expect	he	hasn't	come	because	he's	feeling	as	sick	as	everyone	else.'
Pelagia	took	his	hand	and	kissed	it	gratefully.	'He's	asked	me	to	marry	him.	I	told	him	I'd	have	to	ask
you,'	she	said.
'I	don't	want	to	marry	Mandras,'	said	Dr	Iannis.	'It	would	be	a	much	better	idea	if	he	married	you,	I
think.'
'Don't	you	approve	of	him,	Papakis?'
He	turned	and	looked	at	her	gently.	 'He's	 too	young.	Also,	I	have	not	done	you	a	favour.	You	read
poetry,	you	speak	Italian.	He	isn't	your	equal,	and	he	would	expect	to	be	better	than	his	wife.	He	is	a	man,
after	all.	I	have	often	thought	that	you	would	only	ever	be	able	to	marry	happily	with	a	foreigner,	a	dentist
from	Norway	or	something.'
Pelagia	laughed	at	the	ridiculous	thought,	then	closed	her	eyes.	The	doctor	went	inside	and	came	out
with	something	that	he	handed	very	formally	to	her.	She	took	it,	saw	what	it	was,	and	dropped	it	into	her
skirts	with	a	cry	of	horror.
The	 doctor	 remained	 standing.	 'There's	 going	 to	 be	 a	 war,	 and	 terrible	 things	 happen	 in	 wars,
especially	to	women.	Use	the	gun	to	defend	yourself.	It	might	happen	that	your	marriage	will	have	to	wait.
We	must	make	sure	first	that	Mussolini	does	not	invite	himself	to	the	wedding.'	He	turned	and	went	into
the	house,	leaving	Pelagia	to	her	fears,	and	after	a	few	minutes	she	went	to	her	room	and	placed	the	gun
under	her	pillow,	imagining	once	again	that	Mandras	was	dead.
It	was	not	until	the	third	day	after	the	feast	that	there	was	a	quiet	knock	at	the	door.	Mandras	stood,
speaking	fast,	a	bucket	of	fish	in	his	hand.	'I'm	sorry	I	didn't	come	sooner,	but	I	was	ill	the	day	after	the
feast,	and	yesterday	I	had	to	collect	my	Army	papers,	and	I'm	leaving	for	Athens	the	day	after	tomorrow,
and	I've	spoken	to	your	father,	and	he's	agreed	to	the	marriage,	and	I've	brought	you	some	fish.'
Pelagia	 sat	on	her	bed	and	went	cold	 inside;	 it	was	 too	much	happiness,	 too	much	pain.	She	was
engaged	 to	a	man	who	mixed	marriage	 together	with	 fish	and	war,	 a	man	who	was	 too	beautiful	 to	go
away	 and	 die	 in	 the	 snows	 of	 Tsamoria.	 Suddenly	 Mandras	 seemed	 to	 her	 to	 be	 an	 extraordinarily
delicate	 creature,	 so	 delicate	 and	beautiful	 that	 he	was	 sure	 to	 die.	Her	 hands	 began	 to	 shake	 and	 she
whispered,	'Don't	go,	don't	go.'
CHAPTER	THREE
The	Homosexual
I,	Carlo	Piero	Guercio,	write	these	words	with	the	intention	that	they	should	be	found	after	my	death,
when	what	is	written	here	will	not	harm	me.
I	know	only	silence.	I	have	not	told	the	priest,	since	I	know	in	advance	what	I	will	be	told;	it	is	a
wicked	sin	and	I	must	marry	and	lead	the	life	of	a	normal	man.	Nor	have	I	told	a	doctor,	as	I	know	that	I
will	be	informed	that	I	am	sick	and	can	be	cured	of	my	disease.
What	could	I	say	to	such	priests	and	doctors?	I	would	say	to	the	priest	that	God	made	me	like	this	for
a	purpose,	that	I	had	no	choice.	I	would	say	to	the	doctor,	'I	have	been	like	this	from	the	start,	it	is	nature
that	 has	 created	me.'	But	 they	would	 not	 understand.	 I	 am	 like	 someone	who	 is	 the	 only	 person	 in	 the
world	that	knows	the	truth,	but	is	forbidden	to	speak.	And	this	truth	weighs	more	than	the	universe,	this
burden	cracks	my	bones.
In	my	search	to	understand	myself,	I	have	read	everything,	from	the	most	modern	to	the	most	ancient,
and	it	was	in	the	work	of	the	ancient	Greek	philosopher,	Plato,	that	I	finally	found	myself.	In	his	writings,
he	explained	that	there	were	three	sexes,	the	third	sex	being	men	who	loved	men,	and	this	idea	made	sense
to	me.	Plato	also	wrote	that	 if	an	army	was	made	up	of	men	who	loved	one	another,	 they	would	be	the
bravest	army	in	the	world,	because	men	would	become	heroes,	ready	to	die	for	their	lovers.
I	admit	that	I	joined	the	Army	because	the	men	are	young	and	beautiful,	and	because	I	knew	that	in
the	Army	 I	would	 find	 someone	 I	 could	 love	 though	never	 touch.	 I	would	not	 abandon	him	 in	battle,	 I
would	win	his	admiration,	I	would	die	for	him	if	necessary	and	in	this	way	give	purpose	to	my	life.
In	the	Army	I	found	my	family.	It	was	a	world	without	women,	and	for	the	first	time	in	my	life	I	did
not	have	to	pretend.	I	was	very	fortunate	at	first;	our	unit	was	sent	to	Albania,	where	there	was	no	real
fighting,	and	we	did	not	realize	that	we	might	be	ordered	to	invade	Greece.	No	one	outside	the	Army	can
understand	 the	 joy	of	being	a	soldier,	of	being	part	of	a	group	where	you	are	all	young	and	strong	and
quickly	 learn	 everything	 about	 each	 other.	 We	 believed	 we	 could	 not	 die,	 we	 could	 march	 eighty
kilometres	 a	 day,	 singing	 battle	 songs.	 We	 were	 new	 and	 beautiful,	 we	 loved	 each	 other	 more	 than
brothers.
I	 fell	 in	 love	with	Francesco,	 a	 young	married	 soldier	 from	Genoa,	who	 accepted	me	 as	his	 best
friend	without	ever	suspecting	my	passion	for	him.	He	was	an	entirely	beautiful	boy,	reminding	me	of	one
of	those	elegant	cats	that	give	the	impression	of	immense	but	easy	strength.	I	was	attracted	most	of	all	to
his	face,	with	its	strong,	high	cheekbones,	wide	mouth	and	one-sided	smile.	He	was	always	amusing	and
respected	no	one,	constantly	entertaining	us	with	his	wickedly	accurate	imitations	of	Mussolini	and	Hitler.
Everyone	loved	him,	he	never	got	a	promotion	and	he	did	not	care.
We	soldiers	 loved	 the	army	 life	but	had	no	 love	of	 the	Fascist	 leaders	of	our	country,	nor	did	we
have	 any	 idea	of	why	we	were	 in	Albania.	However,	 looking	back,	 it	 seems	 clear	 that	 an	 invasion	of
Greece	must	have	been	the	final	intention;	there	were	clues	everywhere,	if	only	we	had	seen	them.	In	the
first	 place,	 there	was	 the	 fact	 that	 all	 the	 roads	 that	we	built	 (which,	we	were	 informed,	were	 for	 the
benefit	 of	 the	 Albanians)	 led	 towards	 the	 Greek	 border.	 In	 the	 second	 place,	 we	 heard	 stories	 from
reliable	sources	about	how	our	frontier	posts	were	attacked	a	number	of	times	by	our	own	people	dressed
as	Greeks,	so	that	we	could	blame	the	latter	for	the	attacks.	When	some	Albanians	shot	at	our	soldiers,	we
announced	that	our	attackers	were	Greeks.	We	also	learned	that	one	of	our	leaders	arranged	to	have	his
own	offices	blown	up	so	that	Mussolini	could	finally	declare	war	against	the	Greeks.
I	have	related	these	things	as	if	they	were	amusing,	but	really	they	were	acts	of	madness.	When	war
against	Greece	was	 finally	declared,	we	were	 told	 that	 the	Greeks	would	be	defeated	within	days.	We
were	sent	off	to	die,	with	no	transport,	no	equipment	and	too	few	men.	At	first,	having	no	idea	of	what	the
future	held	for	us,	we	whistled	and	sang,	and	from	time	to	time	Francesco,	marching	beside	me,	looked	at
me	and	smiled.	'Athens	in	two	weeks,'	he	said.
Then	the	weather	turned	against	us	and	rain	poured	from	the	skies,	turning	the	ground	to	mud	so	that
we	 struggled	 through	 it,	 ten	 thousand	 men	 whose	 uniforms	 were	 weighted	 down	 with	 water,	 our
aeroplanes	unable	to	fly	because	of	the	bad	weather.	Our	twenty	heavy	guns	sank	into	the	mud,	and	our
animals	were	unable	to	pull	them	out.	We	struggled	on	in	these	conditions	for	several	days,	at	a	height	of
three	 hundred	metres,	 our	 legs	 turned	 to	 ice	 so	 that	 we	 could	 no	 longer	 feel	 our	 feet.	 'Athens	 in	 two
months,'	 said	Francesco	with	a	 twisted	 smile.	But	we	saw	no	sign	of	 the	Greeks	and	believed	 that	we
were	winning	without	fighting.
On	1	November,	a	bomb	fell	among	us	and	there	was	a	scream	as	a	poor	fellow	from	Piedmont	lost
his	 legs,	 followed	by	 the	short,	 sharp	sound	of	gunshot	 from	the	 trees.	We	realized	 that	 the	Greeks	had
cleverly	got	us	into	a	position	where	we	could	be	surrounded	and	cut	off	from	all	help.	We	were	trapped
in	the	valley	floor	and	the	Greeks,	whom	we	very	rarely	saw,	moved	like	ghosts	among	the	upper	slopes,
so	that	we	never	knew	when	we	would	be	attacked	or	from	where.	Their	bombs	seemed	at	one	moment	to
come	from	behind,	at	another	moment	to	come	from	the	side	or	from	the	front.	We	fired	at	ghosts	and	at
mountain	goats.	The	heroic	Greeks	seemed	to	rise	out	of	the	ground	and	fall	on	us	as	if	we	had	raped	their
mothers.	It	shocked	us.	We	had	no	air	support.	'Athens	in	two	years,'	said	Francesco.	We	were	completely
alone.
We	ate	only	dry	biscuits,	but	when	our	horses	died,	we	ate	them.	We	were	ordered	to	turn	back	and
had	 to	 fight	 our	way	 through	 the	 soldiers	 that	 surrounded	 us.	We	grew	 immense	 beards,	we	were	 half
buried	in	snowstorms,	our	red,	swollen	eyes	sank	deep	into	our	heads,	our	hands	were	torn	as	if	by	cats.
We	became	desperately	thin,	digging	for	food	in	the	frozen	ground	like	pigs.	It	was	a	hell	of	machine	guns,
bombs	and	 ice,	a	hell	 in	which	battles	were	 fought	without	 rest	 for	eight	hours	at	a	 time,	while	on	 the
mountains	our	dead	lay	in	forgotten	piles,	body	upon	body.	We	fought	on	but	we	lost	our	hearts	as	a	great
darkness	settled	across	 the	land.	The	snow	fell	endlessly.	My	boots,	crawling	with	insects,	fell	apart.	 I
think	it	must	have	been	December	when	we	understood	that	we	were	as	broken	as	our	boots.
Waking	up	in	the	morning,	ten	degrees	below	zero.	The	first	question:	who	has	frozen	to	death	now?
Who	has	slipped	from	sleep	to	death?	These	were	the	days	of	the	white	death,	in	which	the	legs	became
swollen	and	turned	bright	purple,	deep	blue,	coal	black.	I	was	exhausted,	shaken	by	the	screams	of	men	in
unimaginable	pain	as	their	legs	were	cut	off	by	our	army	doctors.	I	lived	in	fear	of	the	white	death	and
inspected	my	feet	every	few	hours.	Francesco	was	undoubtedly	mad.	His	mouth	moved	continually,	his
beard	became	a	column	of	ice,	his	eyes	rolled	in	his	head	and	he	did	not	recognize	me.	We	had	lost	four
thousand	men.	There	was	nothing	in	our	lives	except	the	white	death,	the	bitter	absence	of	our	friends,	the
joylessness	of	the	icy	mountains.
One	morning	Francesco	turned	to	me	with	a	wild	expression	in	his	eyes,	speaking	to	me	for	the	first
time	in	weeks.	'Look,'	he	said	and	rolled	up	his	trousers,	revealing	the	purple	stripes	on	the	white	flesh.
He	touched	the	dead	flesh	with	a	look	of	horror	in	his	eyes,	rolled	his	trousers	back	down	again	and	said
to	me,	 'It's	enough,	Carlo.	It's	too	much.'	He	began	to	weep,	trembling	all	over.	Then	he	took	up	his	gun
and,	 before	 I	 could	 prevent	 him,	 advanced	 towards	 the	 enemy,	 stopping	 to	 fire	 every	 five	 steps.	 In
recognition	 of	 his	 heroism,	 the	 Greeks	 did	 not	 return	 his	 fire,	 but	 a	 bomb	 fell	 next	 to	 him	 and	 he
disappeared	beneath	a	shower	of	mud.	There	was	a	long	silence.	I	saw	something	move	where	Francesco
had	been.
I	put	my	gun	down	and	ran	towards	the	place	where	he	lay.	The	Greeks	did	not	shoot	at	me	and	I	saw
that	although	the	side	of	his	head	had	been	blown	away,	he	was	still	alive.	I	knelt	and	gathered	him	into
my	arms,	then	stood	up	and	faced	the	Greeks,	offering	myself	to	their	guns.	There	was	a	silence,	and	then
a	cheer	came	from	them.	I	turned	and	carried	the	bleeding	bundle	back	to	our	side.
Francesco	took	two	hours	to	die.	His	blood	ran	down	my	uniform,	his	mouth	formed	silent	words,
the	light	in	his	eyes	faded	and	he	began	the	long,	slow	journey	towards	death,	suffering	what	must	have
been	indescribable	pain.	I	buried	him	in	a	deep	hole,	the	home	of	enormous	rats.
We	lost	the	war	and	were	saved	only	when	the	Germans	invaded	from	Bulgaria,	forcing	the	Greeks
to	fight	two	different	armies	at	the	same	time.	We	fought	and	froze	and	died	for	no	purpose.	I	took	no	part
in	the	shameful	conquest	of	Greece	because	the	day	after	I	buried	Francesco,	I	shot	myself	in	the	flesh	of
my	thigh.
CHAPTER	FOUR
The	Wild	Man
On	 28	 October,	 Greece	 and	 Italy	 formally	 declared	 war	 on	 each	 other.	 All	 the	 young	 men	 of
Cephallonia	disappeared	to	join	the	army,	and	Dr	Iannis	attempted	to	join	too	but	was	turned	down	when
it	 was	 discovered	 that	 he	 had	 learned	 all	 his	 medical	 knowledge	 on	 ships	 and	 had	 no	 proper
qualifications.	Several	Italian	families	on	the	island	were	attacked	and	their	houses	were	burnt	down,	and
the	islanders	developed	a	silent,	sorrowful	expression	as	they	learnt	to	live	with	the	thought	that	their	sons
and	brothers	might	die.	As	the	weeks	passed,	however,	they	were	comforted	by	the	news	that	their	country
was	winning	the	war	and	that	the	Greeks	were	winning	back	territory	that	was	theirs	by	right	in	Albania.
The	 villagers	 went	 often	 to	 church	 and	 Father	 Arsenios	 surprised	 them	 by	 making	 fine,	 emotional
speeches	and	by	not	getting	drunk.	Almost	 immediately,	 shortages	of	certain	 foods	and	other	household
essentials	developed,	and	beans	became	the	greater	part	of	the	doctor's	and	Pelagia's	diet.
The	war	had	the	effect	of	increasing	the	importance	of	Dr	Iannis,	as	the	village	community	turned	to
him	for	advice	and	leadership.	The	doctor	watched	his	daughter	progress	through	a	series	of	emotions,	all
of	which	 seemed	 to	 him	 to	 be	 unhealthy	 and	worrying.	At	 first	 Pelagia	 had	 been	 in	 a	 state	 of	 painful
anxiety,	and	 then	 in	 storms	of	 tears.	She	would	sit	by	 the	wall	outside	as	 if	 she	expected	her	 fiance	 to
arrive	at	 the	bend	of	 the	 road	where	he	had	been	 shot	by	Velisarios.	Later,	 she	developed	 the	habit	of
remaining	 silently	 in	 the	 room	with	 her	 father,	 her	 hands	motionless	 in	 her	 lap	 as	 tears	 followed	 each
other	silently	down	her	cheeks.	Pelagia	calmed	her	fears	by	writing	letter	after	letter	to	Mandras,	relating
island	news	and	gossip,	telling	him	about	her	terrible	dreams	and	her	fears	for	him,	and	begging	him	to
write	back	to	her.	She	began	the	task	of	making	a	cover	for	their	marriage	bed,	but	lacked	the	benefit	of	a
mothers	instruction	in	such	matters.	Each	time	it	reached	a	certain	stage,	it	began	to	look	suspiciously	like
a	dead	animal,	and	she	felt	forced	to	undo	her	work	and	begin	again.
As	day	followed	day	it	became	clear	that	not	only	had	Mandras	not	written,	but	that	he	never	would.
After	careful	observation	of	his	daughter,	her	father	realized	that	she	was	becoming	bitter	and	increasingly
certain	 that	 her	 fiance	 could	 not	 love	 her.	When	 he	 realized	 that	 Pelagia	was	 seriously	 depressed,	 the
doctor	made	 her	 accompany	 him	 on	 his	medical	 visits,	 sent	 her	 to	 bed	 early	 and	 let	 her	 sleep	 in	 the
mornings.	He	made	a	habit	of	making	her	laugh	against	her	will,	and	deliberately	made	her	angry	by	such
tricks	as	moving	all	the	knives	from	one	drawer	to	another.	The	doctor	considered	the	return	of	her	normal
cheerful	manner	to	be	a	sign	that	she	had	given	up	her	passion	for	Mandras.	On	the	one	hand,	he	was	glad
of	 this,	since	he	did	not	 truly	believe	that	Mandras	would	make	a	good	husband,	but	on	the	other	hand,
Pelagia	was	 already	engaged,	 and	 the	breaking	of	 an	 engagement	would	 cause	great	 shame.	The	 awful
possibility	occurred	to	him	that	Pelagia	might	marry	a	man	she	no	longer	loved	out	of	a	sense	of	duty.
Pelagia	returned	from	the	village	with	a	jar	of	water	upon	her	shoulder,	set	it	down	in	the	yard	and
came	through	the	door,	singing.	The	news	had	been	bad	for	some	weeks	-	not	only	had	Kokolios	lost	two
of	his	sons,	but	the	Germans	had	attacked	the	Greek	army	so	that	the	courageous	Greek	troops	were	at	last
facing	defeat.	Strangely,	the	bad	news	made	Pelagia	even	more	appreciative	of	the	first	signs	of	spring	on
the	 island.	 She	was	 feeling	 strong	 and	whole	 and	was	 enjoying	 having	 the	 house	 to	 herself	while	 her
father	was	away	visiting	a	friend	on	the	other	side	of	the	island.
Pelagia's	singing	was	brought	to	a	sudden	stop	when	she	entered	the	kitchen.	There	was	a	stranger
seated	 at	 the	 kitchen	 table,	 a	most	 wild	 and	 horrible	 stranger,	 whose	 hands	 trembled	 ceaselessly	 and
whose	head	was	utterly	hidden	beneath	a	mass	of	dirt,	mud	and	hair.	An	enormous	beard	hid	the	lower
half	of	the	stranger's	face,	in	which	Pelagia	could	see	only	two	tiny	bright	eyes	that	would	not	look	at	her.
Rags	covered	the	stranger's	body	and	in	the	place	of	shoes	there	were	bandages,	stained	with	blood	both
old	and	new.
Overcome	with	fear	and	pity,	not	knowing	what	to	do,	Pelagia	said,	 'My	father's	out.	He	should	be
back	tomorrow.'
'You're	happy,	anyway.	Singing,'	said	the	man	in	a	cracked	voice,	and	his	whole	body	shook.
'You	can't	stay,	I'm	on	my	own,'	said	Pelagia.
'I	can't	walk,'	replied	the	man.	'I	walked	from	Epirus.	No	boots.'	Just	then,	the	goat	wandered	through
the	open	kitchen	door,	 approached	 the	 stranger	and	made	a	gentle	attempt	at	 tasting	 the	 stranger's	 rags.
'Ah,	at	least	your	goat	remembers	me,'	the	man	whispered,	and	began	to	weep.
Pelagia	was	astonished	by	these	words	and	said,	'Mandras?'
The	man	turned	his	face	towards	her	and	said,	'Don't	touch	me,	Pelagia.	There	are	insects	crawling
all	over	me	and	I	smell	terrible.'
Pelagia	felt	guilt,	pity,	disgust.	It	seemed	unimaginable	that	this	pitiful	ghost	hid	the	mind	and	body	of
the	man	she	loved.	'You	never	wrote	to	me,'	she	said,	making	the	accusation	that	had	destroyed	her	love
for	him	and	left	her	empty.
Mandras	replied,	'I	can't	write.'	For	a	reason	she	did	not	understand,	Pelagia	was	more	disgusted	by
this	 confession	 than	 by	Mandras's	 physical	 condition.	 'Couldn't	 someone	 else	 have	 written	 for	 you?	 I
thought	you	were	dead.	I	thought	you...	couldn't	love	me.'
'How	could	I	let	everyone	know?	How	could	I	have	my	feelings	discussed	by	the	boys?'	He	glanced
up	again	so	that	at	 last	she	recognized	his	eyes,	and	said,	 'Pelagia,	I	got	all	your	letters.	I	couldn't	read
them	but	I	got	them.'	From	inside	his	clothing	he	drew	out	a	huge,	dirty	packet.	'I	carried	you	in	here,'	he
said,	beating	his	chest.	'Every	day,	all	the	time,	I	was	thinking	of	you,	talking	to	you.	I	was	not	a	coward
because	of	you,	I	even	prayed	to	you.	And	when	the	Germans	attacked	us	I	got	through	their	lines,	and	all	I
could	think	of	was	that	I	had	to	get	home	to	you,	and	now...'	His	body	shook	as	he	wept.	 'Now	only	the
animals	know	me.'
'I'll	 fetch	 your	mother,'	 Pelagia	whispered	 and	 ran	 out	 of	 the	 house,	 down	 to	 the	 small,	 fishy	 but
extremely	clean	house	by	 the	harbour	where	Kyria	Drosoula,	Mandras's	widowed	mother,	 lived.	Kyria
Drosoula	was	a	woman	so	large	and	ugly	that	at	their	first	meeting	people	wondered	how	she	had	ever
found	a	husband.	She	was	in	fact	a	brave,	kind	woman,	and	during	Mandras's	absence	she	and	Pelagia	had
comforted	one	another.
Now	the	 two	women	returned,	breathless,	 to	 the	doctor's	house,	and	found	Mandras	 in	exactly	 the
same	position	that	Pelagia	had	left	him	in.
Drosoula	ran	into	the	kitchen	with	a	cry	of	joy	and	then	stepped	back	with	an	astonished	look	that	in
other	circumstances	would	have	been	amusing.	 'It	 is	him,'	 said	Pelagia.	 'I	 told	you	he	was	 in	an	awful
state.'
'My	God,'	 Drosoula	 exclaimed,	 then	 began	 to	 inspect	Mandras	 as	 if	 he	were	 an	 animal	 she	was
considering	purchasing.	 'Go	and	put	a	big	pot	 to	boil,'	 she	said	finally,	 'because	I'm	going	 to	wash	him
from	head	to	foot,	but	first	I'm	going	to	get	rid	of	this	hair,	so	bring	me	some	scissors.'
Mandras	sat	motionless	as	his	mother,	making	terrible	faces	as	she	did	so,	cut	away	the	ropes	and
lumps	 of	 his	 hair	 and	 beard,	 revealing	 the	 horribly	 infected	 state	 of	 the	 skin	 below	 and	 the	 insects
creeping	all	over	it.	Pelagia	felt	sickened	where	she	knew	that	she	should	feel	pity,	and	went	indoors	to
look	in	her	father's	medicine	cupboard.	She	realized	with	a	small	shock	that	she	had	learned	enough	from
her	father	over	the	years	to	become	a	doctor	herself.	Hurrying	outside,	she	told	Drosoula	which	treatments
to	use	on	Mandras's	face	and	head	and	where	to	use	them.	After	a	brief	discussion	about	whether	it	was
correct	for	a	woman	to	see	her	fiance	with	nothing	on,	the	two	women	decided	that	in	these	circumstances
it	was	entirely	acceptable.
They	removed	Mandras's	rags,	and	after	gazing	sorrowfully	at	the	parcel	of	skin	and	bones	that	sat
before	them,	again	under	Pelagia's	expert	guidance,	Drosoula	began	washing	her	son	and	rubbing	healing
oils	and	creams	on	him.	Pelagia	forced	herself	to	remove	the	bandages	from	Mandras's	feet,	and	despite
the	fact	that	at	first	sight	they	did	not	look	as	if	they	could	be	saved,	on	closer	examination	she	realized
that	 the	 flesh	was	quite	dry.	She	 fetched	a	bowl	of	 clean	water,	 salted	 it	 heavily,	 and	as	gently	 as	 she
could,	she	washed	and	treated	the	terrible	mess.
When	Dr	 Iannis	 returned	 the	 following	morning,	 he	 found	 not	 only	 a	 half-dead	man	 asleep	 in	 his
daughter's	bed,	but	his	daughter	and	an	amazingly	ugly	woman	asleep	in	his	own.	He	listened	to	Pelagia's
account	of	everything	she	had	done,	then	examined	the	patient	carefully,	paying	particular	attention	to	the
feet.	 Pelagia	 nervously	 waited	 for	 his	 anger.	 'Well	 done,	 I	 have	 never	 been	 so	 proud,'	 he	 declared.
Drosoula	smiled	at	Pelagia,	who	was	so	relieved	that	her	hands	were	shaking,	and	the	two	women	made
more	plans	for	Mandras's	recovery.
	
CHAPTER	FIVE
30	April	1941:	Invasion
Though	he	said	little,	being	almost	incapable	of	speech	due	to	his	physical	condition,	Mandras	was
fully	aware	of	the	change	in	Pelagia's	attitude	towards	him	and	he	hated	the	way	in	which	his	mother	and
fiancee	had	undressed	him,	washed	him	and	discussed	him	as	if	he	were	not	present.	But	the	horrors	of
war	 and	 starvation	 had	 taken	 away	 from	 him	 the	will	 to	 live,	 so	 that	 he	 lay	 for	 weeks	 in	 bed	 in	 his
mother's	 house,	 incapable	 of	 moving	 or	 even	 speaking,	 constantly	 revisiting	 in	 his	 mind	 the	 terrible
experiences	that	had	been	his.
The	brilliance	of	his	Greek	leaders	had	enabled	him	and	many	of	his	companions	to	survive	the	war
against	the	Italians,	but	the	freezing	conditions	in	the	mountains	and	lack	of	food	meant	that	his	body	aged
more	in	a	few	months	than	it	would	normally	do	in	sixty	years.	Then,	when	the	Germans	had	attacked	from
the	 south,	 Mandras's	 unit	 had	 marched	 back	 down	 into	 Greece	 and	 had	 fought	 bravely	 but	 uselessly
against	 their	 enemy,	 leaving	Mandras	 the	 only	 survivor	 in	 his	 unit.	With	 a	 vision	 of	 a	 loving,	 smiling
Pelagia	constantly	before	him,	Mandras	had	found	the	strength	to	struggle	home,	wearing	bandages	instead
of	boots,	through	the	wild	hills,	mountains	and	forests	that	made	up	the	greater	part	of	Greece.
For	 much	 of	 his	 journey	 he	 had	 met	 very	 few	 people	 and	 had	 consequently	 almost	 died	 from
starvation.	If	he	had	been	met	on	his	return	to	Cephallonia	by	the	loving	Pelagia	of	his	dreams,	Mandras's
recovery	might	 have	 been	 faster.	 But	 as	 week	 followed	 week,	 Pelagia,	 though	 she	 tried	 hard	 to	 love
Mandras,	 felt	 only	 coldness	 towards	 him,	 coldness	 and	 the	 growing	 conviction	 that	 Mandras	 was
remaining	ill	in	order	to	punish	her	for	her	lack	of	warmth	towards	him.
'He	thinks	that	nobody	wants	him,'	said	Dr	Iannis,	 'and	he's	doing	this	in	order	to	force	us	to	show
him	that	we	do.'
'But	I	don't	want	him,'	thought	Pelagia,	again	and	again,	as	she	sat	making	the	bedcover	that	had	never
grown	 beyond	 the	 size	 of	 a	 towel.	 But	 although	 she	 spent	 a	 lot	 of	 time	 either	 with	 or	 thinking	 about
Mandras,	there	were	other	matters	that	occupied	her	mind	just	as	much.	By	April	1941,	the	German	army
had	 reached	 Athens,	 and	 the	 royal	 palace	 there	 was	 occupied	 not	 by	 King	 George	 of	 Greece	 but	 by
German	soldiers.	On	the	28th	of	the	month,	the	Italian	army,	claiming	that	the	Ionian	islands	belonged	to
them	by	right,	invaded	the	island	of	Corfu,	making	it	inevitable	that	Cephallonia	would	be	next	on	the	list.
For	 the	 islanders,	 the	waiting	was	painful.	Every	 last	moment	of	 freedom	and	security	was	 rolled
about	on	the	tongue,	tasted	and	remembered.	Fathers	who	expected	to	be	beaten	to	death	stroked	the	hair
of	pretty	daughters	who	expected	to	be	raped.	Sons	sat	with	their	mothers	on	doorsteps	and	talked	gently
of	their	memories.	Father	Arsenios	knelt	in	his	church,	attempting	to	find	words	to	a	prayer,	puzzled	by	an
odd	sensation	of	having	been	abandoned	by	God	instead	of	the	other	way	round.
In	these	last	weeks	before	the	invasion,	Dr	Iannis	wrote	what	he	believed	to	be	the	final	part	of	his
'History	of	Cephallonia':
'Among	 those	 who	 invaded	 and	 occupied	 our	 island	 -	 the	 Romans,	 the	 Turks,	 the	 Russians,	 the
French,	the	British'	-	he	began,	 'the	Italians	made	the	greatest	impression	upon	us,	because	we	spent	the
period	 from	 1194	 to	 1797	 under	 Italian	 rule.	 This	 explains	 a	 great	 many	 things	 that	 may	 puzzle	 the
foreigner,	for	example,	the	numerous	Italian	words	that	exist	in	our	vocabulary,	and	the	architecture	of	the
island,	which	is	almost	entirely	Italian.'	He	continued	on	this	subject	for	a	number	of	pages,	then,	when	it
seemed	that	the	Italian	invasion	was	due	at	any	moment,	he	wrote:
'I	wait	in	the	knowledge	that	this	may	be	the	last	thing	I	ever	write.	I	beg	that	whoever	finds	these
papers	should	preserve	and	not	destroy	them.'
Placing	the	papers	in	a	black	tin	box,	the	doctor	lifted	the	old	carpet	beneath	the	table	and	opened	a
trapdoor,	revealing	the	large	hole	that	had	been	made	in	1849	in	order	to	hide	island	rebels	sought	by	the
British,	who	 then	governed	 the	 island.	He	placed	his	work	 safely	 inside	 the	hole,	 then	went	outside	 to
listen	for	the	sound	of	approaching	aeroplanes.
On	30	April	foreign	aircraft	and	ships	were	seen	approaching	from	the	horizon.	Drosoula	ran	inside
to	Pelagia	shouting,	'Italians,	Italians.	It's	the	invasion,'
Pelagia's	immediate	reaction	was	to	run	up	the	hill	to	be	with	her	father,	whom	she	found	standing	in
his	doorway,	as	everyone	else	stood	in	theirs,	protecting	his	eyes	against	the	sun	as	he	watched	the	planes.
Out	of	breath,	she	flew	into	his	arms	and	felt	him	tremble,	then	realized	with	a	small	shock	that	he	shook,
not	from	fear,	but	from	excitement.
'History,'	he	cried,	'all	this	time	I	have	been	writing	history,	and	now	history	is	happening	before	my
eyes.'
The	Italian	soldiers	stepped	apologetically	out	of	their	aircraft	and	ships	and	waved	cheerfully	but
hesitantly	to	the	people	in	their	doorways.	In	the	village,	Pelagia	and	her	father	watched	the	Italian	units
go	 by,	 their	 leaders	 consulting	 maps	 with	 puzzled	 faces.	 A	 line	 of	 men	 marched	 by,	 led	 by	 Captain
Antonio	Corelli,	with	the	mandolin	that	he	had	named	Antonia	hanging	on	his	back.	When	he	saw	Pelagia
he	shouted,	'Bella	bambina	eyes	left!'
The	 heads	 of	 the	 soldiers	 turned	 in	 her	 direction,	 and	 for	 one	 unbelievable	 minute	 Pelagia	 was
forced	 to	watch	 the	most	 ridiculous	 behaviour.	 There	was	 a	 soldier	who	 crossed	 his	 eyes	 and	 folded
down	his	lower	lip,	another	who	pushed	his	lips	out	and	blew	her	a	kiss,	another	who	pretended	at	each
step	to	stumble	over	his	own	feet.	Pelagia	put	her	hand	to	her	mouth.	'Don't	laugh,'	ordered	the	doctor.	'It's
our	duty	to	hate	them.'
All	 over	Cephallonia	 the	 islanders	 painted	 rude	 remarks	 about	 the	 invaders	 in	 huge	 letters	 on	 all
available	walls.	The	men	related	Italian	jokes.	What	is	the	shortest	book	in	the	world?	The	Italian	Book
of	War	Heroes.	Why	do	Italians	wear	moustaches?	To	be	reminded	of	their	mothers.	A	decision	was	made
that	the	local	population	should	provide	Italian	officers	with	accommodation.	So	one	day	the	doctor	came
home	and	found	a	round	Italian	officer	standing	in	the	kitchen.
'Buon	giorno,'	said	the	officer.
'Buon	giorno,'	the	doctor	replied.	'Perhaps	you	could	tell	me	why	you	are	here.'
'Ah,'	said	the	man	uncomfortably,	'I	am	sorry	to	say,	you	are	going	to	have	to	provide	accommodation
for	an	officer.'
'Impossible,'	said	the	doctor	angrily.	Then	an	interesting	thought	occurred	to	him	and	he	asked,	 'Do
you	have	a	supply	of	medicines?'
'Naturally,'	 replied	 the	 officer.	 The	 two	men	 exchanged	 glances,	 understanding	 perfectly	what	 the
other	was	thinking.
'There	are	many	things	I	need,'	said	the	doctor.
'And	I	need	accommodation.	So?'
'So	it's	a	deal,'	said	the	doctor.
'A	deal,'	repeated	the	officer.	 'Anything	you	want,	send	me	a	message	through	Captain	Corelli.	You
will	find	him	charming.'
In	 the	early	evening	Captain	Corelli	 arrived,	driven	by	another	 soldier,	Carlo	Piero	Guercio.	The
captain	looked	around,	appreciating	the	signs	of	a	quiet	domestic	life.	There	was	a	goat	tied	to	a	tree,	and
a	young	woman	with	dark	eyes	at	a	table,	with	a	scarf	tied	round	her	head	and	a	large	cooking	knife	in	her
hand.	The	 captain	 fell	 to	 his	 knees	 before	 her	 and	 exclaimed	 dramatically,	 'Please	 don't	 kill	me,	 I	 am
innocent.'
Pelagia	 smiled,	 against	 her	 will,	 and	 glanced	 at	 Carlo,	 amazed	 to	 see	 that	 he	 was	 as	 big	 as
Velisarios.	The	captain	leapt	up.	'I	am	Captain	Antonio	Corelli	and	this...'	he	took	Carlo	by	the	arm,	'...	is
one	of	our	heroes.	He	rescued	a	fallen	friend	under	fire.'
'It's	nothing,'	 said	Carlo	with	a	shy	smile,	and	Pelagia	knew	 immediately	 that,	despite	his	 size,	he
was	a	soft	and	saddened	man.	 'This...'	Corelli	continued,	 tapping	a	case	 in	his	hand,	 '...	 is	Antonia.	By
what	name	do	men	know	you,	may	I	ask?'	Pelagia	looked	at	Corelli	properly	for	the	first	time	and	realized
that	 this	 was	 the	 same	 officer	 who	 had	 commanded	 his	men	 to	march	 past	 at	 'eyes	 left'.	 At	 the	 same
moment	Corelli	recognized	her.	'Ah,'	he	exclaimed	and	smacked	himself	on	the	wrist,	then	fell	to	his	knees
once	more	and	said	softly,	'Forgive	me,	I	have	sinned.'
Dr	Iannis	came	out,	saw	the	captain	on	his	knees	and	said,	'Captain	Corelli?	I	want	a	word	with	you.
Now.'
Surprised	by	the	authority	in	the	older	man's	voice,	Corelli	stood	up	and	held	out	his	hand,	but	the
doctor	did	not	put	out	his	own,	instead	saying	sharply,	'I	want	an	explanation	please.	Why	has	the	teaching
of	Greek	history	been	forbidden	in	schools?	And	why	is	everyone	being	forced	to	learn	Italian?'
The	captain	felt	himself	wanting	to	run	away	like	a	little	boy.	'I	am	not	responsible	for	it,'	he	said.
The	doctor	frowned	fiercely	and	shook	his	finger	at	the	captain.	'There	would	be	no	wars,	captain,	if
men	like	you	took	more	responsibility.'
'I	must	protest,'	the	captain	replied	weakly.
'Fool,'	said	the	doctor	forcefully	and	returned	inside,	very	satisfied	with	himself.	Pelagia	could	not
help	feeling	sorry	for	the	captain.	'Your	father	is...'	he	said,	and	the	words	failed	him.
'Yes,	he	is,'	confirmed	Pelagia.
'Where	shall	I	sleep?'	asked	Corelli,	eager	to	change	the	subject.
'You	will	have	my	bed,'	said	Pelagia.
Under	normal	circumstances	Antonio	Corelli	would	have	asked	brightly,	 'Are	we	going	to	share	 it
then?	How	kind,'	but	now,	after	the	doctor's	words,	he	received	this	information	with	horror.	'Impossible,'
he	said.	'Tonight	I	shall	sleep	in	the	yard	and	tomorrow	I	shall	request	alternative	accommodation.'
Pelagia	was	shocked	by	the	feelings	of	anxiety	that	rose	in	her.	Could	there	be	something	inside	her
that	wanted	 this	 foreigner,	 this	 invader,	 to	stay?	She	went	 inside	and	 told	her	 father	about	 the	captain's
decision.	'He	can't	go,'	he	said.	'How	am	I	supposed	to	be	nasty	to	him	if	he	isn't	here?	And	anyway,	he
seems	like	a	pleasant	boy.'	He	took	his	daughter's	arm	and	went	back	out	with	her.	'Young	man,'	he	said	to
the	 captain,	 'you	 are	 staying	 here	whether	 you	 like	 it	 or	 not.	 It	 is	 quite	 possible	 that	we	will	 be	 sent
someone	even	worse.'
'Yes,'	said	the	captain,	overcome	with	embarrassment.
'Kyria	Pelagia	will	bring	water,	some	coffee	and	food.	You	will	find	we	look	after	our	guests,	even
those	who	do	not	deserve	it.	Your	vast	friend	is	welcome	to	join	us.'
The	captain	went	to	call	Carlo	to	the	meal	in	a	state	of	miserable	obedience	and	utter	defeat.
When	 the	 captain	 woke	 after	 his	 first	 night	 in	 the	 doctor's	 house,	 he	 went	 into	 the	 kitchen,	 saw
Pelagia	 fast	asleep	and	did	not	know	what	 to	do.	He	 looked	down	upon	her	and	realized	he	wanted	 to
crawl	in	beside	her	-	nothing	could	have	seemed	more	natural	-	but	instead	he	returned	to	his	room	and
took	his	mandolin,	Antonia,	out	of	its	case.	After	practising	for	five	minutes	or	so,	he	began	playing	a	very
fast,	 complicated	 piece,	 forgetful	 of	 the	 sleeping	 girl	 next	 door,	 so	 that	 Pelagia	woke	 to	 indescribably
beautiful	music	coming	from	somewhere	in	the	house.	She	lay	listening,	then	went	to	dress	in	her	father's
room,	and	Corelli,	realizing	that	she	had	risen	at	last,	came	out	into	the	kitchen.
'That	was	lovely,'	commented	Pelagia.
He	looked	unhappy.	'I'm	sorry,	I	woke	you	up.'
'That's	very	beautiful,'	she	said,	gesturing	towards	the	instrument.	'Why	do	you	play	the	mandolin?'
'Why	does	one	do	anything?	My	uncle	gave	me	Antonia	and	I	discovered	I	could	be	a	good	musician.
When	the	war's	over,	I'm	going	to	become	a	professional	concert	player	and	composer.'
'You're	going	to	be	rich	and	famous,	then,'	Pelagia	said	jokingly.	'Why	don't	you	play	me	something?'
The	captain	picked	up	the	mandolin,	and	a	stream	of	notes	poured	from	it	that	made	Pelagia's	mouth
fall	 open.	 She	 had	 never	 before	 heard	 such	 complex,	 lovely	music.	 She	 realized	 for	 the	 first	 time	 that
music	was	 not	 just	 a	 sweet	 sound,	 but	was,	 to	 those	who	 understood	 it,	 an	 emotional	 and	 intellectual
journey,	a	journey	that	she	wanted	to	share.	She	leaned	forward	and	put	her	hands	together	as	if	she	were
at	prayer.
'There	you	are,'	said	the	captain	when	he	had	finished.
In	her	excitement	at	 the	music,	she	wanted	 to	dance	and	spin	round,	but	she	only	said,	 'I	 just	don't
understand	why	an	artist	like	you	would	descend	to	being	a	soldier.	It's	a	waste	of	time.'
'Of	course	it's	a	waste	of	time.'	He	rose	and	glanced	at	his	watch.	'Carlo	should	have	been	here	by
now.	 I'll	 have	 to	 go	 and	 find	 him.'	He	 looked	 at	 her	with	 one	 eyebrow	 raised	 and	 said,	 'By	 the	way,
Signorina,	I	couldn't	help	noticing	that	you	have	a	gun	in	the	pocket	of	your	skirt.'
Pelagia	began	to	tremble	but	the	captain	continued,	'I	understand	why	you	might	want	to	have	it,	and
in	fact	I	haven't	seen	it	at	all,	but	you	must	realize	what	would	happen	if	someone	else	saw	it.	Be	more
careful.'
She	looked	up	at	him,	appealing	with	her	eyes,	and	he	smiled,	tapped	the	side	of	his	nose	and	was
gone.
Carlo	had	not	 arrived	with	 the	 car	 to	pick	up	Captain	Corelli,	 because	 it	 had	broken	down	 some
kilometres	from	the	village.	After	kicking	the	car	a	number	of	times,	Carlo	had	set	off	on	foot	towards	the
village.	Velisarios	passed	him	and	 the	 two	men	 looked	at	one	another	with	 something	 like	 recognition,
because	both	men	had	become	accustomed	to	the	sad	suspicion	that	they	were	unique	in	a	peculiar	way.
They	were	both	amazed	at	 the	other's	 size	and	 for	a	moment	 forgot	 that	 they	were	enemies.	 'Hey!'	 said
Velisarios,	raising	his	hands	in	a	gesture	of	pleasure.	Carlo	offered	him	one	of	his	disgusting	cigarettes,
Velisarios	accepted,	and	they	made	sour	faces	to	each	other	as	they	smoked.	They	then	went	their	separate
ways,	more	content	than	before	they	had	met.
As	Carlo	walked	up	 the	hill	 towards	 the	house,	his	mind	 turned	 towards	Captain	Corelli.	For	 the
first	time	since	the	death	of	Francesco	in	the	mountains	of	Albania,	the	soldier	was	experiencing	a	kind	of
happiness;	 in	 the	 captain	 he	 had	 once	 again	 found	 a	man	whom	 he	 could	 love	 and	 serve.	 In	 his	 eyes,
Corelli	was	endlessly	optimistic,	a	clear	fountain,	a	kind	of	saint	who	remained	a	man	of	honour	because
he	knew	no	other	way	to	be.	Carlo	knew	that	some	people	thought	that	Corelli	was	a	little	mad,	but	for
him,	the	captain	was	a	man	who	loved	life	so	much	that	he	did	not	care	what	kind	of	an	impression	he
made.
One	of	the	pleasures	of	Carlo's	life,	at	that	time,	was	an	opera	group	called	La	Scala	that	the	captain
had	organized	from	among	those	of	his	men	who	could	sing.	Carlo,	who	had	a	fine	singing	voice,	had	been
invited	to	join	when	the	captain	had	heard	him	singing	as	he	polished	his	boots.	There	was	another	more
unusual	member	of	the	opera	group,	a	young	German	soldier	called	Gunter	Weber,	part	of	a	troop	of	three
thousand	German	soldiers	who	had	accompanied	the	Italian	army	on	their	invasion	of	the	island.	Although
relations	 between	 the	 Germans	 and	 Italians	 appeared	 friendly,	 the	 Germans	 thought	 of	 the	 Italians	 as
inferior,	and	the	Italians	were	puzzled	by	German	discipline	and	lack	of	humour.
But	Captain	Corelli	had	made	friends	with	Gunter	Weber,	a	boy	who	spoke	some	Italian	and	whom
the	captain	liked	because	his	face	was	open	and	friendly,	and	because	when	he	got	drunk	he	laughed	and
lost	his	German	seriousness.	Weber	became	a	member	of	the	opera	club	despite	the	fact	that	he	could	not
sing	 a	 note.	Neither	Corelli	 nor	Carlo	 knew	 that	 one	 day	 the	German	would	 betray	 his	 friends	with	 a
storm	of	bullets	that	would	open	red	and	bleeding	wounds	in	the	bodies	of	the	companions	he	had	grown
to	love.
CHAPTER	SIX
The	Freedom	Fighter
After	Captain	Corelli	had	left,	Pelagia	did	some	household	tasks,	then	went	outside	to	brush	her	goat,
thinking	about	the	captain	as	she	did	so.	Mandras	caught	her	dreaming.
He	had	climbed	out	of	bed,	cursing	and	completely	cured,	on	the	day	of	the	invasion,	as	if	the	arrival
of	the	Italians	was	something	so	important	that	illness	was	a	luxury	to	be	left	behind.	He	had	gone	down	to
the	sea	and	swum	as	if	he	had	never	been	away,	and	had	returned	with	a	smile	on	his	face	and	a	fish	for
Pelagia.	But	Pelagia	only	felt	guilty	now,	whenever	she	saw	him,	and	deeply	uncomfortable.
She	jumped	when	he	tapped	her	on	the	shoulder	and	despite	her	effort	to	force	a	bright	smile,	he	did
not	fail	to	see	the	look	of	alarm	in	her	eyes.	He	ignored	it	but	would	remember	it	later.	'I'm	going	to	join
the	freedom	fighters,'	he	said.	'I'm	leaving	tomorrow.'
'Oh,'	said	Pelagia.	There	was	a	long	silence,	then	she	said,	'I	won't	be	able	to	write.'
'I	know.'
Pelagia	shook	her	head	slowly	and	sighed.	'Promise	me	one	thing.	Whenever	you	are	planning	to	do
something	terrible,	think	of	me	and	don't	do	it.'
'I'm	a	Greek,'	he	said	gently.	'Not	a	Fascist.	And	I	will	think	of	you	every	minute.'
She	heard	the	sincerity	in	his	voice	and	felt	herself	wanting	to	cry.	They	embraced,	like	brother	and
sister,	not	people	who	were	engaged	to	be	married.	'God	go	with	you,'	said	Pelagia,	and	he	smiled	sadly.
'And	with	you.'
'I	shall	always	remember	you	swinging	in	the	tree.'
They	laughed,	then	he	looked	at	her	lovingly	for	one	last	moment,	took	a	few	steps,	paused,	turned
and	said	softly,	'I	shall	always	love	you.'
***
Mandras	joined	a	group	of	three	men	in	the	hills	of	the	Peloponnisos	in	southern	Greece.	They	had
neither	plan	nor	purpose.	All	 they	knew	was	that	 they	were	driven	by	something	from	the	depths	of	 the
soul,	something	that	commanded	them	to	rid	their	land	of	strangers	or	die	in	the	attempt.	They	set	fire	to
lorries,	 and	 one	 of	 their	 number	 stabbed	 an	 enemy	 soldier	 and	 afterwards	 sat	 shaking	 with	 fear	 and
disgust	while	the	others	comforted	and	praised	him.	They	lived	on	the	edge	of	a	forest	in	a	cave,	living	off
supplies	 brought	 by	 the	 priest	 of	 a	 neighbouring	 village.	 There	were	 several	 other	 groups	 of	 freedom
fighters	 in	 the	 area,	 the	most	 organized	being	 a	Communist	 group	known	as	ELAS	 (although	 it	 did	not
declare	itself	as	communist,	preferring	to	disguise	the	fact).
Mandras	 joined	ELAS	at	 first	 because	he	had	no	 choice.	He	 and	his	 companions	were	 lying	 in	 a
small	leafy	shelter	that	they	had	built,	when	they	were	suddenly	surrounded	by	ten	men	with	thick	beards,
pointing	guns	at	them.	Their	leader,	who	wore	a	dirty	red	cap,	said,	'Come	out,'	and	the	men	slowly	stood
up	and	came	out,	fearing	for	their	lives,	their	hands	upon	the	backs	of	their	heads.
'Who	are	you	with?'	demanded	the	man	with	the	cap.
'With	no	one,'	replied	Mandras,	confused.
'The	deal	 is	 that	 either	 you	go	back	 to	 your	 villages	 and	 leave	 us	 your	weapons,'	 said	 the	 leader
commandingly,	'or	you	fight	us	and	we	kill	you,	or	you	join	us	under	my	command.	This	is	my	territory	and
no	one	else's.	Which	is	it?'
'We	came	to	fight,'	explained	Mandras.	'Who	are	you?'
'I	am	Hector,	not	my	real	name,	and	we	are	 the	 local	branch	of	ELAS.'	Hector's	men	grinned	 in	a
very	friendly	fashion,	and	Mandras	looked	from	one	of	his	companions	to	the	others.	'We	stay?'	he	asked,
and	they	nodded.	They	had	been	too	long	in	the	hills	to	give	up	the	fight	and	it	was	good	to	have	found	a
leader	who	might	know	what	ought	to	be	done.
'Good,'	said	Hector.	'Come	with	us,	and	let's	see	what	you	are	made	of.'
He	led	Mandras	and	his	companions	three	kilometres	to	a	tiny	house	guarded	by	one	of	Hector's	men.
'Bring	him	out,'	Hector	said,	and	the	man	kicked	and	pushed	a	thin	old	man	out	into	the	sunlight,	where	he
stood	 trembling	and	blinking.	Hector	handed	Mandras	a	 length	of	knotted	 rope	and,	pointing	 to	 the	old
man,	said,	'Beat	him.'
Mandras	stared	at	Hector	 in	disbelief	and	the	 latter	stared	fiercely	back	at	him.	 'If	you	want	 to	be
with	us,	you've	got	to	learn	to	teach	these	people	a	lesson.	This	man	has	been	found	guilty.	Now	beat	him.'
Mandras	struck	the	man	once	with	the	rope,	lightly,	because	of	the	man's	age,	and	Hector	impatiently
exclaimed,	 'Harder,	 harder.	What	 are	 you?	A	woman?'	Mandras	 struck	 the	old	man	once	more,	 a	 little
harder.	'Again,'	commanded	Hector.
It	was	easier	each	time	he	hit	him.	In	fact	 it	became	a	pleasure.	It	was	as	if	all	 the	anger	from	the
earliest	years	of	his	childhood	rose	in	him	and	was	given	expression.	The	old	man	threw	himself	to	the
ground,	screaming,	and	Mandras	suddenly	knew	he	could	be	a	god.	Hector	stepped	forward,	took	the	rope
from	his	hand,	and	placed	a	gun	in	his	grasp.	'Now	kill	him.'
Mandras	knelt	down	and	placed	the	gun	against	the	old	man's	head,	but	he	could	not	do	it.	He	closed
his	eyes	tight	and	told	himself	that	he	had	to	be	a	man	in	front	of	other	men.	Anyway,	he	was	only	doing
what	Hector	had	ordered	him	to	do.	The	man	was	going	to	die	anyway.	Mandras	tightened	the	muscles	of
his	face	and	shot	the	man	in	the	head.
Afterwards	he	looked	not	at	the	bloody	mess	of	bone	and	brain,	but	in	disbelief	at	the	smoking	gun.
Hector	patted	Mandras	on	the	back	and	said,	'Well	done'.	Mandras	tried	to	struggle	to	his	feet	but	could
not	do	so,	and	Hector	helped	him	up.	'Revolutionary	justice,'	he	said.	'Historical	necessity.'
As	they	left	the	village,	Mandras	found	that	he	could	not	look	anyone	in	the	face	and	he	stared	down
into	the	dirt.	'What	did	he	do?'	he	asked	finally.
'He	was	a	dirty	old	thief.	He	took	a	bottle	of	whisky	from	supplies	that	were	meant	for	us.	You	have
to	be	tough	with	these	people	or	they	start	doing	what	they	like.	They're	full	of	the	wrong	ideas	and	it's
just	something	we	have	to	get	out	of	them.'
***
During	his	time	with	Hector,	Mandras	learnt	a	great	many	things.	Hector	taught	Mandras	to	read	and
write,	and	taught	him	all	about	Communism.	Mandras	learnt	that	he	was	not	a	fisherman	but	a	worker,	and
that	he	was	as	good	as	Dr	 Iannis	and	deserved	 the	 same	pay.	He	 learnt	 to	 take	 food	and	animals	 from
hungry	villagers	without	payment,	since	ELAS	was	working	so	hard	on	behalf	of	the	Greek	people.	When
villagers	attempted	to	resist	them,	then	Hector	and	his	men	punished	them,	not	just	by	shooting	them	but	by
tearing	 out	 eyes	 and	 cutting	mouths	 so	 that	 people	 died	 smiling.	Hector	 explained	 to	Mandras	 that	 the
villagers	were	Fascists	 and	 loyal	 to	 the	 king,	 and	 that	 a	 good	 lesson	would	 help	 them	 to	 change	 their
ways.
Mandras	also	learnt	to	rape	women	and	to	enjoy	their	screams,	since	it	was	all	in	a	good	cause.	A
new	and	better	Greece	would	be	built,	and	you	did	what	you	liked	with	the	inferior	bricks	that	were	going
to	be	thrown	away	anyway.	It	was	like	making	an	omelette	and	throwing	away	the	eggshells,	said	Hector,
and	Mandras	drank	in	every	word	his	leader	said.
CHAPTER	SEVEN
A	Problem	with	Eyes
Pelagia	 treated	 the	 captain	 as	badly	 as	 she	 could.	 If	 she	 served	him	 food,	 she	would	deliberately
spill	it	as	she	put	it	down,	and	eventually	she	noticed	that	he	had	acquired	the	habit	of	not	pulling	in	his
chair	until	she	had	already	put	the	food	on	the	table.	His	failure	to	protest	at	her	treatment	of	him	and	his
constant	politeness	made	her	even	more	annoyed.	Her	anger	was	so	deep	and	so	bitter	that	she	needed	to
shout	at	him	or	even	strike	him	in	order	to	release	it.	After	two	months	of	sleepless	nights,	months	during
which	she	had	done	her	best	to	annoy	him,	the	captain	remained	calm	and	friendly.
One	day	he	left	his	gun	on	the	table.	After	some	thought,	Pelagia	decided	to	put	the	gun	in	a	bowl	of
water	for	a	few	minutes	in	the	hope	that	this	would	do	some	damage.	The	captain	came	in	and	caught	her
just	as	she	was	lifting	the	gun	out	of	the	water.	She	heard	a	voice	behind	her	and,	in	her	fear,	dropped	it
back	in	the	bowl.
'Oh	God,'	she	exclaimed,	'you	frightened	me!'
The	captain	looked	down	at	the	gun,	raised	his	eyebrows	and	said	coolly,	'I	see	you're	trying	to	make
trouble	for	me.'	This	was	not	what	she	had	expected,	but	nevertheless	her	heart	beat	faster	with	fear	and
anxiety.	'I	was	washing	it,'	she	said	weakly	at	last.	'It	was	terribly	oily.'
'How	charming	to	know	so	little	about	guns,'	said	the	captain.	Pelagia	went	red,	strangely	angered	by
his	suggestion,	which	she	knew	he	did	not	mean,	that	she	was	a	sweet	and	silly	girl	who	did	stupid	things.
'You	are	not	a	good	liar,'	the	captain	added.
'What	do	you	expect?'	she	demanded,	immediately	wondering	what	she	had	meant.
The	captain	seemed	to	know,	however.	'It	must	be	very	difficult	for	you	all	to	have	to	put	up	with	us.'
He	removed	the	gun	from	the	bowl,	sighed	and	said,	'I	suppose	you	have	done	me	a	favour.	It	does	need
cleaning.'
'Aren't	you	angry,	then?	Why	aren't	you	angry?'
'What's	anger	got	to	do	with	music?	Do	you	really	believe	I've	got	nothing	important	to	think	about?
Let's	 just	 think	about	 important	 things	and	 leave	one	another	 in	peace.	 I'll	 leave	you	alone	and	you	can
leave	me	alone.'
This	idea	struck	Pelagia	as	new	and	unacceptable.	She	did	not	want	to	leave	him	alone,	she	wanted
to	 shout	 at	 him	 and	hit	 him.	Suddenly	 overcome	with	 emotion,	 she	 struck	him	with	 all	 her	 force,	 right
across	the	left	cheek.	He	tried	to	step	back	in	time,	but	was	too	late.	He	steadied	himself	and	touched	a
hand	to	his	face,	as	if	comforting	himself,	then	held	out	the	gun.	'Put	it	back	in	the	water,'	he	said,	'I	might
find	it	 less	painful.'	This	remark	made	Pelagia	even	angrier.	She	rushed	out	into	the	yard	and	kicked	an
iron	pot,	injuring	her	toe,	then	threw	the	pot	over	the	wall.	The	captain,	watching	her	from	the	window,
shook	his	head	in	amazement.	These	Greek	girls,	such	passion	and	fire,	he	thought	admiringly,	and	then
wondered	why	no	one	had	ever	written	an	opera	set	in	modern	Greece.	A	tune	entered	his	mind	and	he
began	to	sing	it	softly	to	himself,	thinking	that	perhaps	he	would	call	it	'Pelagia's	March'.
As	the	months	went	by,	Pelagia	noticed	that	she	was	losing	her	anger,	and	this	puzzled	and	upset	her.
The	fact	was	that	the	captain	had	become	as	much	a	part	of	the	house	as	the	goat	or	her	own	father,	and
she	was	quite	used	 to	seeing	him	playing	with	 little	Lemoni	 in	 the	yard,	or	seated	at	 the	 table,	deep	 in
concentration,	composing	music	for	the	mandolin.	Early	in	the	morning	she	looked	forward	with	pleasure
to	the	moment	when	he	would	enter	the	kitchen	and	say,	'Kalimcra	Kyria	Pelagia.	Is	Carlo	here	yet?'	and
in	the	evening	she	would	actually	begin	to	worry	if	he	were	a	little	late.
A	new	source	of	anger	developed,	 the	problem	being	 that	 this	 time	the	anger	was	directed	against
herself.	It	seemed	that	she	just	could	not	help	looking	at	him,	and	he	was	always	catching	her.	There	was
something	about	him,	sitting	at	the	table	as	he	went	through	his	paperwork,	that	made	her	look	up	at	him
regularly.	But	every	time	she	looked	up,	he	did	too,	and	she	would	be	caught	in	his	steady	gaze	as	surely
as	if	he	had	grasped	her	by	the	wrists.
For	a	few	seconds	they	would	look	at	one	another	and	then	she	would	grow	red	and	look	down.	Then
a	few	seconds	later	she	would	look	up,	and	at	that	moment	he	would	return	her	glance.	It	was	impossible
and	embarrassing.	'I've	got	to	stop	doing	this,'	she	would	tell	herself	and,	certain	that	he	was	deep	in	his
tasks,	would	look	up	and	get	caught	again.
She	 knew	 he	was	 playing	 a	 game	with	 her,	 that	 she	was	 being	 played	with	 so	 gently	 that	 it	was
impossible	to	protest.	After	all,	she	had	never	caught	him	looking	at	her,	so	it	was	all	her	fault,	obviously.
Nevertheless,	it	was	a	game	of	which	he	was	in	absolute	command,	and	in	that	sense	she	was	its	victim.
She	 decided	 that	 she	 would	 not	 be	 the	 one	 to	 look	 down;	 she	 would	 wait	 until	 he	 broke	 away.	 She
searched	for	every	last	bit	of	courage	and	looked	up.
They	 looked	 at	 one	 another	 for	what	 seemed	 like	hours	 and	Pelagia	wondered	 foolishly	 if	 it	was
considered	acceptable	to	blink.	Her	eyes	began	to	water	and	she	started	seeing	two	captains	instead	of
one.	He	did	not	look	away	but	began	to	make	funny	faces,	showing	his	teeth	like	a	horse,	and	moving	the
tip	of	his	nose	from	side	to	side,	so	that	Pelagia	began	a	smile,	then	laughed	aloud	and	blinked.	Corelli
jumped	 to	his	 feet,	 crying,	 'I	won!	 I	won,'	 and	 the	doctor	 looked	up	 from	his	book,	exclaiming,	 'What?
What?'
'You	 cheated,'	 protested	 Pelagia,	 laughing.	 The	 doctor	 looked	 from	 the	 captain	 to	 his	 daughter,
adjusted	his	glasses	and	sighed.	 'Whatever	next?'	he	demanded,	knowing	perfectly	well	what	was	next,
and	working	out	in	advance	how	to	deal	with	it.
Some	 days	 later	 they	 passed	 each	 other	 at	 the	 door,	 she	 going	 out	 and	 he	 returning	 from	 work.
Unselfconsciously,	she	raised	one	hand	to	his	left	cheek	and,	in	passing,	kissed	him	on	the	other.	He	was
astonished	and,	by	the	time	she	reached	the	entrance	to	the	yard,	so	was	she,	because	it	was	not	until	then
that	she	realized	what	she	had	done.	She	stopped	as	if	she	had	walked	straight	into	a	wall,	felt	her	blood
rising	to	the	roots	of	her	hair,	and	realized	that	she	did	not	dare	look	back	at	him.	He	called	out,	as	she
knew	he	would,	'Kyria	Pelagia,'
'What?'	she	demanded.
'What's	for	dinner?'
'Don't	laugh	at	me.	I	thought	you	were	my	father.	I	always	kiss	him	like	that	when	he	comes	in.'
'Very	understandable.	We	are	both	old	and	small.'
'If	you	are	going	to	laugh	at	me,	I	shall	never	speak	to	you	again.'
He	came	out	and	threw	himself	upon	his	knees	before	her.
'Oh	no,'	he	cried,	'not	that.	Shoot	me,	beat	me,	but	don't	say	you'll	never	speak	to	me.'	He	grasped	her
round	the	knees	and	pretended	to	weep.
'The	whole	village	is	looking,'	she	protested.	'Stop	it	at	once.'
'My	heart	is	broken,'	he	cried	and,	taking	her	hand,	he	began	to	cover	it	with	kisses.
'Stupid	goat,	you	are	insane.'
Corelli	 laughed	 and	 got	 to	 his	 feet.	 'Come	 inside,'	 he	 said,	 'I've	 got	 something	 very	 interesting	 to
show	you.'
Relieved	by	this	sudden	change	of	subject,	she	followed	him	through	the	door,	but	found	that	he	was
passing	her	on	the	way	out	again.	He	put	his	hands	on	each	side	of	her	head,	kissed	her	dramatically	on
the	 forehead,	exclaimed,	 'I'm	sorry,	 I	 thought	 it	was	 the	doctor,'	 and	 then	 ran	away	across	 the	yard	and
down	the	street.	She	stared	after	him	in	amazement,	making	every	effort	not	to	laugh	or	smile.
CHAPTER	EIGHT
Snails
When	the	doctor	glanced	out	of	the	window	and	saw	Captain	Corelli	creeping	up	behind	Lemoni	in
order	to	surprise	her,	he	laid	down	his	pen	and	went	out	into	the	afternoon	sunlight.
'Excuse	 me,	 children,'	 said	 the	 doctor,	 ignoring	 the	 captain's	 embarrassment,	 'Lemoni,	 do	 you
remember	that	you	told	me	you	know	a	place	where	there	were	lots	of	snails?	Can	you	come	round	this
evening	and	show	me	where	they	are?'
Lemoni	nodded	importantly.
'What's	all	this	about?'	asked	the	captain.
Stiffly,	the	doctor	said,	'Thanks	to	you	Italians,	there's	almost	no	food.	We're	going	out	this	evening	to
find	snails.'
The	captain	wiped	the	sweat	from	his	forehead	and	said,	'Permit	me	to	come	and	help.'
So	in	the	evening,	an	hour	before	sunset,	Pelagia	and	her	father,	Lemoni	and	the	captain	climbed	over
a	 low	wall	and	 then	began	crawling	 through	 impossibly	 thick	undergrowth	 in	 their	 search	 for	 snails.	 It
became	immediately	apparent	that	there	were	quantities	of	snails	everywhere	they	looked.	The	child	and
three	 adults	 became	 so	 involved	 in	 their	 task	 that	 they	 did	 not	 notice	 they	 had	 become	 separated.	The
captain	 found	himself	 on	 his	 own	 and	 paused	 for	 a	 second,	 realizing	 that	 he	 could	 not	 remember	 ever
having	felt	so	content.
'Oh,	oh	no,'	came	Pelagia's	voice	from	nearby.
Fearing	that	perhaps	she	had	been	hurt,	the	captain	crawled	towards	the	place	where	her	voice	had
come	 from	and	 found	her	 unable	 to	move,	 her	 hair	 caught	 in	 some	briars,	 her	 neck	 pulled	 backwards.
'Don't	laugh,'	she	said	crossly.
'I'm	not	laughing,'	he	said,	laughing.	'I	was	afraid	you	were	hurt.'
'If	you	don't	help	me,	I'll	murder	you.	Just	stop	laughing.'
'Hold	still,'	he	told	her,	and	reaching	over	her	shoulders	he	began	to	pull	the	hair	out	piece	by	piece,
as	gently	as	he	could.	'I've	done	it,'	he	said,	pleased	with	himself,	and	as	he	drew	back	and	his	lips	passed
her	cheek,	he	kissed	it	tenderly,	before	the	ear.
She	touched	her	fingertips	to	the	place	of	the	kiss,	and	said,	shaking	her	head	at	him,	'You	shouldn't
have	done	that.'
He	knelt	back	and	held	her	gaze	with	his	own.	'I	couldn't	help	it.	I'm	sorry.'
They	 looked	at	one	another	 for	a	 long	moment,	and	 then	Pelagia	began	 to	cry.	 'What's	 the	matter?'
asked	Corelli,	 frowning	 in	 concern	 as	 Pelagia's	 tears	 rolled	 down	 her	 cheeks	 and	 fell	 into	 the	 bucket
among	the	snails.	'You're	drowning	them,'	he	said,	pointing.	'What's	the	matter?'
She	gave	a	sad	smile,	and	started	crying	again.	He	took	her	in	his	arms	and	patted	her	back.	Suddenly
she	said,	'I	can't	stand	it	any	more,	not	any	of	it.	I'm	sorry.'
'Everything	is	horrible,'	agreed	the	captain,	wondering	if	he	too	might	start	to	cry.	He	took	her	head
gently	in	his	hands	and	touched	at	the	tears	with	his	lips.	She	gazed	at	him	wonderingly	and	suddenly	they
found	themselves	underneath	the	briars,	 in	the	sunset,	surrounded	by	escaping	snails,	deep	in	their	first,
secret,	guilty	kiss.	Hungry	and	desperate,	filled	with	light,	they	could	not	move	away	from	each	other,	and
when	finally	they	returned	home,	they	brought	back	fewer	snails	together	than	Lemoni	brought	on	her	own.
They	became	lovers	 in	 the	old-fashioned	sense.	Their	 idea	of	making	love	was	 to	kiss	 in	 the	dark
under	the	trees	or	sit	on	a	rock	watching	the	sea.	He	loved	her	too	much	to	risk	her	unhappiness,	and	she
had	too	much	sense	to	take	risks.	Again	and	again	she	had	seen	the	tragedy	of	girls	with	an	unwanted	child
and	the	poisoned	deaths	of	girls	who	had	tried	to	end	their	pregnancies.
It	was	hard	for	Pelagia	to	love	an	invader	and	sometimes	she	shouted	at	Corelli,	her	eyes	filled	with
tears	of	anger:	 'How	can	you	bear	 to	be	here?	Orders?	Orders	 from	a	madman!	Don't	you	know	you're
being	used?	Why	don't	you	take	your	guns	and	leave?	Don't	you	know	who	the	enemy	is?'
At	 these	 times	 the	captain	 listened	silently	and	bowed	his	head,	 the	bitterness	of	his	 shame	eating
like	a	worm	at	the	muscles	of	his	heart.	But	they	could	not	stop	themselves	from	loving	one	another.
Gunter	Weber	managed	 to	obtain	a	motorcycle	 for	 the	captain,	who	 turned	up	outside	 the	doctor's
house	one	day	wearing	a	cap	and	goggles.
'Do	you	want	to	come	for	a	ride?'	he	asked.
Pelagia	crossed	her	arms.	'I've	never	been	on	one.	In	fact	I've	never	been	in	a	car	either	and	I'm	not
starting	now.'
'I've	never	been	on	one	either,'	he	said,	'but	it's	very	easy.'
'Somebody	might	see	us,'	said	Pelagia.
The	captain	solved	 this	problem	by	bringing	Pelagia	a	disguise	consisting	of	a	cap,	goggles	and	a
long	leather	coat,	and	the	next	day	they	met	around	the	bend	of	the	road	and	rode	off	on	the	bike.	They	fell
off	twice,	without	injury,	and	she	gripped	his	waist,	whitefaced	with	terror.	She	climbed	off,	shaking,	and
realized	she	could	not	wait	to	get	back	on;	it	was	splendid	to	ride	a	motorcycle.
They	went	to	places	where	Pelagia	could	not	have	been	recognized	and	to	places	that	were	deserted,
and	there	she	would	put	her	arm	through	his	and	walk	beside	him,	leaning	her	weight	against	his	shoulder,
always	 laughing.	With	 him,	 she	would	 always	 remember	 that	 she	 laughed.	One	 day	 they	 discovered	 a
ruined	hut	 so	old	 that	 the	 floor	had	 sunk	 into	 the	 earth.	They	called	 it	 'Casa	Nostra',	 and	 in	 this	 secret
house	they	would	spread	a	blanket	and	lie	embracing	and	talking.
All	their	lovers'	talk	began	with	the	phrase,	'After	the	war'.
'After	the	war,	when	we	are	married,	let's	go	to	America;	I've	got	relatives	in	Chicago.	After	the	war
we	won't	bring	up	our	children	with	any	religion,	they	can	make	their	own	minds	up	when	they're	older.
After	the	war,	we'll	go	all	over	Europe	and	you	can	give	concerts	in	hotels	and	that's	how	we'll	live.	After
the	war	I'll	love	you,	I'll	love	you	forever	after	the	war.'
***
It	was	during	this	period	of	happiness	for	Pelagia	and	the	captain	that	Dr	Iannis	was	woken	one	night
by	a	gentle	tapping	on	his	window.	Puzzled,	the	doctor	looked	out	and	saw	a	villager	accompanied	by	a
very	tall	fair-haired	man	wearing	the	Greek	national	costume,	something	that	a	wealthy	man	might	wear
once	a	year	on	a	feast	day.	'We	thought	you	were	the	man	to	help	him,'	the	villager	told	the	doctor,	before
departing.	The	 tall	 stranger	 smiled	 and	held	out	 his	 hand,	 speaking	 in	 an	 extraordinarily	 old-fashioned
Greek	 that	 the	 doctor	 found	 almost	 impossible	 to	 understand.	 The	 stranger	 then	 climbed,	 uninvited,
through	the	doctor's	window	into	the	house,	and	took	a	huge	radio	out	of	his	bag.	Pelagia	woke	and	came
into	her	father's	room,	saw	the	stranger	and	put	her	hand	over	her	mouth,	wide-eyed	with	amazement.
'Who's	this?'	she	demanded	of	her	father.
'How	am	I	supposed	to	know,'	replied	the	doctor.	 'He	says	he's	called	Bunnios	and	he	talks	Greek
like	a	Spanish	cow.'
The	stranger	bowed	politely	and	shook	Pelagia's	hand,	 then	smiled	charmingly	and	said,	 'Greek	of
the	old	days.	Homer.'
'Ancient	Greek?'	 exclaimed	Pelagia,	 disbelievingly.	 The	 doctor	 tapped	 his	 finger	 to	 his	 forehead.
'English?'	he	asked.
'English,'	agreed	the	man.	'But,	I	must	beg	you...'
'Of	course	we	won't	tell	anyone.'
The	man	smiled.	It	had	been	an	awful	burden	to	speak	the	finest	ancient	Greek	and	not	be	understood.
'We	are	having	an	Italian	officer	sleeping	in	a	room,'	said	the	doctor,	whose	English	was	not	as	good
as	he	liked	to	believe,	'so	we	are	being	very	quiet,	please.	Are	you	a	spy?'
The	man	nodded	and	asked,	'Do	you	have	any	clothes	I	could	have?	I	would	be	so	grateful.'
The	Englishman	departed	for	 the	 town	of	Argostoli	at	dawn,	wearing	trousers	 that	ended	half	way
down	his	legs,	and	having	received	some	good	advice	from	the	doctor:	'Look,	OK?	You	accent	terrible-
terrible.	Not	to	talk,	understand?	You	are	quiet	until	you	learning.	Also,	you	watch	out	Communists	-	they
thieves.	Italians	OK,	Germans	not	good,	see?'
Bunnios,	whose	real	name	was	Bunny	Warren,	soon	found	an	empty	hut	in	the	hills	where,	using	his
huge	radio,	he	reported	in	great	detail	 to	his	British	masters,	 informing	them	of	troop	movements	in	the
area.	 He	 also	 set	 himself	 the	 task	 of	 learning	modern	 Greek,	 and	 was	 assisted	 in	 this	 by	 the	 willing
islanders.
***
The	captain's	opera	group,	La	Scala,	became	accustomed	to	meeting	in	the	doctor's	house.
'Your	 soldiers	 are	 stealing	 from	people's	 vegetable	patches,	when	we're	 dying	of	 hunger	 already,'
said	the	doctor	to	Corelli	one	day,	when	the	group	was	there.
'If	it's	true,	they	will	be	punished,'	the	captain	replied,	already	deeply	shamed	and	embarrassed	by
the	fact	that	some	nights	previously	someone,	obviously	an	Italian	soldier,	had	stolen	Pelagia's	goat.
'We	Germans	do	not	do	this,'	said	Gunter	Weber,	with	a	pleased	expression	on	his	face.
'Germans	can't	sing,'	replied	Corelli,	'and	anyway,	I'll	get	this	investigated	and	I'll	put	a	stop	to	it.	It's
too	bad.'
Weber	smiled.	 'You	are	very	famous	for	defending	the	rights	of	the	Greeks.	I	wonder	if	sometimes
you	understand	why	you	are	here.'
'I	try	to	think	of	it	as	a	holiday.	I	don't	have	your	advantages,	Gunter.'
'Advantages?'
'Yes.	I	don't	have	the	advantage	of	thinking	that	other	races	are	inferior	to	mine.'
'It's	a	question	of	science,'	said	Weber.	'You	can't	alter	a	scientific	fact.'
Corelli	frowned.	'Science?	I	don't	care	about	science.	Moral	principles	are	important,	not	science.'
'We	 disagree,'	 said	Weber	 in	 a	 friendly	 fashion.	 'Science	 tells	 us	 that	 the	 strong	 survive.	 Strength
needs	no	excuses	and	doesn't	have	to	give	reasons.'
'Science	is	about	facts,	and	morality	is	about	values,'	said	Carlo,	who	had	been	listening	closely.
'It's	also	a	matter	of	being	able	to	live	with	yourself,'	Corelli	added.
'You're	a	good	man,'	said	Gunter,	'I	admit	it.	Why	don't	I	get	my	record	player	from	my	car	and	we
can	all	sing	with	Marlene	Dietrich.'	He	went	to	his	car	and	proudly	returned	with	the	record	player,	which
he	put	down	on	the	table.	He	put	on	the	record	and	Dietrich	began	to	sing,	her	voice	full	of	the	sadness	of
knowledge,	the	longing	for	love.
'Oh,'	exclaimed	Weber,	'her	voice	makes	me	melt,'	and	Corelli	said,	'Antonia	likes	this.	She's	going
to	sing.'	He	began	to	accompany	the	song,	playing	so	beautifully	that	in	the	village	people	stopped	what
they	were	doing	and	 listened	 to	Corelli	 fill	 the	night.	Pelagia	 left	 the	kitchen,	her	 form	ghostlike	 in	 the
light	of	the	candles.	'Please	play	that	song	again,'	she	asked	Weber.	'It	was	so	beautiful.'
'Do	you	like	 it?'	asked	Weber,	and	she	nodded.	 'All	right,'	he	continued,	 'when	I	go	home	after	 the
war,	I'll	leave	it	with	you.	It	would	please	me	very	much	for	you	to	have	it.'
Pelagia	was	delighted.	She	looked	at	the	smiling	boy	with	his	smart	uniform	and	blond	hair	and	was
filled	with	pleasure.	'You're	so	sweet,'	she	said,	and	kissed	him	naturally	on	the	cheek,	so	that	the	boys	of
La	Scala	cheered	and	Weber	went	red	and	hid	his	eyes	with	his	hand.
***
The	time	came	when	the	doctor	decided	that	it	was	necessary	to	discuss	certain	matters	with	Pelagia.
'There's	 something	 I	have	 to	 talk	 to	you	about,'	he	 told	her.	 'It	has	not	escaped	my	notice	 that	you	have
fallen	in	love	with	the	captain.'
She	went	violently	red	and	looked	terribly	shocked.	'The	captain?'	she	said	foolishly.
He	began	a	long	speech.	 'It's	not	that	I	don't	 like	the	captain.	Of	course,	he's	a	little	mad,	which	is
quite	simply	explained	by	the	fact	that	he	is	Italian.	In	fact	I	like	him	very	much,	but	you	must	remember
that	you	are	engaged	to	Mandras,	and	technically,	the	captain	is	an	enemy.	Can	you	imagine	the	pain	you
will	 suffer	when	people	discover	 that	you	have	given	up	 the	 love	of	a	Greek	 in	 favour	of	an	 invader?
People	will	throw	stones	at	you	and	spit,	you	know	that,	don't	you?	You	would	have	to	move	away	to	Italy
if	you	wanted	to	stay	with	him,	because	here	you	might	not	be	safe.	Are	you	prepared	to	leave	this	island
and	this	people?
'And	another	thing.	Love	is	a	temporary	madness.	When	it	ends	you	have	to	work	out	whether	your
roots	have	so	joined	together	that	it	is	unimaginable	that	you	should	ever	separate.	Because	that	is	what
love	is.	Love	isn't	breathlessness,	it	is	not	excitement,	it	is	not	lying	awake	at	night	imagining	that	he	is
kissing	every	part	of	your	body.	No,	don't	look	so	embarrassed,	I'm	telling	you	some	truths.	That	is	just
being	"in	 love",	which	any	fool	can	do.	Love	 itself	 is	what	 is	 left	over	when	being	 in	 love	has	burned
away.
'I	say	to	you	that	to	marry	the	captain	is	impossible	until	our	country	is	free	again.	I	would	be	happy
for	you	to	do	this,	but	this	means	that	you	have	a	love	that	will	be	delayed.	Pelagia,	you	know	as	well	as	I
do	that	love	delayed	means	that	physical	passion	increases.	No,	don't	look	at	me	like	that.	Do	you	think	I
don't	know	that	young	girls	can	be	eaten	by	desire?	Imagine	 if	you	got	pregnant,	what	would	you	do?	I
would	not	assist	in	the	murder	of	an	innocent.	Would	you	have	the	child,	and	then	find	that	no	man	would
ever	marry	you?	I	would	not	abandon	you	as	long	as	I	live,	even	under	such	circumstances.	But	imagine	if
I	should	die.	What	then?'
Pelagia	had	never	felt	so	crushed	in	all	her	life	and	wept	bitterly,	but	when	she	looked	up,	she	found
her	father	looking	at	her	sympathetically.	'You	make	everything	sound	so	disgusting,'	she	said.	'You	don't
know	how	it	is.'
'I	went	through	a	lot	of	this	with	your	mother,'	he	replied.	 'She	was	engaged	to	someone	else.	I	do
know	how	it	is.'
'You	don't	forbid	everything	then?'	she	asked	hopefully.
'No,	I	don't	forbid	everything.	I	say	you	must	be	careful	and	act	honourably	to	Mandras.	Don't	give	in
to	 your	 desires,	 that's	 all.	 The	 captain	 is	 a	 good	 man.	 Pray	 for	 our	 freedom,	 Pelagia,	 because	 then
everything	becomes	possible.'
Pelagia	stood	up	to	go	and	her	father	said,	'I	did	not	intend	to	upset	you.	I	was	young	once.'
'Not	everything	was	different	in	your	day,	then,'	she	said	as	she	left	the	room,	and	her	father	smiled,
pleased	that	his	words	had	not	crushed	his	daughter's	spirit.
***
The	doctor	and	the	captain	were	sitting	indoors	at	the	kitchen	table	while	the	latter	was	removing	a
broken	string	from	his	mandolin.	The	doctor	leaned	back	and	sighed,	then	suddenly	asked,	 'Are	you	and
Pelagia	planning	to	be	married?	As	her	father,	I	think	I	have	a	right	to	know.'
The	captain	was	so	surprised	by	the	frankness	of	the	question	that	he	was	unable	to	think	of	a	reply.
His	 relationship	with	Pelagia	had	only	been	able	 to	proceed	on	 the	basis	 that	no	one	 ever	brought	 the
issue	out	into	the	open.	He	looked	at	the	doctor	anxiously.
'You	can't	live	here,'	said	the	doctor.	He	pointed	to	the	mandolin.	'If	you	want	to	be	a	musician,	this	is
the	last	place	to	be.	And	I	don't	think	that	Pelagia	could	live	in	Italy.	She	is	a	Greek.	She	would	die	like	a
flower	without	sunlight.'
'Ah,'	said	the	captain,	for	the	lack	of	any	intelligent	remark.
'It's	true,'	said	the	doctor.	'I	know	you	have	not	thought	about	it.	Italians	always	act	without	thinking.
Anyway,	Pelagia	is	a	Greek,	that's	my	point.	So	can	it	work?'
There	was	a	silence	between	the	two	men.	'I	love	her,'	said	Corelli	at	last,	as	if	this	were	the	answer
to	the	problem,	which	to	him	it	was.
'I	know	that.	You'd	have	to	live	here,	that's	all,'	said	the	doctor.	'You	might	have	to	choose	between
loving	her	and	becoming	a	musician.'
The	doctor	left	the	room,	more	for	dramatic	effect	than	for	any	other	purpose,	and	then	came	back	in.
'And	another	 thing.	This	 is	 a	very	 ancient	 land	 and	we've	had	nothing	 except	murder	 for	 two	 thousand
years.	We've	got	 so	many	places	 full	 of	 bitter	 ghosts	 that	 anyone	who	goes	near	 them	or	 lives	 in	 them
becomes	heartless	or	insane.	I	don't	believe	in	God,	captain,	but	I	do	believe	in	ghosts.	And	there	will	be
many	more	deaths.	It's	only	a	question	of	time.	So	don't	make	any	plans.'
CHAPTER	NINE
Autumn	1943:	Betrayal
The	 Allies	 invaded	 Sicily,	 Italy's	 southern	 island,	 and	 so	 they	 betrayed	 their	 most	 loyal	 and
courageous	friend,	Greece,	and	did	not	come	to	its	aid.	The	angry	Greeks	demanded	to	know	why	their
country,	which	was	occupied	by	the	Italians,	had	been	ignored,	and	received	no	answers.	The	Allies	had
abandoned	Greece,	the	little	nation	that	had	given	Europe	its	culture	and	its	heart.	To	make	matters	worse,
during	this	period	the	Greek	Communists	were	committing	unimaginably	vicious	acts,	but	for	a	long	time
the	world	did	not	believe	it.
On	 Cephallonia,	 the	 Italian	 soldiers	 listened	 to	 their	 radios	 and	 followed	 the	 course	 of	 Allied
progress	up	Italy,	 their	homeland,	while	 the	German	soldiers	were	angered	and	disgusted	by	the	Italian
army's	 lack	of	 resistance	 to	 the	Allies.	Corelli	and	his	brother	officers	sensed	 ice	 in	 the	air,	and	visits
between	 the	Germans	 and	 the	 Italians	 became	 less	 frequent.	When	Weber	 turned	 up	 at	meetings	 of	 La
Scala,	he	seemed	quiet	and	distant.
'What	happens,'	Corelli	asked	Pelagia	with	a	troubled	look,	'when	we	have	to	surrender	before	the
Germans	do?'
'We'll	get	married.'
He	shook	his	head	sadly.	'It's	going	to	be	a	complete	mess.	There's	no	chance	of	the	British	coming.
They're	 going	 straight	 for	Rome.	No	one	will	 save	us	 unless	we	 save	ourselves.	We	 should	 attack	 the
Germans	on	the	island	now,	while	there	aren't	many	of	them,	but	our	generals	don't	do	anything.	They	say
we	should	trust	the	Germans.'
'Don't	you	trust	them?'
'I'm	not	stupid.'
'Come	inside,'	she	said,	'my	father's	out.'
'There's	no	point.	My	mind	is	just	a	blank	that's	filled	with	worry.'
Corelli	came	 to	 the	doctor's	house	 less	often,	and	day	and	night	he	 trained	his	men,	working	 them
hard	in	the	terrible	August	heat,	so	that	the	sweat	ran	down	their	faces	and	arms,	and	the	sun	burned	the
flesh	of	their	shoulders.	They	did	not	complain.	They	knew	that	the	captain	was	right	to	prepare	them.
He	himself	stopped	playing	the	mandolin;	there	was	so	little	time	for	it	that	when	he	picked	it	up	it
felt	foreign	in	his	fingers	in	comparison	with	a	gun.	He	went	home	to	Pelagia	on	his	motorbike	at	times
when	 her	 father	was	 likely	 to	 be	 out,	 and	 he	 brought	 her	 bread,	 honey,	 bottles	 of	wine,	 a	 photograph
signed	 on	 the	 back	 with	 the	 words	 'After	 the	 War...'	 written	 on	 it	 in	 his	 elegant,	 foreign-looking
handwriting,	and	he	brought	her	his	tired,	grey	face,	and	his	saddened	eyes.
'My	poor	darling,'	she	would	say,	her	arms	about	his	neck,	 'don't	worry,	don't	worry,	don't	worry,'
and	he	would	move	back	a	little	and	say,	'Koritsimou,	let	me	just	look	at	you.'
And	 then	 came	 the	 time	when	 Carlo	 was	 listening	 to	 the	 radio,	 trying	 to	 find	 a	 signal.	 It	 was	 8
September,	and	the	evenings	had	become	much	cooler	than	they	had	been	before.	Carlo	had	recently	been
thinking	about	Francesco	and	about	the	horror	of	Albania,	and	now	more	than	ever	he	knew	that	it	had	all
been	a	waste,	and	that	his	time	in	Cephallonia	had	been	a	holiday	from	a	war	that	was	going	to	destroy	his
life	once	more,	perhaps	forever.	He	found	a	voice	and	 turned	up	 the	volume:	 '...	all	aggressive	acts	by
Italian	Armed	Forces	against	the	forces	of	the	British	and	the	Americans	will	cease	at	once,	everywhere.'
The	Italians	had	formally	surrendered	to	the	Allies.
Outside,	the	bells	of	the	island	began	to	ring;	they	rang	all	over	the	island	in	the	towns	of	Argostoli,
Lixouri,	Soulari,	Dorizata.	On	the	radio	there	was	a	message	from	Eisenhower,	the	American	president:
'...	All	 Italians	who	 take	steps	 to	 rid	 themselves	of	 the	German	presence	 in	 their	country	will	have	 the
assistance	and	support	of	the	Allies...'
Carlo	ran	out	and	found	Corelli	 just	arriving	on	his	bike,	a	great	cloud	of	blue	smoke	behind	him.
'Antonio,	Antonio,	it's	all	over,	and	the	Allies	have	promised	to	help	us,'	he	cried.	He	threw	his	enormous
arms	around	the	man	he	loved	and	picked	him	up,	dancing	in	a	circle.	 'Carlo,	Carlo,'	 the	captain	cried,
'put	me	down.	Don't	get	so	excited.	The	Allies	don't	care	about	us.	We're	in	Greece,	remember.	Carlo,	you
don't	know	your	own	strength.	You	half	killed	me.'
'They'll	help	us,'	said	Carlo,	but	Corelli	shook	his	head.	'If	we	don't	act	now,	we're	finished.	We've
got	to	get	the	Germans	on	the	island	to	surrender	to	us.'
That	 night	 the	 Italian	 warships	 in	 the	 harbours	 of	 the	 island	 sailed	 for	 home,	 without	 informing
anyone	 they	were	going,	or	 taking	with	 them	a	single	Italian	soldier.	 In	a	 terrible	act	of	cowardice,	 the
warships	withdrew	their	protection	from	the	soldiers	on	the	island,	so	that	the	German	soldiers	laughed
and	Corelli's	men	smelled	betrayal.	Corelli	waited	at	the	telephone	for	orders,	and	when	none	came	he
fell	asleep	in	his	chair.
Carlo,	now	realizing	that	Corelli's	pessimistic	predictions	were	probably	correct,	wrote	his	captain
a	long	letter	in	which	he	declared	his	undying	love	for	him	and	also	his	unselfish	hope	that	Corelli	would
find	 true	happiness	with	Pelagia.	Strangely	 convinced	 that	 he	was	going	 to	die	 soon,	Carlo	 added	 this
letter	to	his	other	writings	and	brought	them	to	the	doctor's	house,	with	the	request	that	his	papers	should
be	placed	in	the	hiding-hole	under	the	trapdoor	and	only	opened	and	read	in	the	event	of	his	death.
Like	Corelli,	Gunter	Weber	also	slept	from	time	to	time	in	his	chair,	waiting	for	orders,	desperately
tired	and	with	all	his	confidence	gone.	He	missed	his	Italian	friends,	but	worse	than	that,	his	country	was
losing	and	he	no	longer	felt	proud	and	full	of	strength.	He	felt	 inferior	and	so	betrayed	by	his	country's
allies,	the	Italians,	that	if	he	had	been	a	woman	he	would	have	wept.	He	tried	to	pray	but	the	words	turned
bitter	in	his	mouth.
Corelli	stopped	his	motorcycle	on	his	way	back	to	camp	and	beneath	the	shade	of	a	tree,	by	a	ruined
wall,	he	sat	and	thought	about	going	back	to	Italy,	about	surviving,	about	Pelagia.	The	truth	was	that	he
had	no	home	and	that	was	why	he	never	talked	about	it.	Mussolini	had	forced	his	family	to	move	to	Libya,
and	there	they	had	been	attacked	by	rebels	and	had	died,	while	he	lay	in	hospital	with	a	high	fever.
Of	all	the	relatives'	houses	where	he	had	stayed,	which	one	was	home?	He	had	no	family	except	his
soldiers	 and	his	mandolin,	 and	his	heart	was	 there	 in	Greece.	Had	he	 suffered	 so	much	pain,	 so	much
loneliness,	had	he	 finally	 found	a	place	 to	be,	only	 to	have	 it	 torn	away?	His	memories	of	his	parents
were	as	thin	and	indefinite	as	those	of	a	ghost,	and	for	the	first	time	he	began	to	feel	as	if	Pelagia	already
belonged	to	his	past.	He	thought	about	dying	and	wondered	how	long	Pelagia	would	weep,	and	what	a
shame	it	would	be	to	spoil	her	lovely	flesh	with	tears;	it	broke	his	heart	to	imagine	it.	He	wanted	to	reach
out	from	beyond	the	grave	and	comfort	her,	even	though	he	was	not	yet	dead.
He	went	to	the	doctor's	house	and	asked	them	to	look	after	his	mandolin,	and	Pelagia	wrapped	it	in	a
blanket	and	put	it	under	the	hole	in	the	floor.	They	told	him	about	Carlo's	visit,	and	how	he	had	left	a	thick
pile	of	papers	with	 them.	The	captain	had	not	known	 that	Carlo	had	ambitions	 to	be	a	writer	 and	was
curious	about	the	content	of	the	big	man's	papers.	He	thought	that	Pelagia	looked	very	thin	and	almost	ill,
and	when	she	sadly	stroked	his	cheek,	he	almost	did	not	know	how	to	prevent	his	tears.
***
After	 Italy's	 surrender	 to	 the	Allies,	General	Gandin,	 leader	 of	 the	 Italian	 troops	 on	Cephallonia,
suffered	terrible	indecision	about	the	course	of	action	he	should	take.	He	had	two	choices.	Compared	to
the	number	of	Italian	soldiers	on	the	island,	 there	were	many	fewer	German	troops,	and	he	could	insist
that	 the	 German	 soldiers	 laid	 down	 their	 arms	 and	 surrendered	 to	 the	 superior	 Italian	 forces.	 If	 the
Germans	rejected	this,	then	the	Italian	troops	could	theoretically	attack	and	overcome	them.	But	Gandin
knew	that	he	would	receive	no	support	from	the	Allies,	and	moreover,	that	he	would	have	neither	air	nor
sea	support	from	his	own	country.	He	knew	that	the	Germans	still	had	a	large	number	of	bomber	planes
based	 in	mainland	Greece,	 and	 the	 thought	 of	 those	 death	machines	 screaming	 over	 the	 island	 as	 they
dropped	their	bombs	filled	him	with	horror.
These	 thoughts	 led	 the	General	 to	 the	 second	 option,	which	was	 to	 surrender	 to	 the	Germans,	 on
condition	 that	 the	 latter	 gave	written	guarantees	of	 the	 safety	of	 the	 Italian	 soldiers	on	 the	 island.	This
would	mean	trusting	 the	Germans	not	 to	break	their	promises	and	attack	the	Italians.	 It	was	 this	second
route	that	Gandin	was	tempted	to	take.	He	was,	in	a	strange	way,	a	man	of	honour,	and	still	considered	the
Germans	to	be	his	allies.
Unlike	General	Gandin,	the	Italian	troops	on	Cephallonia	knew	exactly	what	should	be	done.	They
heard	from	the	radio	that	the	Germans,	as	they	withdrew	in	Italy,	were	killing	and	looting	along	the	way
and	they	could	see	no	reason	why	the	Germans	would	not	do	the	same	in	Cephallonia,	given	the	chance.
While	Gandin	delayed,	unable	to	make	up	his	mind,	and	his	soldiers	became	almost	crazy	with	anger	and
fear,	the	Germans	quietly	flew	more	arms	and	troops	to	the	island.
Finally	 General	 Gandin	 came	 to	 a	 decision.	 Despite	 the	 universal	 demand	 of	 his	 men	 that	 the
Germans	should	be	forced	to	surrender,	the	General	agreed	with	the	German	leaders	on	the	island	that	the
Italians	should	be	allowed	to	keep	their	weapons	and	peacefully	leave	Cephallonia.	There	were	no	ships,
however,	to	take	the	Italians	away,	a	point	which	did	not	seem	significant	to	Gandin.	Some	of	the	Italian
troops,	 guessing	 what	 was	 likely	 to	 happen,	 became	 deeply	 depressed,	 while	 others,	 like	 Corelli,
developed	an	iron	determination	and	prepared	their	men	to	the	last	degree	for	the	terrible	battle	that	they
were	certain	lay	ahead	of	them.
When	the	German	bomber	planes	arrived,	early	in	the	afternoon,	tipping	their	wings,	it	was	almost	a
relief	 to	 the	waiting	 Italians.	 Now	 everything	was	 clear;	 it	 was	 at	 last	 obvious	 that	 the	Germans	 had
betrayed	them	and	that	every	Italian	soldier	would	have	to	fight	for	his	life.	Gunter	Weber	knew	that	he
would	 have	 to	 turn	 his	 weapons	 on	 his	 friends.	 Corelli	 knew	 that	 his	 musician's	 fingers,	 so	 well
accustomed	to	the	arts	of	peace,	must	now	tighten	around	a	gun.	General	Gandin	knew	too	late	that	he	had
made	the	wrong	decision	and	that,	as	a	result,	his	men	were	going	to	die.	Pelagia	knew	that	a	war	that	had
always	been	somewhere	else	would	now	settle	upon	her	home	and	turn	its	stones	to	dust.
The	 German	 planes	 attacked	 Argostoli	 first	 because	 that	 was	 where	 most	 Italian	 troops	 were
concentrated.	Gandin	made	the	foolish	mistake	of	bringing	his	troops	into	the	town	in	increasing	numbers,
and	this	made	it	easier	for	the	Germans	to	isolate	and	cut	them	down.	Houses	were	crushed	by	the	bombs
and	soldiers	and	 islanders	died	 in	 large	numbers.	More	and	more	German	soldiers	were	flown	in,	and
spread	all	over	the	island,	killing	as	they	went.	Everyone	knew	that	no	ships	or	planes	would	come	to	aid
an	 island	 of	 Cephallonia's	 insignificance.	 On	 a	 hillside,	 Bunny	Warren	 sat	 by	 his	 radio	 and	 tried	 to
persuade	his	superiors	that	they	should	provide	the	Italians	with	air	and	sea	support,	but	without	success.
***
Dr	Iannis	and	his	daughter	sat	side	by	side	at	their	kitchen	table,	unable	to	sleep,	holding	each	others'
hands.	Pelagia	was	weeping.	The	doctor	wanted	to	relight	his	pipe,	but	out	of	respect	for	his	daughter's
feelings	he	allowed	his	hands	to	stay	in	hers,	and	he	repeated,	'Koritsimou,	I	am	sure	he	is	all	right.'
'But	we	haven't	seen	him	for	days,'	she	cried.	'I	just	know	he's	dead.'
'If	he	was	dead	someone	would	have	told	us,	someone	from	La	Scala.	They	were	all	nice	boys,	they
would	let	us	know.'
'Were?'	she	repeated.	'You	think	they're	all	dead?	You	think	they're	dead	too,	don't	you?'
'Oh	God,'	the	doctor	sighed.
It	was	on	the	morning	of	22	September	that	Captain	Antonio	Corelli,	knowing	that	his	leaders	were
planning	to	surrender	to	the	Germans,	having	had	no	sleep	for	three	days,	climbed	on	his	motorcycle	and
sped	towards	Pelagia's	house.	He	threw	himself	into	her	arms,	resting	his	burning	eyes	upon	her	shoulder,
and	told	her,	'We	are	lost.	The	British	have	betrayed	us.'
She	begged	him	to	stay,	to	hide	in	the	house,	in	the	hole	in	the	floor,	with	his	mandolin	and	Carlo's
papers,	but	he	took	her	face	in	his	hands,	kissed	her	without	the	tears	that	he	was	too	tired	to	weep,	and
then	rocked	her	in	his	arms,	squeezing	her	so	tightly	that	she	thought	that	her	bones	would	crack.	He	kissed
her	again	and	said,	'Koritsimou,	this	is	the	last	time	I	shall	ever	see	you.	There	has	been	no	honour	in	this
war,	but	I	have	to	be	with	my	boys.'	With	his	head	hanging	down,	he	told	her,	'Koritsimou,	I	am	going	to
die.	Remember	me	to	your	father.	And	I	thank	God	I	have	lived	long	enough	to	love	you.'
She	watched	him	go	as	he	drove	away	on	his	motorcycle,	the	dust	cloud	surrounding	his	head,	then
she	went	inside	and	sat	at	the	kitchen	table,	terror	gripping	her	heart.
CHAPTER	TEN
The	Order	to	Kill
Gunter	Weber	 stood	before	his	 superior	officer	and,	his	 face	hard	with	determination,	 said,	 'Sir,	 I
must	request	that	you	give	this	task	to	someone	else.	I	cannot	carry	it	out.'
His	 superior	 raised	 an	 eyebrow	 but	 somehow	 failed	 to	 feel	 any	 anger.	 The	 truth	was	 that	 in	 this
position	he	hoped	that	he	would	have	done	the	same.
'Why	not?'	he	asked.
'Sir,	it	is	against	international	law	to	murder	prisoners	of	war.	It	is	also	wrong.	I	must	request	to	be
excused.'
'They	have	betrayed	us,	their	allies.'
'I	realize	that,	but	I	am	not	a	criminal,	sir,	and	I	do	not	wish	to	become	one.'
The	officer	 sighed.	 'War	 is	a	dirty	business,	you	know	 that.	We	all	have	 to	do	 terrible	 things.	For
example,	I	like	you	and	I	admire	you	for	taking	this	position,	but	I	must	remind	you	that	the	punishment	for
refusing	to	obey	an	order	is	death.	I	don't	state	this	as	a	threat	but	as	a	fact	of	life.	You	know	this	as	well
as	I	do.'	He	walked	to	the	window	and	then	turned.	'They're	all	going	to	be	shot	anyway.	Why	add	your
death	to	theirs?	It	would	be	a	waste	of	a	fine	officer.'
Gunter	Weber	swallowed	hard	and	his	lips	trembled	so	that	he	found	it	hard	to	speak.	At	last	he	said,
'I	request	that	my	protest	is	recorded	and	put	in	my	file,	sir.'
'Your	request	is	granted,'	said	the	officer	and	left	the	room.
Weber	leaned	against	the	wall	and	lit	a	cigarette,	but	his	hands	shook	so	much	that	he	immediately
dropped	it.
'Let's	 sing,	 boys,'	 said	Antonio	 Corelli,	 looking	 round	 the	 inside	 of	 the	 truck	where	 his	men	 sat,
watched	by	expressionless	German	soldiers.	One	of	the	Italians	was	already	tearful,	others	were	praying,
their	heads	bowed	down	to	their	knees.	Corelli	felt	strangely	happy	as	if	he	were	drunk	with	tiredness	and
the	absolute	certainty	of	death.	Why	not	smile	in	the	face	of	death?	'Let's	sing,	boys,'	he	repeated,	'Carlo,
sing.'
Carlo	gazed	at	him	with	eyes	full	of	endless	sorrow,	and	began	very	softly	 to	sing	a	song	from	an
opera	 they	 all	 loved,	 Madame	 Butterfly,	 and	 soon	 others	 joined	 in,	 when	 they	 felt	 able	 to.	 The	 tune
comforted	them,	and	it	was	easier	to	sing	than	to	think	on	death;	it	gave	the	heart	something	to	do.
When	 the	 truck	 arrived,	 Gunter	 Weber's	 knees	 began	 to	 shake.	 Almost	 before	 it	 had	 arrived,	 it
seemed	that	he	had	known	that	life	had	called	him	to	the	killing	of	his	friends.	He	had	not	expected	them	to
arrive	singing	the	tune	that	he	and	La	Scala	had	sung	together	late	at	night	at	the	doctor's	house,	nor	had	he
expected	them	to	jump	so	lightly	from	the	truck.	He	ordered	a	German	soldier	to	put	his	friends	against	the
wall,	lit	another	cigarette	and	turned	away,	but	finally	he	turned	again	and	approached	the	Italians.	More
than	half	 of	 them	were	praying,	 kneeling	 in	 the	 soil,	 and	others	wept	 like	 children	 at	 a	 death.	Antonio
Corelli	and	Carlo	Guercio	were	embracing.	Weber	reached	for	his	packet	of	cigarettes	and	approached
them.
'Cigarette?'	he	asked	them,	and	Corelli	took	one,	Carlo	refusing.	Corelli	looked	at	Weber	and	said,
'Your	hands	are	trembling	and	your	legs.'
'Antonio,	I	am	very	sorry,	I	tried...'
Corelli	sucked	on	his	cigarette	and	said,	'I	am	sure	you	did,	Gunter,	I	know	how	it	goes.'
Weber's	face	trembled	with	the	effort	of	hiding	his	tears,	and	at	last	he	said	suddenly,	'Forgive	me.'
Carlo	made	a	sound	of	disgust	in	his	throat	and	said,	'You	will	never	be	forgiven.'	But	Corelli	put	his
hand	up	to	silence	his	friend	and	said	quietly,	'Gunter,	I	forgive	you.	If	I	do	not,	who	will?'
Weber	held	out	his	hand.	'Goodbye,	Gunter,'	said	Corelli,	taking	it.	Allowing	his	hand	to	remain	in
his	former	friend's,	he	shook	it	briefly	one	final	time	and	released	it.	He	linked	an	arm	through	Carlo's,
and	smiled	up	at	him.	'Come,'	he	said,	'we	two	have	been	companions	in	life.	Let's	go	together	to	heaven.'
It	was	a	beautiful	day	to	die.	A	few	soft	clouds	hid	the	top	of	Mount	Aenos	and	nearby	a	goatbell
rang.	Corelli	realized	that	his	own	legs	were	shaking	and	that	he	could	do	nothing	to	prevent	it.	He	thought
about	Pelagia,	with	her	dark	eyes,	her	passionate	nature,	her	black	hair.	He	saw	her	clearly	in	his	mind's
eye:	making	a	blanket	 that	grew	smaller	 every	day;	 arm	 in	arm	with	her	 father,	 returning	 from	 the	 sea;
kissing	Gunter	Weber	 on	 the	 cheek	 at	 the	offer	 of	 the	 record	player.	Pelagia,	whose	 form	had	been	 so
sweetly	rounded,	now	so	pale	and	thin.
A	Croatian	 soldier	 approached	Weber,	 a	man	who,	 in	Weber's	opinion,	had	a	dangerously	violent
nature.	The	Croatian	said,	'Sir,	more	will	be	arriving.	We	can't	delay.'
'Very	well,'	said	Weber.	He	closed	his	eyes	and	prayed,	a	prayer	without	words	to	a	God	who	did
not	care.
There	was	nothing	formal	about	 the	killings,	and	the	victims	were	not	 lined	up	against	 the	wall	or
made	to	face	forwards.	Many	of	them	were	left	on	their	knees,	praying	or	weeping	or	begging	for	mercy.
Some	stood	smoking	as	if	at	a	party,	and	Carlo	stood	next	to	Corelli,	glad	to	die	at	last	and	determined	to
die	 a	 soldier's	 death.	 Corelli	 put	 one	 hand	 in	 his	 pocket	 to	 steady	 the	 shaking	 of	 his	 leg,	 and	 deeply
breathed	the	Cephallonian	air	that	held	Pelagia's	breath.
The	German	boys	heard	the	command	to	fire	and	fired	in	disbelief.	Those	of	them	whose	eyes	were
open	aimed	wide	or	high,	or	aimed	to	avoid	a	death.	The	Croatian	soldier	shot	to	kill,	firing	rapidly	and
taking	careful	aim.
Weber's	head	spun.	His	former	friends	were	leaping	and	dancing	in	the	rain	of	bullets,	were	crying
out,	stumbling	to	their	knees,	arms	waving,	their	mouths	filled	with	blood.	But	what	no	one	had	seen,	even
Weber,	was	 that	 at	 the	 order	 to	 fire,	Carlo	 had	 stepped	 quickly	 sideways	 in	 front	 of	Corelli,	 and	 had
gripped	 the	 latter's	 wrists	 so	 tightly	 that	 he	 was	 unable	 to	move.	 Corelli	 stared	 wonderingly	 into	 the
middle	 of	Carlo's	 back	 as	 great	 holes	 burst	 though	 from	 inside	 the	 latter's	 body,	 releasing	 fountains	 of
blood.
Carlo	stood	unbroken	as	one	bullet	after	another	entered	his	chest	 like	white-hot	knives.	He	stood
perfectly	still	and	counted	to	thirty,	looked	up	at	the	sky	and	then	threw	himself	over	backwards.	Corelli
lay	beneath	him,	unable	 to	move,	so	astonished	by	this	extraordinary,	saintly	act	of	 love	that	he	did	not
hear	the	Croatian	soldier's	voice.
'Italians,	it's	all	over.	If	any	of	you	are	living,	stand	up	now	and	you	will	go	free.'
He	did	not	 see	 the	 two	or	 three	stand	up	and	see	 them	fall	again	as	 the	Croatian	shot	 them	down.
Then	he	heard	the	single	shots	as	Weber,	drunk	with	horror,	wandered	among	the	dead,	putting	those	still
living	out	of	 their	pain.	Next	 to	his	head	he	saw	Weber's	boot	and	he	saw	Weber	bend	down	and	 look
directly	into	his	eyes	where	he	lay	trapped	beneath	Carlo's	great	weight.	He	saw	the	shaking	gun	approach
his	 face,	he	saw	 the	ocean	of	sorrow	 in	Webers	eyes,	and	 then	he	saw	 the	gun	withdrawn,	unfired.	He
tried	to	breathe	more	freely,	and	realized	he	was	having	difficulty,	not	only	because	of	Carlo's	weight	but
because	the	bullets	that	had	passed	through	his	friend	had	also	struck	himself.
***
Corelli	 lay	 beneath	 his	 friend	 for	 hours,	 their	 blood	mixing	 in	 the	 soil,	 in	 their	 uniforms,	 in	 their
flesh.	It	was	not	until	evening	that	Velisarios	came	across	the	heap	of	tragic	bodies,	and	recognized	the
man	as	big	as	himself	who	had	once	reached	a	hand	across	the	barrier	of	war	and	offered	him	a	cigarette.
He	looked	down	into	the	vacant	and	staring	eyes,	reached	down	and	tried	to	close	them.	He	failed,	and
was	struck	by	the	horror	of	leaving	such	a	brother	to	the	wind	and	birds.	He	knelt	down	and	with	a	huge
effort	he	lifted	Carlo	from	the	ground,	and,	as	he	did	so,	he	saw	the	mad	captain	who	was	staying	at	the
doctor's,	the	one	whose	'secret'	love	for	Pelagia	was	known	and	discussed	by	everyone	on	the	island.	The
man's	eyes	were	not	vacant	and	they	blinked.	The	lips	moved.	'Doctor,'	said	the	dying	man.	'Pelagia.'
The	strong	man	put	Carlo	against	the	wall.	Then	he	carefully	picked	the	captain	up,	felt	how	light	he
was,	and	set	off	across	the	stony	fields	to	save	his	life.
Nobody	knows	 the	 exact	number	of	 the	 Italian	dead	 that	 lay	upon	 the	 earth	of	Cephallonia,	 but	 at
least	four	thousand	were	murdered,	possibly	nine	thousand.	The	evidence	was	lost	in	flame,	because	the
Germans,	displaying	knowledge	of	their	guilt,	burnt	the	bodies,	cutting	down	trees	that	were	a	thousand
years	old	 to	make	 the	fires.	They	changed	flesh	 into	smoke,	 they	put	one	dead	boy	after	another	across
their	shoulders	and	tipped	them	into	the	flames,	working	until	their	legs	weakened	and	the	flames	became
too	hot	to	approach.
One	of	 the	bodies	 that	 they	burned	was	 the	body	of	General	Gandin,	who	 trusted	his	enemies	and
tried	 to	 save	 his	 men.	 Another	 who	 died	 at	 this	 time	 was	 Father	 Arsenios,	 the	 priest	 from	 Pelagia's
village.	He	wandered	among	the	bodies	and	the	flames	until	he	was	so	mad	with	grief	 that	he	began	to
beat	the	heads	and	shoulders	of	the	German	soldiers	with	a	stick.	At	first	the	soldiers,	who	had	murdered
thousands,	did	not	know	what	to	do,	but	then	an	officer	came	up	behind	Arsenios	and	fired	a	single	shot
into	the	back	of	his	neck,	exploding	his	brains.
Men	and	women	and	the	few	Italian	soldiers	who	had	escaped	approached	the	fires	as	closely	as	the
heat	permitted	and	began	 to	pull	away	the	bodies	at	 the	edge	of	 the	fires.	All	of	 them	thought	 the	same
things:	'Is	this	what	it	will	be	like	under	the	Germans?	How	many	of	these	boys	could	there	have	been?
How	many	of	these	boys	did	I	know?	Can	I	imagine	how	it	is	to	die	of	bleeding,	slowly?'
At	dawn	a	thick,	black	cloud	hung	over	the	land	and	blocked	out	the	sun,	and	the	people	returned	to
their	houses	and	locked	their	doors.
CHAPTER	ELEVEN
An	Operation
When	the	door	was	suddenly	kicked	open	just	as	it	was	getting	dark,	Pelagia's	first	thought	was	that
it	was	the	Germans,	since	she	knew	that	all	the	Italians	were	dead.	Like	everybody	else	she	had	heard	the
sounds	of	battle	and	seen	truck	after	truck	pass	by,	bearing	either	cheering	German	soldiers	or	the	dead
bodies	of	Italians.	At	night	she	had	gone	out	with	her	father,	whose	cheeks	were	trembling	with	tears	of
anger	and	pity,	and	looked	for	lives	to	save	among	those	bodies	abandoned	in	the	fires.
It	had	left	her	speechless,	not	with	fear	or	sorrow,	but	with	emptiness.
When	the	door	flew	open	she	was	frightened,	but	she	had	nevertheless,	somehow	been	expecting	it.
Her	gun	was	ready	in	her	pocket.	She	stood	up,	her	hand	tightening	around	the	gun,	her	face	colourless,
and	saw	Velisarios,	breathing	hard.	He	advanced	to	the	table	and	gently	placed	his	burden	on	it.
'Who	is	it?'	asked	Pelagia.
'He's	alive,'	said	Velisarios.	'It's	the	mad	captain.'
She	bent	down	to	look	with	eyes	full	of	both	horror	and	hope,	but	she	did	not	recognize	him;	there
were	too	many	holes,	too	much	blood.	She	wanted	to	touch	him	but	withdrew	her	hand.	Where	does	one
touch	a	man	like	this?	The	body	opened	its	eyes	and	the	mouth	smiled.	'Kalimera,	koritsimou,'	it	said,	and
she	recognized	the	voice.
'It's	the	evening,'	she	said	foolishly.	'Kalispera,	then,'	he	whispered	and	closed	his	eyes.
Pelagia	looked	up	at	Velisarios,	her	eyes	wide	and	desperate,	and	said,	'Velisarios,	you	have	never
done	a	greater	thing.	I'm	going	to	get	my	father.	Stay	with	him.'	She	found	her	father	at	the	kapheneion	and
dragged	him	out,	ignoring	the	angry	stares	of	the	other	men,	and	Kokolios,	who	roared	at	her.
The	doctor	looked	at	the	body	and	knew	he	had	never	seen	anything	worse.	There	was	enough	blood
to	 fill	 the	veins	of	a	horse.	 'It	would	be	kinder	 to	kill	him,'	he	said,	but	before	Velisarios	could	say,	 'I
thought	so	too,'	Pelagia	began	beating	her	father	with	both	hands.	And	so	water	was	put	on	to	boil	and	the
rags	of	the	captain's	uniform	were	gently	cut	away.
Dr	 Iannis	 complained	 as	 he	 cleaned	 away	 the	 blood.	 'What	 am	 I	 supposed	 to	 do?	 I	 have	 no
equipment	to	perform	an	operation.'
'Shut	up,	shut	up,	shut	up,'	Pelagia	shouted,	her	heart	racing	with	both	fear	and	determination.	 'Just
shut	up	and	do	it.'
Because	the	doctor	was	unaware	that	most	of	the	blood	and	flesh	had	belonged	to	the	broad	back	of
Carlo	Guercio,	it	seemed	unbelievable	to	him	that	Antonio	Corelli	was	as	little	wounded	as	he	was.	Once
he	was	 cleaned,	 it	was	 clear	 that	 the	 victim	 had	 six	 bullets	 in	 his	 chest,	 one	 in	 the	 stomach,	 and	 one
through	the	outer	flesh	in	his	right	arm.	But	the	doctor	knew	too	much	to	be	optimistic	and	it	still	seemed
hopeless.	Frightened	of	the	task	that	lay	ahead	of	him,	he	opened	a	bottle	of	raki,	drank	deeply	and	passed
the	bottle	 to	Velisarios,	who	did	 the	 same.	Then,	with	 the	 comforting	 taste	of	 alcohol	 in	his	mouth,	 he
reached	for	an	instrument	and	moved	it	gently	around	in	each	wound	until	he	felt	it	reach	a	bullet.
He	 stood	up	amazed,	 realizing	 that	 the	holes	were	not	 even	deep	and	 that	 the	bullets	 should	have
passed	right	through	the	victim's	body	but	had	not	done	so.	'Daughter,'	he	said,	 'I	swear	by	all	the	saints
that	this	man's	flesh	is	made	of	steel.	I	think	he'll	live.'
'Antonio,'	he	called,	and	Corelli	opened	his	eyes.	'Antonio,	I'm	going	to	operate.	I	haven't	got	much
morphia.	Can	you	drink?'	Corelli	 nodded,	 and	Pelagia	poured	 a	 cup	of	 raki	 down	his	 throat	while	 the
doctor	 injected	morphia	 into	 his	 arm.	 Pelagia	 looked	 at	 that	 desperately	 damaged	 body,	 helpless	 as	 a
worm,	and	knew	that	it	was	not	exactly	a	body	that	one	loved,	but	that	one	loved	the	man	who	shone	out
through	the	eyes	and	used	his	mouth	to	smile	and	speak.	The	doctor	saw	her	dreaming	and	said,	'Don't	just
sit	there.	We	need	more	boiling	water.	And	wash	your	hands,	especially	under	the	nails.'
Pelagia	 discovered	 in	 that	 hour	 how	 difficult	 the	 task	was	 that	 she	 had	 set	 her	 father.	Her	 hands
trembled,	and	at	first	she	could	hardly	force	herself	to	touch	the	captain.	She	looked	up	and	saw	her	father
cutting	wide	holes	around	the	bullet	wounds	and	had	to	resist	her	desire	to	be	sick.	The	doctor	started	on
the	bullet	in	the	stomach,	since	he	needed	to	do	something	that	was	relatively	easy	in	order	to	increase	his
confidence.	He	found	it	not	far	beneath	the	surface	of	the	skin	and	picked	it	out,	amazed	by	its	flattened
shape.	'It's	unbelievable,'	he	said,	showing	it	to	Pelagia.	'How	do	you	explain	this?'
'He	was	behind	that	big	man,	the	one	as	big	as	me,'	said	Velisarios.	 'The	big	man	was	holding	him
from	 behind,	 like	 this.'	 He	 stood	 up	 and	 put	 his	 hands	 behind	 his	 back	 to	 show	 how	 one	 could	 grip
another's	wrists.	'I	think	he	was	trying	to	save	the	man,'	he	said.
'Carlo,'	said	Pelagia,	suddenly	bursting	into	tears.	Carlo	was	the	first	of	the	boys	of	La	Scala	whom
they	now	knew	with	certainty	was	dead.
'No	man	who	dies	 like	 that	 has	 died	 for	 nothing,'	 said	 the	 doctor,	 fighting	 back	 his	 own	need	 for
tears.	Pelagia	wiped	her	eyes	on	the	sleeve	of	her	dress	and	said,	'Antonio	always	said	that	Carlo	was	the
bravest	in	the	Army.'
'Velisarios,	 is	 the	man's	body	still	 there?	We	would	 like	 to	bury	 it	and	not	see	 it	burned,'	 said	 the
doctor.
'It's	after	dark,	I'll	go	and	look,'	said	the	strongman.	'On	the	way,	I	might	kill	a	German,	who	knows?'
He	departed,	happy	to	be	out	of	that	house	where	the	sights	were	enough	to	make	one	ill.
When	the	doctor	had	finished	cleaning	out	the	wound,	he	gave	Pelagia	the	task	of	sewing	it	up,	and
she	did	so	with	accuracy	and	care,	despite	her	feeling	of	the	unreality	of	it	all.	Velisarios	buried	Carlo
Guercio's	remains	that	night	in	the	yard	of	the	doctor's	house.	Just	before	dawn,	when	the	operation	on	the
captain	was	 finished	at	 last,	 and	 father	 and	daughter	were	both	utterly	 exhausted,	 they	came	out	 to	 say
their	goodbye	to	that	heroic	soldier.
Pelagia	combed	the	hair	and	kissed	the	forehead,	and	Velisarios	placed	a	cigarette	in	the	dead	man's
lips.	'I	owed	him	one,'	he	said.	The	doctor	made	a	speech	while	Pelagia	wept	beside	him.	'Sleep	long	and
well,'	he	ended.	'As	long	as	we	remember	you,	you	will	be	remembered	fair	and	young.'
Leaning	upon	each	other,	the	doctor	and	his	daughter	returned	inside.	Carefully,	they	carried	Corelli
to	Pelagia's	bed,	and	outside	the	first	birds	sang.
***
It	was	only	a	short	time	before	the	Germans	began	to	take	an	interest	in	loot.	Not	only	did	the	doctor
have	to	hide	his	valuables,	he	also	had	to	hide	an	Italian	officer	who	lay,	unable	to	move,	in	his	daughter's
bed.	Pelagia	made	a	bed	for	him	at	the	bottom	of	the	hole	in	the	kitchen,	and	once	again	Velisarios	was
called	in	to	carry	him.	There	Corelli	was	reunited	with	his	mandolin	and	Carlo's	papers	were	temporarily
removed.	The	lid	of	the	hiding-place	was	left	open	unless	troops	were	in	the	neighbourhood.
For	the	first	day	after	the	operation	the	captain	slept,	but	when	he	first	woke,	the	pain	was	so	bad	that
he	could	not	move	at	all,	and	he	felt	as	if	he	had	been	run	over	by	a	lorry.
'I	can't	breathe,'	he	told	the	doctor.
'If	 you	 couldn't	 breathe	 you	 couldn't	 speak.'	The	 captain	 said	 nothing	 and	 the	 doctor	 continued,	 'It
appears	that	Carlo	saved	your	life.'
'It	doesn't	"appear".	I	know	he	did.	Of	all	of	us,	he	died	the	best.	And	he's	left	me	to	remember	it.'
'You	shouldn't	weep,	Captain.	We	are	going	to	get	you	well,	and	then	get	you	off	the	island.'
'When	 I	 am	better	 you	must	move	me	 from	 the	 house,	Doctor.	 I	 don't	want	 you	 in	 danger.	 If	 I	 am
caught,	I	should	die	alone.'
'We	can	move	you	to	your	secret	house,	where	you	used	to	go	with	Pelagia.	Don't	look	so	surprised.
Everybody	knew.	And	you	may	not	get	better.	Remember	that.'
'My	God,	Doctor,	please	tell	me	some	lies.'
'The	truth	will	make	us	free.	We	overcome	fear	by	looking	it	in	the	eyes.'
The	 captain	 fell	 into	 a	 fever	 two	 days	 later	 and	 Pelagia	 remained	 in	 the	 hiding-place	 with	 him,
wiping	his	forehead	to	reduce	his	temperature.	The	fever	came	to	a	crisis	on	the	fourth	day,	and	Corelli
was	sweating	so	much	and	talking	so	nonsensically	that	both	the	doctor	and	Pelagia	feared	for	his	life.	But
two	days	later	the	fever	left,	and	the	patient	opened	his	eyes	with	wonder,	as	if	realizing	that	he	existed
for	the	first	time.	He	felt	weaker	than	it	ought	to	be	possible	to	feel,	but	by	the	same	evening	he	was	able
to	stand	with	the	doctor's	help	and	let	himself	be	washed.	Pelagia	fetched	a	mirror	and	showed	him	his
new-grown	beard,	and	that	night	he	was	fed	his	first	solid	meal.	Snails.
***
In	 later	 life,	Pelagia	 remembered	 the	 time	of	Corelli's	 recovery	and	his	escape	not	as	a	period	of
exciting	adventure,	nor	even	as	a	time	of	fear	and	hope,	but	as	the	slow	beginning	of	her	sorrows.	The	war
had	reduced	her	anyway.	Her	skin,	stretched	 tightly	over	her	bones,	was	 transparent	 from	lack	of	food,
and	when	she	ate	she	chewed	carefully	in	case	she	lost	a	tooth.	Her	rich	black	hair	had	thinned	and	lost	its
shine,	and	showed	the	first	grey	hairs	 that	should	not	have	appeared	for	at	 least	another	decade.	It	was
hard	to	obtain	food,	and	the	doctor	was	reduced	to	trapping	snakes	and	other	such	creatures.	Things	were
not	hopeless,	however;	there	was	always	the	sea,	the	source	of	Cephallonia's	being.
As	soon	as	Corelli	could	walk,	he	went	in	the	company	of	the	doctor	and	Velisarios	to	Casa	Nostra
at	night,	while	Pelagia	remained	at	home	in	the	hiding-place	in	which	the	mandolin,	the	doctor's	History
and	Carlo's	papers	had	been	replaced.	As	long	as	the	German	rapists	were	on	the	island,	she	hardly	left
the	house.	Corelli	had	given	her	his	ring,	too	big	for	any	of	her	fingers,	and	she	turned	it	round	and	round
in	the	lamplight.	The	captain	came	frequently,	after	dark,	complaining	that	the	hut	was	cold,	his	new	beard
scratching	her	cheeks	as	they	lay	fully	clothed	upon	her	bed,	wrapped	in	each	other's	embrace,	talking	of
the	future	and	the	past.
'I	will	always	hate	the	Germans,'	she	said.
'Gunter	saved	my	life.'
'He	murdered	all	your	friends.'
'He	had	no	choice.	It	wouldn't	surprise	me	if	he	shot	himself	afterwards.	He	was	trying	not	to	cry.'
'There	is	always	a	choice.'
'He	wasn't	brave	like	Carlo.	Only	one	in	a	million	is	made	like	that,	you	mustn't	blame	poor	Gunter.'
Pelagia	desperately	wanted	to	keep	her	captain	on	the	island,	but	knew	that	she	would	kill	him	if	she
did.	There	were	people	who	were	prepared	 to	betray	 for	bread,	 and	 it	 could	only	be	a	matter	of	 time
before	 the	Germans	 became	 aware	 of	 his	 presence	 in	 their	 lives.	 She	 asked	Kokolios	 and	Stamatis	 to
enquire	for	news	of	Bunnios,	the	English	spy,	and	to	tell	him	to	call	on	her	if	he	could.
For	 some	 time	 now	 Bunny	 Warren	 had	 been	 encouraging	 the	 owners	 of	 boats	 to	 help	 the	 few
surviving	 Italian	 soldiers	 to	 escape	 from	 the	 island,	 and	 it	 was	 easy	 for	 him	 to	 arrange	 the	 captain's
departure.	 He	 called	 at	 Pelagia's	 home	 one	 night,	 tapping	 softly	 on	 her	 window,	 and	 when	 she	 had
removed	herself	from	Corelli's	embrace,	she	looked	out	and	saw	the	man	whose	help	she	had	both	sought
and	feared.	He	came	in	through	the	door	and	very	formally	shook	her	hand.
'Who	is	this?'	asked	Corelli,	who	for	a	moment	had	been	fearing	a	visit	from	the	Germans.
'Bunnios,'	said	Pelagia,	without	answering	his	question,	'this	is	an	Italian	soldier	and	we	have	to	get
him	out.'	By	chance	a	boat	was	leaving	for	Sicily	the	following	morning	and	it	would	be	easy	to	put	the
captain	on	board.	They	simply	had	to	go	to	a	certain	bay	at	one	o'clock	in	the	morning	with	a	lamp,	and
flash	out	to	sea	in	answer	to	the	signals	flashed	from	the	boat.
Corelli	did	not	go	back	to	Casa	Nostra	before	dawn,	but	stayed	with	Pelagia	in	the	house.	The	three
of	them	sat	in	that	familiar	kitchen,	saddened	and	fearful,	talking	quietly	and	shaking	their	heads	over	all
the	memories.
'I	owe	my	life	to	you,	Doctor,'	the	captain	said.
'I	am	sorry	about	the	scars.	It	was	the	best	I	could	do.'
'And	I	am	sorry,	Doctor,	about	the	rape	of	the	island.	I	don't	suppose	we	will	ever	be	forgiven.'
'As	you	know,	Captain,	I	must	have	forgiven	you,	or	I	would	not	have	given	you	permission	to	marry
my	daughter.'
Pelagia	and	Corelli	 looked	at	each	other	and	the	captain	said,	 'We	have	decided	that	 if	we	have	a
son,	we	will	name	him	Iannis.'	The	doctor	was	visibly	delighted,	even	though	this	was	exactly	what	he
would	 have	 expected	 under	 the	 circumstances.	 He	 looked	 up,	 his	 eyes	 watering,	 and	 said	 simply,
'Antonio,	if	I	have	ever	had	a	son	it	was	you.	You	have	a	place	at	this	table.'
Corelli	 stood	up	and	 the	 two	men	embraced,	clapping	each	other	on	 the	back,	and	 then	 the	doctor
embraced	his	daughter.	 'I'll	 leave	you	 two	children	 together,'	 he	 said.	 'There	 is	 a	 little	girl	dying	and	 I
should	visit.'
The	doctor	 left	 the	house	and	 the	 two	 lovers	 sat	opposite	 each	other,	unable	 to	 speak.	Finally	 the
tears	began	to	follow	each	other	slowly	down	Pelagia's	cheeks,	and	Corelli	knelt	beside	her,	put	his	arms
around	her	and	laid	his	head	against	her	chest.	He	was	shocked	again	at	how	thin	she	was	and	closed	his
eyes	tightly,	imagining	that	it	was	another	world.	'I	am	so	afraid,'	she	said.	'I	think	you	won't	come	back,
and	the	war	goes	on	and	on	forever,	and	there's	no	safety	and	no	hope	and	I'll	be	left	with	nothing.'
'I	shall	not	forget	you	and	I	will	come	back,'	replied	Corelli.
'Promise?'
'I	promise.	I	have	left	you	my	ring	and	Antonia.'
'We	never	read	Carlo's	papers.'
'Too	painful.	We'll	read	them	when	I	return.'
She	stroked	his	hair	in	silence	and	said	finally,	'Antonio,	I	wish	that	we	had...	lain	together.	As	a	man
and	woman.'
'Everything	at	the	right	time,	koritsimou.'
'There	may	not	be	a	time.'
'There	will	be.	You	have	my	promise.'
At	eleven	o'clock	Bunny	Warren	scratched	at	the	window.	He	carried	a	knife	in	his	belt	and	sounded
extremely	efficient	as	he	gave	detailed	instructions	to	the	doctor,	who	translated	them	for	Corelli's	benefit.
It	was	a	cold	December	night,	there	was	no	moon,	and	since	most	Germans	preferred	to	be	indoors
on	such	a	night,	the	journey	to	the	beach	was	relatively	safe.	Nevertheless,	Pelagia's	heart	beat	fast	and	a
dark	hole	seemed	to	be	opening	in	her	heart.	Corelli	felt	so	sad	he	almost	wished	that	they	would	meet
some	German	soldiers	so	that	he	could	die,	fighting	and	killing,	and	end	it	all.	He	knew	that	to	leave	the
island	would	be	to	lose	his	roots.
For	warmth,	the	four	of	them	stood	close	together	on	the	tiny	patch	of	sand,	waiting	for	the	flash	of	a
lamp	that	would	come	to	them	from	the	sea.	Corelli	walked	to	the	waterline	and,	seeing	the	black	waves,
wondered	how	he	would	ever	survive	the	journey.	He	felt	his	love	for	the	island	turning	in	his	chest	like
the	twist	of	a	knife,	because	he	had	his	own	village	now	and	even	his	thought	and	speech	had	changed.
Returning	to	Pelagia,	he	held	her	face	in	his	hands	and	then	embraced	her.
When	 the	 light	 flashed	 three	 times	 from	 the	 sea	 and	Warren	 returned	 the	 signal,	Corelli	 shook	his
hand,	kissed	his	 father-in-law	on	both	cheeks	and	went	 to	Pelagia	once	more.	There	was	nothing	 to	be
said.	He	knew	that	her	mouth	was	trembling	with	grief	and	his	throat	was	tight	with	the	same	emotion.	He
stroked	her	cheek	tenderly	and	kissed	her	eyes.	He	heard	the	sound	of	the	boat	approaching	and	looked	up
to	 see	 the	 shadows	of	 two	men	 inside	 it.	The	 four	 approached	 the	boat	 and	 the	doctor	 said,	 'Go	well,
Antonio,	and	return.'
'May	God	hear	you,'	said	the	captain,	and	for	the	last	time	he	held	Pelagia.
After	he	had	climbed	into	the	boat,	disappearing	into	the	darkness	like	a	ghost,	Pelagia	ran	into	the
waves	 until	 the	 sea	 reached	 her	 thighs,	 but	 though	 she	 tried	 to	 catch	 sight	 of	 him,	 she	 saw	 nothing.	A
terrible	 emptiness	 seized	 her	 and	 she	 put	 her	 hands	 to	 her	 face	 and	wept,	 bent	 over	 in	 pain,	 her	 cries
carried	off	in	the	wind	and	were	lost	in	the	sound	of	the	sea.
CHAPTER	TWELVE
1943-9:	The	Years	of	Terror
Of	 the	 German	 occupation	 there	 is	 little	 to	 say,	 except	 that	 it	 caused	 the	 islanders	 to	 feel	 more
appreciation	 for	 the	 Italians	 they	 had	 lost.	 It	 seldom	 happens	 that	 a	 people	 can	 learn	 to	 feel	 friendly
towards	 their	 oppressors,	 but	 hardly	 since	 Roman	 times	 had	 there	 been	 any	 other	 kind	 of	 rule	 in
Cephallonia.	Now	there	were	no	more	Italians	working	in	the	fields	beside	the	farmers	in	order	to	escape
the	 boredom	 of	 army	 life,	 there	 were	 no	 more	 football	 matches	 between	 teams	 that	 quarrelled	 and
cheated,	there	were	no	flirtations	with	girls	by	soldiers	who	had	a	cigarette	hanging	from	the	corners	of
their	mouths.	There	were	no	more	voices	sending	out	opera	tunes	across	the	pine	trees	of	the	mountains.
Gone	 were	 the	 charming	 chicken-thieves,	 and	 in	 their	 place	 came	 a	 period	 of	 time	 that	 the	 doctor
recorded	in	his	History	as	the	worst	time	of	all.
The	 islanders	 remember	 that	 the	 Germans	 were	 not	 human	 beings.	 They	 were	 machines	 without
principles,	machines	that	only	knew	how	to	loot	and	kill,	without	any	passion	except	the	love	of	strength,
and	without	belief	except	in	their	natural	right	to	destroy	an	inferior	race.
The	Italians	had	of	course	been	 thieves,	but	 their	 shame	when	caught	showed	 that	 they	 recognized
their	 guilt.	 The	 Germans	 came	 into	 the	 house	 at	 any	 time	 of	 day,	 kicked	 over	 the	 furniture,	 beat	 the
occupants,	 however	 old	 or	 young,	 and	 in	 front	 of	 their	 eyes	 carried	 away	 whatever	 they	 liked.	 Both
Pelagia	 and	 her	 father	 were	 beaten	 at	 different	 times	 for	 no	 apparent	 cause.	 Drosoula	 had	 cigarettes
burned	 into	 her	 skin	 for	 frowning	 at	 an	 officer.	 The	 doctor	 had	 all	 his	 precious	 medical	 equipment,
gathered	together	over	twenty	years	of	poverty,	broken	in	his	presence	by	four	officers	whose	hearts	were
as	dark	and	empty	as	the	caves	of	hell.
When	 in	 November	 1944	 the	 German	 troops	 were	 ordered	 to	 withdraw,	 they	 destroyed	 every
building	for	which	they	found	the	time,	and	the	inhabitants	of	Cephallonia	rose	up	against	them	and	fought
them	all	the	way	to	the	sea.
But	the	night	before	he	left,	Gunter	Weber,	who	had	ashamedly	stayed	away	from	the	house	since	the
time	of	the	killings,	brought	his	record	player	and	his	collection	of	Marlene	Dietrich	records	and	left	them
outside	Pelagia's	door,	as	he	had	promised	in	happier	days.	He	wrote	a	note	in	Italian:	'God	be	with	you,	I
will	remember	you	always.'
Pelagia	hid	the	record	player	in	the	hole	in	the	floor,	with	Antonio's	mandolin	and	Carlo's	papers,
and	it	survived	the	terrible	years	that	followed.
***
The	Germans	 left	 and	 the	 celebrations	 began,	 but	 no	 sooner	 had	 the	 bells	 begun	 ringing	 than	 the
members	of	the	Communist	organization	ELAS,	now	calling	themselves	EAM,	came	out	from	hiding	and
attempted	to	take	control	of	the	country.	They	formed	Workers'	Councils	and	elected	themselves	to	every
post	of	authority.	In	Cephallonia	the	Communists	began	to	send	awkward	characters	to	prison	camps.	On
the	mainland	they	poisoned,	with	dead	animals,	the	water	of	villages	that	opposed	them.	Into	mass	graves
they	threw	the	dead	bodies	of	Greeks	who	had	had	their	eyes	torn	out	and	their	mouths	cut	into	the	shape
of	 a	 smile.	 They	 kidnapped	 30,000	 little	 children	 and	 sent	 them	 across	 the	 border	 into	 Communist
Yugoslavia	 to	 be	 taught	 how	 to	 be	 true	 Communists.	 ELAS	 soldiers	 captured	 by	 the	 British	 were	 so
frightened	of	their	leaders	that	they	begged	to	be	allowed	to	remain	in	British	prison	camps.
Pelagia	and	the	doctor	were	two	out	of	millions	of	people	whose	lives	were	forever	destroyed	by
these	butchers.	The	doctor	was	dragged	away	in	the	night	by	three	men	who	had	decided	that	since	he	was
a	doctor	he	must	be	a	Fascist.	They	threw	Pelagia	 into	a	corner	and	beat	her	unconscious	with	a	chair.
When	Kokolios	came	out	from	his	house	to	defend	the	doctor,	he	too	was	carried	away,	even	though	he
was	a	Communist.	He	was	accompanied	by	Stamatis,	a	supporter	of	the	royal	family,	and	the	three	men
were	taken	to	the	harbour	for	transportation.
Pelagia	did	not	know	what	had	happened	 to	her	 father,	and	none	of	 the	authorities	would	 tell	her.
Alone	in	the	house,	penniless	and	helpless,	for	the	first	time	in	her	life	she	thought	of	ending	everything	by
killing	herself.	The	island	seemed	to	be	cursed	by	an	endless	series	of	oppressors.	When	would	Antonio
return?	The	war	was	continuing	in	Europe,	and	probably	he	was	dead.	She	heard	that	the	Communists	had
been	killing	the	Italian	soldiers	who	had	come	to	fight	alongside	them	against	 the	Greeks.	Had	the	time
come,	finally,	to	hate	the	Greeks?	Of	the	nations	who	had	broken	into	her	house	to	beat	her	and	steal	her
possessions,	only	the	Italians	were	innocent,	it	seemed.
Fortunately	she	had	a	friend.	Drosoula	had	long	known	that	Pelagia	had	lost	her	love	for	Mandras,
and	 that	by	his	 long	silence	he	had	given	up	his	 rights.	She	knew	also	 that	Pelagia	was	waiting	 for	an
Italian,	 but	 she	 felt	 no	 bitterness	 and	 never	 uttered	 a	 single	 word	 of	 blame.	 When	 Pelagia	 stumbled
bleeding	 through	her	 door	 after	 the	Communists	 had	 taken	Dr	 Iannis,	Drosoula,	who	had	 also	 suffered
much,	stroked	her	hair	and	uttered	loving	words,	as	if	Pelagia	were	her	own	daughter.	Within	a	week	she
had	closed	up	her	little	house	on	the	harbour	and	moved	into	the	doctor's	house	on	the	hill.	She	found	his
Italian	gun	in	a	drawer	and	kept	it	at	her	side	in	case	of	attack.
Like	Pelagia,	Drosoula	had	been	reduced	by	the	war.	The	layers	of	fat	had	melted	from	her	waist	and
thighs,	and	her	great	ugly	moon	of	a	face	had	sunk	inwards.	However,	her	tall,	 thin	form	and	grey	hairs
demanded	respect,	and	her	unbroken	spirit	gave	Pelagia	strength.
For	comfort	they	slept	together	in	the	doctor's	bed,	and	by	day	they	made	plans	to	find	supplies	of
food	 and	 listened	 to	 each	 others	 complaints	 and	 stories.	 They	 dug	 for	 roots	 in	 the	 undergrowth,	 and
Drosoula	took	her	young	friend	down	to	the	harbour	to	learn	to	fish.
But	Drosoula	was	out	when	Mandras	returned,	full	of	selfimportance	and	new	ideas,	expecting	the
admiring	 attention	 of	 the	 young	woman	he	 had	 not	 seen	 for	 years,	 and	 determined	 to	 take	 revenge.	He
came	in	through	the	door	without	knocking	and	leaned	his	gun	against	the	wall.	When	she	heard	the	noise
in	 the	kitchen,	Pelagia,	who	was	 in	 her	 room,	 called	out,	 'Drosoula?'	A	man	 came	 in	who	 she	did	not
recognize,	except	that	he	looked	very	like	Drosoula	had	done	before	the	war;	there	was	the	same	swollen
stomach	and	thighs,	the	same	round,	coarse	face	and	thickened	lips.	Puzzled,	Pelagia	stood	up.
Mandras	 also	was	 confused.	There	was	 something	 about	 this	 desperately	 thin,	 frightened	 girl	 that
reminded	him	of	Pelagia,	but	 this	woman	had	silver	 threads	 in	her	 thin	black	hair,	her	blouse	and	skirt
hung	straight	to	the	ground,	her	cheeks	were	hollow.	He	looked	quickly	around	the	room	to	see	whether
Pelagia	was	there,	assuming	that	this	must	be	a	cousin	or	an	aunt.	 'Mandras,	is	it	you?'	said	the	woman,
and	he	recognized	the	voice.
He	stood,	amazed	and	confused,	with	much	of	his	hatred	knocked	out	of	him,	while	she	 looked	at
those	coarse	and	altered	features	and	felt	deep	disgust.	'I	thought	you	must	be	dead,'	she	said	finally.
He	closed	the	door	and	leaned	against	it.	'You	mean	you	were	hoping	I	was	dead.	As	you	see,	I	am
not.	I	am	very	much	alive	and	well.	Don't	I	get	a	kiss	from	my	fiancee?'
She	advanced	fearfully	and	placed	a	kiss	on	his	right	cheek.
'I	am	glad	you	are	alive,'	she	said.
He	caught	both	her	wrists	 and	held	 them	 tightly.	 'I	 don't	 think	you	are.	How	 is	your	 father,	 by	 the
way?	Is	he	not	here?'
'Let	me	go,'	she	said	softly,	and	he	did	so.	'The	Communists	took	him	away'	she	told	him.
'Well,	he	must	have	done	something	to	deserve	it.'
'He	did	nothing.	He	healed	the	sick.	And	they	beat	me	with	a	chair	and	took	everything.'
'There	must	be	reasons.	The	party	is	never	wrong.	Whoever	is	not	with	us	is	against	us.'
She	noticed	that	he	wore	the	red	star	of	ELAS	sewn	into	the	front	of	his	cap.	'You're	one	of	them,'	she
said.
He	leaned	against	 the	door,	placing	all	his	weight	against	 it,	 increasing	her	sense	of	 imprisonment
and	her	fear.	 'Not	just	one	of	them,	an	important	one	of	them,'	he	stated,	sounding	pleased	with	himself,
then	added	challengingly,	'Soon	we	will	have	a	nice	big	house	to	live	in.	When	shall	we	get	married?'
She	trembled	and,	seeing	this,	his	anger	increased.	'We	will	not	be	married,'	she	said.	'We	were	very
young,	it	was	not	what	we	thought	it	was.'
'Not	what	we	thought?	And	there	was	I,	fighting	for	Greece,	thinking	of	you	all	day	and	dreaming	of
you	at	night.	And	now	I	come	back	at	last	and	find	a	faded	cow	who	has	forgotten	me.'
'What's	the	matter	with	you?'	she	asked.
'The	matter	with	me?'	He	took	from	his	pocket	a	thick	bundle	of	papers.	 'This	is	what	is	the	matter
with	me.'	He	threw	them	towards	her	feet	and	she	picked	them	up	slowly.	She	held	the	bundle	in	her	hands
and	realized	that	it	consisted	of	her	letters	to	him	in	Albania.	'My	letters?'	she	said,	turning	them	over	in
her	hands.
Mandras	gave	a	sudden	roar	of	disgust	and,	seizing	the	letters,	he	found	the	last	one,	held	it	up	to	the
light	and	read,	'You	never	write	to	me,	and	at	first	I	was	sad	and	worried.	Now	I	realize	that	you	cannot
care	 and	 this	 has	 caused	me	 to	 lose	my	 love	 for	 you	 also.	 I	want	 you	 to	 know	 that	 I	 have	 decided	 to
release	you	from	your	promises.	I	am	sorry,'
He	gave	a	smile	 that	was	both	humourless	and	 threatening.	 'Yes,	 I'm	able	 to	 read	now,	and	 this	 is
what	I	found	in	the	letters	I	had	been	carrying	next	to	my	heart.	And	now	I	know	the	truth.	Do	you	know
the	first	thing	I	heard	when	I	arrived	back	here?	I	heard,	"Mandras,	did	you	hear	about	your	old	fiancee?
She's	going	to	marry	an	Italian."	So	you've	found	a	Fascist	for	yourself,	have	you?	Is	this	what	I've	been
fighting	for,	you	cow?'
Pelagia	stood	up,	her	lips	trembling,	and	said,	'Mandras,	let	me	out.'
'Let	me	out,'	he	repeated,	 'let	me	out.	Poor	 little	 thing's	frightened,	 is	she?'	He	came	up	to	her	and
struck	her	across	the	face	so	hard	that	she	spun	round	before	she	fell.	He	kicked	her	in	the	stomach	and
bent	 down	 to	 pick	 her	 up	 by	 the	 wrists,	 then	 he	 threw	 her	 on	 the	 bed	 and,	 quite	 against	 his	 original
intentions,	began	to	tear	at	her	clothes.
This	rape	of	women	was	something	that	he	could	not	help,	it	seemed.	It	was	a	feeling	that	came	from
deep	inside	him,	something	he	had	learned	in	years	of	not	needing	to	explain	his	actions	to	anyone.	It	was
his	natural	right,	and	the	violence	was	much	more	exciting	than	the	sexual	act	itself.
But	Pelagia	fought.	Her	nails	broke	in	his	flesh,	she	struck	him	with	hands	and	knees	and	elbows,	she
screamed	and	struggled.	To	Mandras	her	resistance	was	unreasonable,	he	was	failing	despite	his	weight
and	strength,	and	he	sat	back	and	hit	her	repeatedly.	Then	suddenly	he	tried	to	pull	up	her	skirts.	The	solid
weight	of	her	gun	fell	out	of	its	pocket	and	landed	beside	her	head	on	the	pillow,	but	Mandras	did	not	see
it,	and	when	the	bullet	cracked	through	his	shoulder,	 the	shock	knocked	him	backwards	and	he	gazed	at
Pelagia	in	shock	and	accusation.
Drosoula	heard	the	crack	of	the	gunshot	just	as	she	came	through	the	kitchen	door	and	at	first	she	did
not	recognize	the	sound,	but	then	she	knew	what	it	was	and	took	the	Italian	gun	from	the	drawer.	Without
thinking,	knowing	that	thought	would	make	her	a	coward,	she	pushed	open	the	door	of	Pelagia's	room	and
saw	there	the	unthinkable.
She	had	thought	that	Pelagia	might	have	shot	herself,	that	there	might	be	thieves,	but	when	she	burst
in,	she	saw	the	doctor's	daughter	leaning	up	on	her	elbow,	her	face	swollen	and	bloody,	her	lips	split,	her
clothes	torn.	Drosoula	followed	Pelagia's	gaze	and	saw,	leaning	against	the	wall	behind	the	door,	a	man
who	might	have	been	her	son.	She	ran	to	Pelagia's	side	and	took	her	into	her	arms,	rocking	her,	and	heard
the	words,	'He...	tried	...	to...	rape	me.'
Drosoula	stood	up,	and	mother	and	son	examined	each	other	in	disbelief.	So	much	had	changed.	As
the	 anger	 grew	 in	 the	woman,	 the	 fire	 in	Mandras	 died.	A	wave	of	 self-pity	 overcame	him	 and	 all	 he
wanted	to	do	was	weep;	everything	had	come	to	nothing,	everything	was	lost.	The	horror	of	 the	war	in
Albania,	 the	 years	 in	 the	 forest,	 his	 new	 power	 and	 importance,	 it	 was	 all	 a	 dream,	 and	 he	 was	 a
frightened	little	boy	again,	trembling	before	the	anger	of	his	mother.	And	his	shoulder	hurt	so	much.	He
wanted	to	show	it	to	her,	to	win	her	attention.	He	wanted	her	to	touch	and	heal	it.
But	she	pointed	the	gun	at	him	and	spat	the	one	word	that	seemed	to	mean	the	most,	'Fascist'.
'Mother...'	he	said	in	a	voice	that	was	low	and	frightened.
'How	dare	you	call	me	"mother"?	I	am	no	mother	and	you	are	not	my	son.	I	have	a	daughter...'	she
pointed	to	Pelagia,	who	had	curled	into	a	ball,	'...	and	this	is	what	you	do.	I	do	not	know	you,	never	in	my
life	do	I	want	to	see	you	again,	I	have	forgotten	you,	my	curse	goes	with	you.	May	you	never	know	peace,
may	your	heart	burst	in	your	chest,	may	you	die	alone,'	She	spat	on	the	ground	and	shook	her	head	with
disgust.	'Pig	rapist,	get	out	before	I	kill	you.'
Mandras	left	his	gun	leaning	against	the	wall	of	the	kitchen,	and	with	bright	red	blood	on	his	right
hand	where	 he	 still	 held	 his	 wound,	 he	 stumbled	 out	 into	 the	 cold	December	 sun.	 He	 looked	 through
tearful	eyes	at	the	tree	where	once	he	had	swung	and	laughed,	and	where,	he	seemed	to	remember,	there
had	once	been	a	goat.	It	was	a	tree	that	was	incomplete	without	Pelagia	as	she	was,	fresh	and	beautiful,
slicing	 onions	 beneath	 it	 and	 smiling	 through	 the	 tears.	 A	wave	 of	 grief	 overcame	 him	 and	 his	 throat
tightened	with	sorrow.
It	did	not	occur	to	him	that	he	was	just	one	more	life	twisted	and	ruined	by	the	war.	He	was	aware
only	 that	heaven	had	disappeared,	 that	hope	had	turned	to	dust,	 that	 joy,	which	had	once	shone	brighter
than	the	summer	sun,	had	disappeared	into	the	black	light	and	cold	heat	of	mass	murder.	He	had	struggled
for	a	better	world	and	instead	had	destroyed	it.
There	was	once	a	place	where	all	had	shone	with	delight	and	innocence.	He	stood	still	for	a	moment,
recalling	where	it	was;	 then	he	went	down	to	 the	sea,	stood	on	the	waterline,	and	kicked	off	his	boots.
With	his	right	hand	he	slowly	removed	his	clothes	till	he	stood	with	nothing	on.	He	realized	he	wanted
only	to	feel	the	sea	and	sand	upon	his	skin.	He	needed	to	be	washed.
He	 remembered	 days	 in	 his	 boat	 with	 nothing	 to	 do	 except	 fish;	 he	 remembered	 his	 joy	 when
something	 fine	 was	 landed	 for	 Pelagia,	 his	 pleasure	 at	 her	 pleasure	 when	 he	 gave	 it	 to	 her.	 He
remembered	that	in	those	days	he	was	beautiful.	He	began	walking	into	the	sea	that	would	take	his	life,
and	by	drowning	him	make	him	clean,	make	him	pure	and	innocent	once	more.
CHAPTER	THIRTEEN
Antonia
There	had	been	so	many	rapes	that	Pelagia	and	Drosoula	were	not	surprised	to	find	an	abandoned
bundle	 on	 their	 doorstep.	 It	 had	 been	 born	 at	 a	 time	when	 its	 father	 could	 have	 been	 a	 German	 or	 a
Communist,	 and	 the	 mother	 might	 have	 been	 any	 unfortunate	 girl	 at	 all.	 Whoever	 this	 sorrowing	 and
dishonoured	girl	had	been,	she	had	cared	enough	about	her	child	to	leave	it	upon	the	doorstep	of	a	doctors
house,	knowing	that	those	inside	would	be	able	to	cope.	The	disorder	of	the	times	was	so	great	that	the
two	women	could	 think	of	no	solution	except	 to	 try	and	care	for	 it	 themselves,	 thinking	 that	 in	 time	 the
child	could	be	adopted	by	someone	childless	or	handed	to	a	charitable	organization.
They	had	 taken	 the	child	 inside	and	unwrapped	 it	and	discovered	 that	 it	was	a	girl.	She	was	very
calm	and	cried	only	a	little.	She	sucked	the	thumb	of	her	right	hand	(a	habit	she	never	lost,	even	in	old
age),	and	she	smiled	a	lot,	her	legs	and	arms	waving	up	and	down	in	delight.
The	two	women,	who	had	suffered	so	greatly	from	loss	and	unhappiness,	found	that	the	child,	whom
they	named	Antonia,	gave	new	meaning	to	their	lives.	Because	of	her,	the	women's	tragic	memories	began
to	fade,	and	she	took	her	place	in	their	lives	as	if	she	had	always	been	meant	to	be	there.	In	all	her	life,
Antonia	never	asked	a	question	about	her	father,	and	only	when	she	applied	for	a	passport	to	go	abroad
did	she	discover	that	she	did	not	officially	exist.
She	did	have	a	grandfather,	however.	When	Dr	 Iannis	 returned	after	 two	years,	 stumbling	 into	 the
kitchen	supported	by	two	charity	workers,	utterly	broken	by	his	treatment	in	the	prison	camp	and	forever
speechless,	he	bent	down	and	kissed	the	child	before	retiring	to	his	room.	Just	as	Antonia	did	not	enquire
about	a	father,	Dr	Iannis	did	not	enquire	about	the	child.	It	was	enough	for	him	to	know	that	the	world	had
gone	down	a	path	that	he	had	no	hope	of	understanding.	He	accepted	that	his	daughter	and	Drosoula	would
sleep	in	his	bed,	and	that	he	would	take	Pelagia's,	because,	whichever	bed	it	was,	he	would	dream	the
same	dreams	of	a	forced	march	of	hundreds	of	kilometres	without	his	boots,	without	food	or	water.	He
would	hear	the	cries	of	villagers	as	their	houses	burned,	the	crack	of	gunshots	as	they	were	murdered,	and
he	would	witness,	over	and	over	again,	Stamatis	and	Kokolios	dying	in	each	other's	arms	and	begging	him
to	leave	them	in	the	road	in	case	he	himself	was	shot.
In	 his	 wordlessness,	 Dr	 Iannis	 drew	 the	 same	 comfort	 from	Antonia	 that	 he	 had	 drawn	 from	 his
daughter	after	his	own	young	wife	had	died.	He	would	put	 the	child	upon	his	knee,	arranging	her	black
hair,	gazing	 into	her	brown	eyes	as	 if	 this	alone	was	 the	way	 to	 speak,	her	 smile	 filling	his	heart	with
sorrow,	 because	when	 she	was	 old	 she	would	 lose	 her	 innocence,	 and	 learn	 that	 tragedy	 destroys	 the
muscles	of	the	face	until	a	smile	becomes	impossible.
In	 1949	 the	 national	 government	 succeeded	 at	 last	 in	 defeating	 the	 Communists,	 who	 lost	 their
control	of	the	country.	Dr	Iannis	took	up	medicine	again,	helping	his	daughter	in	a	reversal	of	their	roles.
It	upset	Pelagia	to	see	the	shaking	of	his	hands	as	he	dealt	with	patients'	wounds,	and	she	knew	also	that
he	worked	despite	a	terrible	sense	of	uselessness.	Why	preserve	life	when	all	of	us	must	die,	when	health
is	only	an	accident	of	youth?	She	wondered	sometimes	at	the	strength	of	his	desire	to	heal,	despite	all	he
had	suffered.	In	the	evening	she	wrapped	her	arms	around	him	and	held	him	as	his	mind	wandered	back
over	 the	 past,	 his	 eyes	wet	with	 sadness,	 and	 she	 buried	 her	 head	 on	 his	 chest,	 understanding	 that	 by
comforting	him	she	was	comforting	herself	too.
She	 attempted	 to	 interest	 him	 in	working	 on	 his	 History,	 and	when	 she	 took	 the	 papers	 from	 the
hiding-hole	and	arranged	 them	in	front	of	him	at	his	 table,	he	seemed	willing	enough	 to	work.	He	read
through	them,	but	at	 the	end	of	a	week	Pelagia	found	he	had	added	only	one	short	paragraph	in	a	shaky
handwriting	that	did	not	look	like	his	old,	firm	handwriting	at	all.	Then	she	saw	that	across	the	bottom	of
the	 last	 page	 her	 father	 had	 written,	 'In	 the	 past	 the	 horrors	 came	 from	 outside.	 Now	 we	 have	 only
ourselves	to	blame.'
While	 she	 had	 been	 in	 the	 hiding-hole,	 Pelagia	 had	 rediscovered	Antonio's	mandolin	 and	Carlo's
papers.	She	read	through	the	latter	in	a	single	evening	and	was	astonished;	she	had	never	imagined	that
that	 powerful,	 good-natured	 man	 had	 suffered	 so	 greatly	 from	 a	 secret	 sadness	 that	 had	 made	 him	 a
stranger	 to	 himself.	 She	 saw	 that	 he	 had	 been	 as	 determined	 to	 lose	 his	 life	 as	 he	 had	 been	 to	 save
Corelli's	and	she	realized	that	if	her	own	adopted	child	was	at	risk,	she	would	find	the	same	extraordinary
courage	in	herself.
Antonia	grew	tall	and	lovely,	a	child	whose	movements	were	filled	with	confidence	and	grace.	She
was	 incapable	 of	 behaving	 like	 a	 'lady',	 and	 when	 she	 sat	 in	 her	 grandfather's	 armchair	 she	 not	 only
sucked	her	 thumb	but	also	hung	one	 leg	over	 the	arm	of	 the	chair,	 ignoring	her	mother's	and	Drosoula's
protests	with	laughing	cries	of,	'Don't	be	so	old-fashioned.'
The	family	were	regarded	as	eccentric.	The	empty-headed	gossips	of	the	village	regarded	Drosoula,
with	her	extreme	ugliness,	and	Pelagia,	with	her	assumption	 that	she	was	any	man's	equal,	as	a	pair	of
crazy	women.	Children	 threw	 stones	 at	 them	 as	 they	 passed,	 and	 adults	warned	 their	 children	 to	 keep
away	 and	 encouraged	 their	 dogs	 to	 bite	 them.	 Nevertheless,	 Pelagia	 earned	 a	 living,	 because	 after
darkness	people	would	arrive	secretly	in	the	belief	that	her	treatments	were	sure	to	work.
During	all	this	time	Pelagia	became	certain	that	Antonio	Corelli	was	dead	and,	like	her	father,	she
also	became	certain	beyond	doubt	of	the	reality	of	ghosts.
It	had	happened	first	in	1946	when,	one	day	in	October,	she	was	standing	outside	the	house	with	the
infant	Antonia	 in	 her	 arms.	She	was	making	baby	noises	 and	giving	 the	 baby	her	 finger	 to	 suck,	when
something	made	her	look	up.	She	saw	a	figure	dressed	in	black,	standing	before	her	in	exactly	the	same
place	that	Mandras	had	been	when	he	had	been	shot	by	Velisarios'	cannon.	The	figure	was	looking	at	her,
as	 if	 it	wanted	to	 take	a	step	towards	her,	and	her	heart	 leapt.	There	was	an	atmosphere	around	him	of
nine	thousand	weeping	ghosts,	and	sorrow	seemed	to	pour	from	his	face.	Thin	and	bearded	though	he	was,
she	was	sure	it	was	him.	Excited	beyond	all	joy,	she	put	the	baby	down	in	order	to	run	to	him,	but	when
she	looked	up	he	had	gone.
Her	 heart	 jumping	 in	 her	 chest,	 she	 ran.	Around	 the	 bend	 she	 stopped	 and	 looked	wildly	 around,
crying	 out,	 'Antonio!	 Antonio!'	 But	 no	 voice	 responded	 and	 no	 man	 came	 towards	 her.	 He	 had
disappeared.	Her	hands	rose	to	the	sky	in	confusion	and	fell	down	again	to	her	sides.	She	stood	watching
and	calling	until	her	shouts	hurt	her	throat	and	tears	blinded	her	eyes.
The	 same	ghost	 appeared	at	 the	 same	place	 in	1947	and	every	year	after	 that	 at	 roughly	 the	 same
time,	but	never	exactly.	It	was	because	of	this	that	Pelagia	came	to	the	conclusion	that	Antonio	had	kept
his	 promise	 to	 return	 and	 that	 it	was	 possible	 to	 keep	 such	 a	 promise	 and	 continue	 to	 love	 even	 from
beyond	the	grave.	She	was	able	 to	 live	satisfied,	knowing	 that	she	had	not	been	abandoned,	and,	 filled
with	happy	dreams	of	being	desired	and	 loved,	 she	 looked	 forward	 to	her	own	death	when	she	would
once	again	have	all	that	had	been	stolen	away	in	life.
CHAPTER	FOURTEEN
1953:	Earthquake
The	thirteenth	of	August,	1953	was	a	fine	day,	with	small	white	clouds	scattered	here	and	there	most
charmingly	 in	 the	 deep	 blue	 sky.	 That	morning	Antonia,	 now	 eight	 years	 old	 but	 as	 tall	 as	 a	 child	 of
twelve,	went	to	pick	up	a	sheet	of	paper	from	the	floor,	and	when	the	sheet	flew	upwards	and	stuck	to	her
hand,	she	cried,	'It's	magic,'	and	ran	excitedly	outside.
Strange	 things	were	happening	all	over	 the	 Ionian	 islands.	There	were	no	birds	 in	 the	 sky;	on	 the
hillsides	and	in	 the	undergrowth,	snakes	and	rats	 left	 their	holes,	and	in	 the	villages	all	 the	dogs	began
barking.
Drosoula	came	inside	sweating	and	shaking	and	told	Pelagia,	'I	am	ill,	I	feel	terrible,	something	has
happened	to	my	heart.'	She	sat	down	heavily	with	her	hand	to	her	chest,	taking	deep	breaths,	and	Pelagia
went	to	her	medicine	cupboard	and	made	a	drink	for	her.	Antonia,	who	had	come	back	inside,	suddenly
burst	into	tears,	exclaimed,	'Mama,	I've	got	to	get	out,'	and	ran	outdoors.
Drosoula	and	Pelagia	were	exchanging	surprised	glances	when	suddenly	there	came	a	low,	terrible
roar	from	the	earth	that	made	the	two	women	feel	as	if	their	hearts	were	exploding	in	their	chests.	'A	heart
attack,'	 thought	Pelagia	desperately,	and	she	saw	Drosoula,	with	her	hands	on	her	stomach	and	her	eyes
staring,	stumble	as	if	someone	had	struck	her.
It	seemed	that	time	had	stopped	and	the	indescribable	roaring	of	the	earth	would	never	end.	Dr	Iannis
rushed	out	of	the	room	that	used	to	be	Pelagia's	and	spoke	for	the	first	time	in	years.	'Get	out!	Get	out!'	he
cried.	 'It's	 an	 earthquake!	 Save	 yourselves!'	 His	 voice	 sounded	 small	 and	 far	 away,	 and	 immediately
afterwards	he	was	thrown	violently	sideways.
More	frightened	than	they	had	ever	been	in	their	lives,	the	two	women	stumbled	towards	the	door,
were	thrown	down	and	attempted	to	crawl.	But	again	and	again	they	were	thrown	upwards	and	sideways
and,	unable	to	crawl	on	their	hands	and	knees,	they	spread	their	hands	and	legs	and	moved	towards	the
door	like	snakes,	reaching	it	just	as	the	roof	began	to	fall	in.
Outside	in	the	yard	dust	was	slowly	rising	as	the	earth	went	up	and	down,	while	in	the	centre	of	the
street	a	stream	of	water	suddenly	rose	to	a	height	of	twelve	metres	and	then	disappeared	as	if	it	had	never
been.	 Houses	 suddenly	 leapt	 upwards	 and	 solid	 stone	 walls	 moved	 like	 paper	 in	 the	 wind,	 and	 then
suddenly	there	was	a	stillness	like	that	of	death.
Pelagia,	spitting	and	covered	in	dirt,	filled	with	a	sense	of	utter	helplessness,	began	to	struggle	to	her
knees.	 Suddenly	 the	 strange	 silence	 was	 broken	 by	 the	 wild	 cries	 of	 the	 priest,	 who	 rushed	 from	 the
church	with	his	arms	raised	to	heaven.	'You	pig!'	he	roared.	'You	evil	dog!'	He	fell	to	his	knees	and,	with
tears	in	his	eyes,	struck	at	the	earth	with	his	fists.
At	 this	 point,	 as	 if	 in	 response	 to	 his	 cries,	 the	 terrible	 roaring	 began	 again	 and	 once	 more	 the
Cephallonian	earth	danced,	the	peaks	of	the	mountains	rocking	like	boats.	During	those	intervals	when	the
motion	stopped,	Pelagia,	Drosoula	and	Antonia	held	tightly	on	to	each	other,	gazing	in	horror	at	the	old
house,	of	which	there	was	little	left.	The	walls	were	reduced	to	half	their	height	and	the	roof	lay	in	ruins
on	the	floor.	This	ruin	contained	the	sad	soul	and	tired	old	body	of	the	doctor,	who	had	planned	his	last
words	for	years	and	now	died	beneath	the	stones	without	the	chance	to	say	them.
***
The	British	were	the	first	to	arrive,	sending	four	large	ships	carrying	water,	food,	medicines,	doctors
and	rescue	equipment.	Italy,	remembering	its	shameful	past,	sent	ships	loaded	with	rescue	workers,	and
American	ships	arrived	carrying	earthmovers,	helicopters	and	3,000	sailors.	The	Greek	Navy	turned	up
late	but	eager,	and	the	King	of	Greece	and	his	family	travelled	around	the	islands.	The	earthmovers	began
the	slow	work	of	clearing	 the	 ruined	houses,	and	foreign	aid	workers	built	cities	of	 tents	as	 temporary
accommodation	 for	 the	 islanders.	 Aeroplanes	 and	 helicopters	 dropped	 food	 to	 hillside	 communities
whose	roads	had	been	cut	off	by	the	earthquake.
In	Cephallonia,	 because	of	 the	wide	 streets	 and	 the	 fact	 that	most	 buildings	were	only	one	 storey
high,	few	people	actually	died	in	the	earthquake.	There	were	the	usual	stories	concerning	people	who	had
lost	 their	sense	of	 time	and	appeared	from	beneath	 the	ruins	of	houses	after	nine	days,	believing	 it	had
been	a	few	hours.
The	 islanders	 reacted	 differently,	 according	 to	whether	 or	 not	 they	 found	 a	 natural	 leader	 among
themselves.	Where	none	appeared,	people	became	sad	and	purposeless	and	had	terrible	dreams	of	falling
into	endless	 space.	During	 the	earthquake	 itself	perhaps	a	quarter	of	 the	 islanders,	 like	 the	doctor,	had
remained	calm,	but	afterwards	the	remaining	three-quarters	suffered	terrible	shame	remembering	the	way
they	had	abandoned	their	children	and	elderly	parents.
Although	he	had	always	been	considered	a	slow-thinking	man,	Velisarios,	who	was	now	forty-two
years	 old	 and	 stronger	 than	 he	 had	 ever	 been,	 took	 command	 in	 Pelagia's	 village.	With	 a	 strength	 that
seemed	greater	 than	 that	of	 the	earthquake	 itself,	he	 threw	off	 the	beams	and	stones	 that	 imprisoned	 the
crushed	body	of	the	doctor,	because	he	was	aware	that	decay	was	followed	by	disease.	Then	he	gathered
together	the	confused	and	hopeless	villagers	and	ordered	them	into	small	working	parties.
For	 months	 after	 the	 earthquake,	 there	 were	 times	 when	 the	 earth	 would	 shake	 and	 tremble,	 not
violently	 as	 it	 had	 done	 in	 the	 earthquake	 itself,	 but	 enough	 to	 make	 people	 scream	 in	 fear.	 It	 was
Velisarios	who	told	people	to	get	back	to	work,	threatening	them	with	broken	bones	unless	they	returned
to	their	tasks.	Even	Pelagia,	who	was	almost	crazy	with	grief,	was	given	the	work	of	caring	for	people's
wounds,	 while	 Drosoula,	 who	 at	 first	 could	 only	 cry,	 was	 put	 in	 charge	 of	 the	 children	 so	 that	 their
parents	could	work.
When	 the	 aid	workers	 finally	 arrived	 at	 the	 village,	 they	 found	 a	 small	 community	 living	 in	 tents
made	of	sheets	of	iron,	with	toilets	dug	at	a	safe	distance	from	the	water	supply.	An	enormous	man	was	in
charge,	who	in	old	age	would	be	more	loved	and	respected	than	the	teacher	or	the	priest.
For	three	months	the	earth	moved,	as	if	it	was	breathing.	Then,	at	last,	it	became	quiet	and	motionless
once	 again,	 and	 reconstruction	 began,	 to	 be	 completed	 three	 years	 later.	 Ancient	 and	 beautiful	 Italian
towns	were	rebuilt	as	plain	white	boxes.	Pelagias	village	was	put	up	further	down	the	hill	and	her	old
house	was	abandoned,	the	contents	of	the	hiding-hole	in	the	kitchen	buried,	it	seemed,	forever.
The	 earthquake	 changed	 lives	 so	 greatly	 that,	 even	 today,	 it	 is	 still	 the	 most	 important	 topic	 of
conversation	in	Cephallonia.
Islanders	cannot	resist	informing	strangers	of	the	facts,	and	tourist	guides	will	mention	the	earthquake
when	it	seemed	they	were	only	going	to	discuss	the	weather.	Old	people	remember	an	event	according	to
whether	it	was	before	or	after	the	earthquake.	The	disaster	caused	people	to	recall	the	war	as	unimportant
by	comparison,	and	they	woke	up	each	morning	amazed	and	grateful	to	be	alive.
In	 the	new	house	 that	Pelagia,	Drosoula	and	Antonia	now	 lived	 in,	Pelagia's	guilt	was	 the	central
issue	in	the	three	women's	lives;	the	thought	that	she	had	played	a	part	in	her	father's	death	made	Pelagia
suffer	horribly.
'He	was	seventy,'	said	Drosoula	sensibly.	'It	was	better	to	die	quickly	like	that,	trying	to	save	us.'
But	 Pelagia	 could	 not	 accept	 this.	 She	 knew	 that	 in	 the	 moment	 of	 disaster,	 her	 mind	 had	 been
spinning	with	nothing	except	 the	need	to	save	herself,	and	she	knew	that	when	her	father	had	fallen	she
should	have	tried,	even	at	the	risk	of	her	own	life,	to	drag	him	through	the	door	before	the	roof	fell	in.	She
fell	 into	 a	 bottomless	 pit	 of	 self-blame,	 took	 no	 interest	 in	 her	 appearance	 and	 did	 not	 perform	 her
household	tasks,	preferring	to	sit	by	the	doctor's	grave,	chewing	her	lips	until	they	bled.	With	her	untidy
greying	hair	and	her	pale	face,	she	simply	sat	and	watched,	as	if	expecting	his	ghost	to	rise	up	through	the
earth	and	speak	to	her.	Time	after	time,	in	the	winter	storms	and	rams,	Drosoula	and	Antonia	would	go	to
the	grave	and	drag	Pelagia	away,	while	she	sighed	and	wept.
One	day	Antonia	and	Drosoula	could	stand	no	more;	they	began	to	feel	impatient	and	angry,	and	the
old	woman	and	the	young	girl	discussed	how	they	could	cure	Pelagia	of	her	sorrow.
'Why	don't	we	just	tie	her	to	the	bed	and	hit	her?'	suggested	Antonia.
Drosoula	sighed	with	pleasure	at	 the	 thought	and	for	a	moment	wondered	whether	or	not	 it	would
work.	Then	her	eyes	brightened	and	she	kissed	the	young	girl	on	the	top	of	her	forehead.	'I've	had	an	idea,'
she	said.
At	 breakfast	 the	 next	 morning,	 Antonia	 suddenly	 announced,	 'I	 had	 a	 dream	 about	 Granddad	 last
night.'
'That's	funny,'	said	Drosoula,	'so	did	I.'
They	looked	at	Pelagia	for	some	kind	of	reaction,	but	she	simply	continued	to	tear	a	piece	of	bread
into	tiny	pieces.
'He	told	me	he	was	glad	he	was	dead,'	said	Antonia,	'because	now	he	can	be	with	Mama's	mother.'
'That's	not	what	he	told	me,'	replied	Drosoula,	and	Pelagia	asked,	'Why	are	you	talking	as	if	I'm	not
here?'
'Because	you're	not,'	replied	Drosoula	truthfully.	'You	haven't	been	here	for	a	long	time.'
'What	did	he	tell	you	then?'	enquired	Antonia.
'He	told	me	that	he	wants	Mama	to	write	the	History	of	Cephallonia	that	got	buried	in	the	earthquake.
He	said	it	spoils	the	fun	of	being	dead,	knowing	that	it's	got	lost.'
Pelagia	regarded	them	suspiciously	and	Antonia	asked	her	innocently,	'So	are	you	going	to	write	it?'
'There's	no	point	in	asking	her,'	said	Drosoula.	'She's	on	another	planet.'
'That's	not	true,'	protested	Pelagia.
'Welcome	back,'	said	Drosoula	rudely.
Pelagia	went	back	to	her	father's	grave	and	thought	about	what	Drosoula	had	said;	although	she	knew
that	the	story	of	the	dream	was	nonsense,	it	occurred	to	her	that	rewriting	the	History	would	indeed	be	a
way	to	keep	her	father's	spirit	alive.	She	travelled	into	Argostoli	and	returned	with	pens	and	a	thick	pad
of	paper.
It	was	surprisingly	easy.	Although	the	History	had	been	destroyed	in	the	earthquake,	she	had	read	it
so	many	 times	 that	 the	old	phrases	 rolled	 through	 the	kitchen	door	and	 flowed	down	her	arm	and	 right
hand	into	her	pen:
'The	ancient,	half-forgotten	island	of	Cephallonia	rises	from	the	Ionian	Sea...'
Drosoula	and	Antonia	spied	on	her	as	she	sat	at	her	table,	tapping	her	teeth	with	her	pen.	They	crept
away	to	a	safe	distance,	embraced	each	other	and	danced.
Pelagia	almost	became	the	doctor.	She	did	hardly	any	housework,	leaving	it	all	to	the	women.	Her
father's	pipe	had	been	found	 in	 the	ruins	of	 the	old	house,	and	she	stuck	 it	between	her	 teeth	as	he	had
done,	but	did	not	light	it.	She	began	to	add	small	details	to	the	text	that	she	remembered	so	well,	supplying
information	about	such	matters	as	clothes	and	baking,	and	the	cruel	but	traditional	treatment	of	widows.
The	joy	of	the	work	caused	a	deep	change	in	her.	She	sent	letters	of	enquiry	to	universities	and	discovered
that	all	over	the	world	there	were	people	who	loved	knowledge	so	much	that	they	would	spend	months
making	enquiries	on	her	behalf.
Finally,	at	the	end	of	1961,	she	put	her	completed	work	into	an	enormous	file	and	wondered	what	to
do	next.	She	learnt	from	publishers	 that	such	a	book	would	have	no	market	and	was	advised	instead	to
give	 it	 to	 a	 university.	 'I	will	when	 I'm	 dead,'	 thought	 Pelagia,	 and	 she	 left	 it	 proudly	 on	 her	 shelf	 as
visible	evidence	of	the	fact	that	she	was	an	intellectual	in	the	tradition	of	the	Ancient	Greeks.
By	 this	 time	 Antonia	 was	 a	 fresh	 and	 beautiful	 seventeen-year-old,	 who	 opposed	 her	 adopted
mother's	ideas	as	a	matter	of	principle,	and	the	two	would	sit	up	late	into	the	night	discussing	philosophy.
'When	you're	my	age,	you'll	look	back	and	see	I	was	right,'	Pelagia	would	say.
Antonia	had	no	intention	of	reaching	Pelagia's	age	and	said	so.	'I	want	to	die	before	I'm	twenty-five,'
she	said.	'I	don't	want	to	get	old.	You	old	people	caused	all	the	problems	and	it's	us	young	ones	who	have
to	solve	them.'
'Enjoy	your	dreams,'	commented	Pelagia.
CHAPTER	FIFTEEN
Alexi
It	was	about	this	time	that	mysterious	postcards	in	rather	poor	Greek	began	to	arrive	from	all	over
the	world.	From	Santa	Fe	came	one	that	said,	'You	would	like	it	here.	All	the	houses	are	made	of	mud.'
From	London:	'Mad	people:	terrible	fog.'	From	Madrid:	'Too	hot.	Everyone	asleep.'
Although	Pelagia's	 first	 thought	was	 that	her	 father's	ghost	was	visiting	his	 favourite	countries	and
was	sending	her	communications	from	beyond	the	grave,	her	second	thought	was	that	they	might	be	from
Antonio.	But	he	too	was	dead.	Perhaps,	she	thought,	these	unsigned	cards	were	from	someone	with	whom
she	had	exchanged	letters	during	the	writing	of	the	History.	Puzzled	but	pleased,	she	tied	her	collections
of	cards	together	and	put	them	in	a	box.
'You've	got	a	secret	boyfriend,'	 suggested	Antonia,	who	was	pleased	 to	discuss	 the	matter	since	 it
drew	attention	away	from	her	own	romantic	affairs,	which	both	Pelagia	and	Drosoula	were	attempting	to
discourage.
They	had	met	while	Antonia	was	earning	a	little	money	by	serving	coffee	in	a	cafe	on	the	plaza	of
Argostoli.	There	had	been	a	noisy	band	playing	in	the	square,	and	the	gentleman	who	had	had	to	rise	and
shout	his	order	in	the	young	girl's	ear	had	at	the	same	moment	realized	what	a	deliciously	attractive	ear	it
was.	Antonia	had	also	realized	that	here	was	a	man	whose	eyes	expressed	exactly	the	correct	mixture	of
strength	and	gentleness,	calmness	and	humour.
Alexi	waited	at	the	cafe	day	after	day,	choosing	the	same	table	whenever	he	could,	his	heart	bursting
with	his	desire	to	see	the	tall	young	woman	with	her	perfect	teeth	and	long	fingers.	She	brought	him	his
coffee	eagerly,	forbidding	the	other	girls,	the	waiters,	and	even	the	owner	himself	to	serve	him.	One	day
he	took	her	hand	while	she	was	putting	down	a	cup,	looked	passionately	up	at	her	and	said,	'Marry	me.'
Alexi	was	a	lawyer	whose	skilful	speeches	could	make	a	judge	weep,	but	while	Pelagia	recognized
his	excellence	in	this	area,	she	could	not	stand	the	thought	of	him	marrying	Antonia.	She	was	very	tall,	he
was	short.	She	was	only	seventeen,	and	he	was	thirty-two.	She	was	tall	and	graceful,	he	was	overweight
and	had	a	habit	of	tripping	over	things.	Pelagia	remembered	her	passion	for	Mandras	at	the	same	age	and
forbade	the	marriage,	certain	that	this	was	the	right	thing	to	do.
The	 wedding	 day	 was	 nevertheless	 delightful.	 Antonia,	 beaming	with	 happiness,	 kissed	 even	 the
strangers	who	had	come	to	stare,	and	Alexi,	sweating	with	alcohol	and	joy,	made	a	long	and	extremely
poetic	 speech,	much	of	 it	very	wisely	 in	praise	of	his	mother-in-law.	She	would	always	 remember	 the
exact	 moment	 during	 the	 celebrations	 when	 she	 had	 seen	 what	 it	 was	 about	 him	 that	 had	 awakened
Antonia's	heart.	It	was	when	he	put	his	arm	around	her,	kissed	her	on	the	cheek	and	said,	'We	are	going	to
buy	a	house	in	your	village,	with	your	permission.'	The	humble	tone	of	his	voice	and	his	implied	doubt
that	she	might	not	want	him	near	her	was	enough	to	cause	her	to	become	extremely	fond	of	him.
While	Pelagia	waited	impatiently	for	a	grandchild,	Drosoula	became	deeply	involved	in	work.	In	the
empty	 space	 by	 the	 harbour	 that	 had	 once	 been	 her	 own	 house,	 she	 put	 up	 a	 wooden	 roof	 and	 some
romantic	lamps.	She	borrowed	some	ancient	tables	and	chairs,	bought	a	cheap	oven	and	grandly	started
the	taverna	that	she	would	run	eccentrically	but	with	great	success	until	the	day	of	her	death	in	1972.
It	was	 the	 1960s,	 and	 tourists	were	 just	 beginning	 to	 arrive	 in	Cephallonia.	Wealthy	boat	 owners
passed	 on	 information	 to	 their	 friends	 about	 the	most	 unusual	 places	 to	 eat.	German	 soldiers	who	had
turned	 into	 gentle	 citizens	 with	 vast	 families	 brought	 their	 sons	 and	 daughters	 and	 told	 them,	 'This	 is
where	Daddy	was	in	the	war.	Isn't	it	beautiful?'	Italians	arrived	by	ferry,	bringing	their	pretty	white	dogs.
Consequently,	as	the	owner	of	the	only	taverna	in	the	little	port,	Drosoula	earned	enough	in	the	summer	to
do	nothing	at	all	in	the	winter.
Lemoni,	who	was	 now	married,	 immensely	 fat	 and	 the	mother	 of	 three	 children,	 helped	with	 the
serving,	and	Pelagia	came	down,	taking	the	opportunity	to	practise	her	Italian.	The	service	was	not	fast;	to
tell	the	truth,	it	was	extremely	slow.	The	guests	were	treated	unapologetically	as	members	of	Drosoula's
patient	 family,	 and	 quite	 often	 there	 was	 no	 service	 at	 all	 if	 Drosoula	 happened	 to	 like	 a	 particular
customer	with	whom	 she	was	 deep	 in	 conversation.	 The	 foreigners,	who	 loved	 and	 feared	 her,	 never
complained	 about	 her	 forgetfulness	 and	 her	 indefinite	 delays,	 and	would	 say,	 'She's	 so	 nice,	 poor	 old
thing,	it	seems	a	shame	to	hurry	her.'
Meanwhile,	year	after	year,	Pelagia	waited	for	a	grandchild	that	never	came.	'It's	my	body,'	declared
Antonia,	'and	I	have	the	right	to	choose.	Anyway,	the	world's	population	is	already	too	large.	Alexi	agrees
with	me,	so	don't	think	you	can	go	and	shout	at	him.'
'I'm	getting	old,'	Pelagia	would	say,	'that's	all.'
Time	passed.	It	was	Drosoula	who	died	first,	perfectly	upright	in	her	rocking	chair,	so	quietly	that	it
seemed	she	was	apologizing	for	having	lived	at	all.	She	was	a	courageous	woman	who	had	lived	a	few
short	years	of	happiness	with	a	husband	that	she	had	loved,	a	woman	who	had	rejected	her	son	as	a	matter
of	principle	and	lived	the	rest	of	her	days	in	willing	service	to	her	adopted	family.
After	Drosoula	was	buried	near	the	doctor,	Pelagia	realized	that	she	was	now	truly	alone.	She	had
no	idea	any	more	how	to	run	a	life,	and	it	was	with	fear	and	hopelessness	in	her	heart	that	she	took	over
Drosoula's	taverna	and	attempted	to	make	a	living.
Alexi,	who	by	his	early	thirties	had	lost	all	his	hair,	achieved	success	as	a	lawyer,	as	Pelagia	had
known	he	would,	and	acquired,	among	other	things,	a	big	Citroen	car.	When	at	last,	in	1979,	Antonia	gave
in	 to	 the	demands	of	nature	 and	became	pregnant,	 she	and	Alexi	 started	 to	hold	hands	again	 in	public,
stared	dreamily	at	babies	and	made	long	lists	of	possible	names.
'It's	going	to	be	a	girl,'	said	Pelagia.	'Really,	you	must	call	her	Drosoula.'
'But	Drosoula	was	so	big	and...'
'Ugly?	It	doesn't	matter.	We	loved	her	anyway.	Her	name	should	live.'
'Oh,	I	don't	know,	Mama...'
'I	am	an	old	woman,'	declared	Pelagia,	who	gained	great	satisfaction	from	repeating	this	statement.
'It	might	be	my	last	wish.'
'You're	sixty.	These	days	that	isn't	old.'
'Well,	I	feel	old.'
'You	don't	look	it.'
'I	didn't	bring	you	up	to	be	a	liar,'	said	Pelagia,	terribly	pleased,	nevertheless.
'I'm	thirty-four,'	said	Antonia.	'That's	old.'
When	 the	 little	 boy	 appeared,	 Pelagia	 began	 to	 refer	 to	 the	 child	 as	 Iannis,	 and	 she	 did	 this	 so
frequently	that	it	soon	seemed	obvious	to	its	parents	that	it	could	not	be	called	by	any	other	name.	If	you
called	it	Iannis,	it	smiled	and	blew	bubbles,	so	Iannis	it	was.
Alexi,	now	realizing	that	a	man	must	pass	something	on	to	his	son,	began	to	 look	around	for	good
investments.	He	built	a	small	block	of	holiday	apartments	and	installed	a	modern	kitchen	and	toilets	in	the
taverna.	He	persuaded	Pelagia	to	allow	him	to	hire	a	proper	cook,	leaving	her	as	the	manager,	and	they
split	the	profits	fifty-fifty.	On	the	white	walls	Pelagia	stuck	all	the	postcards	that	continued	to	arrive	from
the	four	corners	of	the	world.
CHAPTER	SIXTEEN
An	Unexpected	Lesson
At	 five	 years	 old,	 Iannis,	 who	 spent	 nearly	 all	 his	 time	 at	 the	 taverna	 in	 his	 grandmother's	 care,
already	 knew	 how	 to	 say	 'Hello'	 and	 'Isn't	 he	 sweet?'	 in	 six	 different	 languages.	 The	 reason	 for	 his
continual	presence	at	the	'Taverna	Drosoula'	was	that	his	father	was	building	new	holiday	apartments	and
tennis	courts	and	his	mother	was	opening	shops	that	sold	cheap	souvenirs	all	over	the	island.	Their	son
grew	up	 contentedly	 in	 his	 grandmother's	 company,	 playing	 in	 the	 clear	waters	 of	 the	 port	 and	 slowly
learning	the	Italian	that	Pelagia	insisted	on	speaking	to	him.	In	the	evening,	the	reunited	family	would	sit
together	in	the	taverna,	arguing	both	in	Italian	and	in	Greek,	while	Pelagia	would	embarrass	Iannis	with
references	to	his	infant	years.
When	he	was	ten	years	old,	Pelagia	hired	a	bozouki	player	to	entertain	her	guests	in	the	taverna.	His
name	was	Spiridon	and	he	played	his	bozouki	with	such	skill	that	he	could	persuade	even	the	Germans	to
put	 their	 arms	 around	 each	 other's	 shoulders	 and	 dance	 in	 a	 circle	while	 stamping	 on	 the	 floor.	 Iannis
loved	Spiridon,	with	his	broad	shoulders	and	his	wide	mouth	that	seemed	to	contain	a	hundred	flashing
teeth.	Pelagia	also	loved	him	because	he	reminded	her	of	her	long-lost	captain,	and	occasionally	her	heart
wished	desperately	for	a	time-machine	to	take	her	back	to	the	days	of	the	only	real	love	of	her	life.
Iannis	 did	 not	 fail	 to	 notice	 that	 Spiridon	 was	 popular	 with	 women,	 who	 at	 the	 end	 of	 every
performance	would	seize	the	red	roses	from	the	vases	in	the	middle	of	their	tables,	and	throw	them	at	him.
So	one	day	Iannis	demanded	that	Spiridon	should	teach	him	how	to	play	the	bozouki.
'Your	arms	aren't	long	enough	yet,'	said	Spiro.	 'It	would	make	more	sense	to	start	with	a	mandolin.
It's	the	same	thing	really,	but	small	enough	for	you.'
'Will	you	teach	me	to	play	it?'
'Of	course,	but	we'll	have	to	find	a	mandolin.	Otherwise	we	might	have	to	do	just	the	theory.'
Iannis	begged	his	mother	 and	 father	 to	get	him	one,	 and	 they	promised	 to	buy	one	when	 they	next
went	to	Athens,	but	forgot.	Eventually	Pelagia	told	him,	'In	fact	we	have	one	already,	but	it's	buried	under
the	old	house.	I	am	sure	Antonio	wouldn't	mind	you	digging	it	up.'
'Who's	Antonio?'
'My	Italian	fiance	who	was	killed	 in	 the	war.	 It	belonged	 to	him.	There	was	a	big	 trapdoor	 in	 the
middle	of	the	floor	and	it	was	in	a	hole	underneath.'
So	Iannis	dragged	Spiridon	up	the	hill	and	showed	him	a	ghostly	ruin	overgrown	with	long	grass,	its
broken	stones	just	visible	above	the	growth.	All	around	it	 lay	the	silent	and	deserted	remains	of	 lonely
little	houses.
'It's	the	saddest	place,'	said	Iannis.	'I	come	here	to	explore	sometimes.'	He	pointed.	'My	grandfather
died	in	there.	I'm	named	after	him.	Grandma	says	he	was	the	best	doctor	in	Greece	and	that	he	could	cure
people	by	touching	them.'
The	two	of	them	went	through	what	had	once	been	the	door	and	scratched	their	heads	when	they	saw
the	rubbish	that	lay	all	around.	Spiro	blew	out	his	cheeks	and	sighed.	'We've	got	two	days	work	here,'	he
said.	'We'll	just	have	to	get	on	with	it.'
By	 the	 next	 evening	 there	was	 a	 clear	 space	 in	 the	middle	 of	 the	 old	 floor	 and	 the	 trapdoor	 lay
revealed	in	the	area	that	had	once	been	the	kitchen.	Spiro	tried	to	get	his	fingers	under	the	iron	ring	of	the
door	but,	hard	as	he	tried,	he	could	not	move	it.	He	and	the	child	were	gazing	at	the	ring	and	scratching
their	heads	when	 they	became	aware	of	a	very	big	old	man	 in	a	black	suit,	 standing	a	 little	bent	 in	 the
doorway.	'What	are	you	doing?'	he	asked.	'Oh,	it's	you,	young	Iannis.	I	thought	you	were	looters.'
'We're	trying	to	open	this,'	said	the	boy.	'It's	stuck,	and	it's	got	something	inside	that	we	want.'
The	old	man	came	 inside	 and	examined	 the	 trapdoor	with	his	watery	 eyes	before	 slowly	bending
down	and	putting	the	tips	of	the	fingers	of	one	hand	under	the	iron	ring.	He	leaned	sideways,	putting	all
his	weight	and	strength	 into	 lifting	 the	 ring	and,	with	a	 sudden	 loud	crack,	 the	door	 flew	upwards	 in	a
cloud	of	dust.	Velisarios	rubbed	his	hands	together,	blew	on	the	tips	of	his	fingers	and	seemed	suddenly	to
become	a	tired	old	man	again.	'Goodbye,	my	friends,'	he	said,	and	made	his	way	slowly	down	the	path	to
the	new	village.
'Unbelievable,'	said	Spiro.
Inside	 the	 hiding-place,	 in	 perfect	 condition,	 they	 found	 an	 antique	 German	 record	 player,	 a
handmade	blanket,	a	bundle	of	papers	written	in	Italian	and	another	package	of	papers	with	the	title,	 'A
Personal	History	of	Cephallonia'.	There	was	also	a	cloth	bundle	containing	the	most	beautiful	mandolin
that	Spiro	had	ever	seen.
When	Iannis	showed	Pelagia	the	mandolin,	she	started	crying	and,	to	Iannis's	amazement,	she	did	not
stop	for	a	whole	week.	 Iannis	comforted	her	as	best	he	could,	climbing	on	 to	her	knees,	which	he	was
really	a	little	too	old	for,	and	wiping	her	tears,	wondering	how	it	was	possible	to	love	an	old	woman	with
stiff	 knees	 and	 thin	 grey	 hair	 so	 much.	 While	 Iannis	 comforted	 Pelagia,	 Spiro	 carefully	 cleaned	 and
polished	the	mandolin.	He	tightened	and	tuned	each	string	and	told	Iannis,	with	great	seriousness,	that	the
mandolin	was	the	most	precious	thing	he	would	ever	own,	so	that	Iannis	learned	to	regard	the	instrument
with	a	respect	that	he	had	never	felt	in	church,	when	dragged	there	by	Pelagia.
***
In	October	1993	Iannis	was	fourteen,	and	he	had	had	a	whole	summer	in	which	to	play	in	public	with
Spiridon	 and	 have	 red	 roses	 thrown	 at	 him.	 In	 order	 not	 to	 annoy	 his	 grandmother	 with	 his	 constant
practising	 -	 in	 fact	not	 to	make	her	 cry	again	 -	he	had	gone	up	 to	 the	 ruins	of	 the	old	house	 to	play	 in
private,	and	was	concentrating	very	hard	on	a	particularly	difficult	piece	of	music.	He	was	biting	his	lip
with	 the	 effort,	 and	did	not	 notice	 an	old	man	who	approached	him	and	watched	him	with	 critical	 but
delighted	 interest.	 Iannis	 nearly	 jumped	 out	 of	 his	 seat	 when	 a	 voice	 said,	 in	 a	 very	 strange	 accent,
'Excuse	me,	young	man.'
'Ah!'	Iannis	exclaimed.	'You	frightened	me.'
'I	couldn't	help	noticing,'	said	the	man,	'that	you	are	doing	something	wrong.'
'I	know,	 I'm	having	 trouble	with	 this	piece,'	 replied	 Iannis,	noticing	how	unusually	bright-eyed	 the
old	man	was,	and	how	there	was	about	him	an	atmosphere	of	energy	and	laughter.
'Let	me	show	you	how	to	place	your	fingers.'	The	old	man	came	over	to	Iannis	and	started	to	pull	the
boy's	fingers	into	place,	explaining	as	he	did	so	why	the	fingers	were	better	in	this	position.	Then	he	stood
upright	and	added,	'You	can	always	tell	a	really	good	musician	because	a	good	musician	doesn't	seem	to
be	moving	his	fingers	at	all.'
'You	seem	to	know	a	lot	about	it,'	said	Iannis.
'Well,	I	ought	to.	I've	been	a	professional	mandolin	player	for	nearly	all	my	life.	I	can	tell	that	you're
going	to	be	good.'
'Play	 me	 something?'	 asked	 the	 boy,	 offering	 him	 the	 mandolin.	 The	 old	 man	 took	 the	 mandolin,
settled	 it	 into	 this	body	and	began	 to	play	 in	 such	a	way	 that	 Iannis's	mouth	 fell	open	with	amazement.
Suddenly	the	old	man	stopped,	turned	the	mandolin	over,	examined	it	with	an	expression	of	disbelief	and
exclaimed,	'Mother	of	God,	it's	Antonia.'
'How	did	you	know	it's	called	Antonia?'	asked	Iannis,	both	surprised	and	suspicious.	'Have	you	seen
it	before?'
'Where	did	you	find	it?	Who	gave	it	to	you?'
'I	dug	it	out	of	that	hole,'	said	Iannis,	pointing	to	the	open	trapdoor.	'Grandma	told	me	it	was	there.'
'And	would	your	grandmother	be	Kyria	Pelagia,	daughter	of	Dr	Iannis?'
'That's	me.	I'm	called	Iannis,	after	him.'
The	old	man	sat	next	to	the	boy	on	the	wall,	still	holding	the	mandolin,	and	wiped	his	forehead	with
a	handkerchief,	seeming	suddenly	very	anxious.	 'Tell	me,	young	man,	 is	your	grandmother	alive?	Is	she
happy?'	he	asked	finally.
'She	cries	sometimes,	ever	since	we	dug	Antonia	and	all	the	other	things	out	of	the	hole.'
'And	what	about	your	grandfather?	Is	he	well?'
The	boy	seemed	confused.	'What	grandfather?'	he	asked.
'Not	 your	 father's	 father.	 I	mean	Kyria	 Pelagia's	 husband,'	 said	 the	 old	man,	wiping	 his	 forehead
again.
'There	isn't	one.	I	didn't	even	know	she	had	one.'
'Are	you	saying	that	Kyria	Pelagia	hasn't	got	a	husband?	You	haven't	got	a	grandfather?'
'I	 suppose	 I	must	have,	but	 I've	never	heard	of	him.	 I've	only	got	my	father's	 father,	and	he's	half-
dead.'
The	old	man	stood	up,	looked	around	him	and	said,	'This	was	a	beautiful	place.	I	had	the	best	years
of	my	life	here.	And	do	you	know	what?	I	was	going	to	marry	your	grandmother	once.	I	think	it's	time	I
saw	her	again.'
The	two	of	them	were	walking	down	the	hill	when	Iannis	stopped	suddenly.	 'If	you're	the	one	who
played	the	mandolin	and	was	going	to	marry	Grandma...	does	that	mean	you're	the	ghost?'	The	autumnal
sun	shone	briefly	through	the	cloud,	and	the	old	man	paused	for	thought.
CHAPTER	SEVENTEEN
The	Return
Antonio	Corelli,	although	in	his	seventies,	rediscovered	a	certain	youthful	energy	in	his	old	limbs	as
he	danced	about,	trying	to	avoid	being	hit	by	the	frying	pans	that	Pelagia	was	busily	throwing	at	him.	'You
pig!'	she	screamed.	'All	my	life	waiting,	all	my	life	thinking	you	were	dead.	And	you	alive	and	me	a	fool.
How	can	you	break	such	promises?	Betrayer!'
Corelli	backed	against	the	wall,	trying	to	hold	off	the	broomstick	that	Pelagia	was	waving	at	him.	'I
told	you,'	he	cried.	'I	thought	you	were	married.'
'Married!'	she	exclaimed	bitterly.	'No	such	luck!	Thanks	to	you,	you	rat.'	She	made	a	move	as	if	she
was	going	to	hit	him	across	the	head	with	the	broom	handle.
'I	came	back	for	you.	1946.	I	came	round	the	bend	and	there	you	were	with	the	little	baby,	looking	so
happy.'
'Was	I	married?	Who	told	you	that?	So	I	adopt	a	baby	that	someone	leaves	on	my	doorstep...	Couldn't
you	have	said,	"Excuse	me,	but	is	this	your	baby?"'
'Please	stop	hitting	me.	I	came	back	every	year,	you	know	I	did.	You	saw	me,	I	always	saw	you	with
the	child.	I	was	so	bitter	I	couldn't	speak.	But	I	had	to	see	you.'
'Bitter?	I	don't	believe	my	ears.	You?	Bitter?'
'For	ten	years,'	said	Corelli,	'for	ten	years	I	was	so	bitter	that	I	even	wanted	to	kill	you.	And	then	I
thought,	well,	OK,	 I	was	away	 for	 three	years,	 perhaps	 she	 thought	 I	wasn't	 coming	back,	perhaps	 she
thought	I	was	dead,	perhaps	she	thought	I'd	forgotten,	perhaps	she	met	someone	else	and	fell	in	love.	As
long	as	she's	happy.	But	I	still	came	back,	every	year,	just	to	see	you	were	all	right.	Is	that	betrayal?'
'And	did	you	ever	see	a	husband?	And	did	you	think	what	 it	did	 to	me	when	I	 ran	 to	you	and	you
disappeared?	Did	you	think	about	my	heart?'
'OK,	so	I	jumped	the	wall	and	hid.	I	had	to.	I	thought	you	were	married,	I	told	you.	Pelagia,	please,
this	is	a	terrible	embarrassment	for	the	customers.	Can't	we	go	for	a	walk	and	talk	about	it	on	the	beach?'
She	looked	round	at	all	the	faces,	some	of	them	grinning,	some	of	them	pretending	to	look	the	other
way.	 Everywhere	 there	were	 overturned	 chairs	 and	 tables	 that	 Pelagia	 had	 thrown	 to	 the	 floor	 in	 her
anger.	 'You	 should	 have	 died,'	 she	 shouted,	 'and	 left	 me	 with	 my	 dreams.	 You	 never	 loved	 me.'	 She
marched	out	of	the	door,	leaving	Corelli	bowing	repeatedly	to	the	customers	and	saying,	 'Please	excuse
us.'
Two	hours	later	they	were	sitting	on	a	familiar	rock,	gazing	out	over	the	sea	at	the	yellow	lights	of
the	harbour	reflected	in	the	blackened	waters.	'I	see	you	got	my	postcards,	then,'	he	said.
'In	Greek.	Why	did	you	learn	Greek?'
'I	was	ashamed	of	being	an	invader.	I	was	so	ashamed	that	I	didn't	want	to	be	Italian	any	more.	I've
been	living	in	Athens	for	about	twenty-five	years.	I'm	a	Greek	citizen.'
'Did	you	become	a	composer?'
'Yes,	I've	played	my	music	all	over	the	world.	I	wrote	my	first	big	piece	of	music	for	you.	It's	called
"Pelagia's	March".'	He	noticed	that	she	was	trying	not	to	cry,	and	thought	how	emotional	she	had	become
in	her	old	age.	She	had	even	knocked	out	his	false	teeth,	so	that	they	had	fallen	in	the	sand	and	had	to	be
washed	in	the	sea.
'I	 feel	 like	an	unfinished	poem,'	 said	Pelagia,	with	a	heavy	sigh.	Corelli	 felt	 a	 sting	of	 shame	and
avoided	a	reply.
'Everything's	changed.	Everything	here	used	to	be	so	pretty	and	now	the	houses	look	like	boxes	made
of	cement.'
'And	 we	 have	 electricity	 and	 telephones	 and	 running	 water	 and	 proper	 toilets	 and	 earthquake-
resistant	houses.	Is	that	so	bad?'
There	was	a	silence,	during	which	the	thoughts	of	both	of	them	returned	to	the	past.	 'I	see	you	still
have	my	ring,'	he	said.
'Only	 because	 I	 couldn't	 get	 it	 off,'	 she	 answered.	 'I	 had	 it	 altered	 to	 fit	 and	 now	 I	 regret	 it.'	 She
hesitated.	'So	did	you	get	married?	I	suppose	you	did.'
'Me?	No.	As	 I	 said,	 I	was	very	bitter	 for	years	 and	years.	 I	was	horrible	 to	 everyone,	 especially
women,	and	then	I	became	successful	and	I	was	all	over	the	world,	flying	from	one	place	to	another.	And,
anyway,	who	wants	to	be	with	someone	who	is	dreaming	of	someone	else?'
'Antonio	Corelli,	I	can	see	that	you	can	still	tell	lies	with	your	silver	tongue.	And	how	can	you	bear
to	look	at	me	now?	I'm	an	old	woman.	I	feel	ashamed	to	be	so	old	and	ugly.	You	look	the	same,	just	old
and	 thin,	but	 I	 look	 like	someone	else,	 I	know	it.	 I	want	you	 to	 remember	me	properly.	Now	I'm	just	a
lump.'
'You	forget	that	I	came	to	spy	on	you.	If	you	see	things	happen	gradually,	there's	no	shock.	You're	just
the	 same.'	 He	 squeezed	 her	 hand	 gently	 and	 said,	 'Don't	 worry,	 it's	 still	 Pelagia.	 Pelagia	 with	 a	 bad
temper,	but	still	Pelagia.'
'Did	you	ever	think	that	I	might	have	been	raped	and	that	was	why	I	had	a	baby?'
'Yes,	I	did.'
'And...?'
'I	admit	it	made	a	difference.	We	had	some	ideas	about	dishonour	then,	didn't	we?	Thank	God	we're
not	so	stupid	now.'
'The	man	who	tried	to	rape	me...	I	shot	him.'
He	looked	at	her	in	disbelief.	'You	shot	him?'
'I	was	never	dishonoured.	He	was	the	fiance	I	had	before	you.'
'You	never	said	anything	about	a	fiance.'
'Jealous?'
'Of	 course	 I'm	 jealous.'	 The	 emotion	 was	 beginning	 to	 stir	 him	 a	 little	 too	much	 and	 he	 tried	 to
control	his	feelings.	Pelagia	decided	it	was	time	to	change	the	subject.	'I	want	to	show	you	something.	You
never	read	Carlo's	papers,	did	you?	Come	back	to	the	taverna	and	eat,	and	I'll	give	you	his	writing.	We	do
an	excellent	snails	dish.'
'Snails!'	he	exclaimed.	'I	remember	all	about	snails.'
Corelli	sat	at	the	table	with	its	plastic	cloth	and	read	through	the	stiff	old	sheets	that	had	curled	up	at
the	corners.	As	he	read,	he	frowned,	and	once	or	twice	he	blinked	as	if	in	disbelief.	When	he	had	finished
reading,	Pelagia	came	and	sat	opposite	him.	'Well?'	she	asked.
He	 tapped	 the	 pile	 of	 papers.	 'I	 wish	 you	 hadn't	 shown	me	 these.	 I'm	more	 old-fashioned	 than	 I
thought.	I	had	no	idea.'
'He	loved	you.	Are	you	disgusted?'
'Sad...	It's	a	shock.	I	can't	help	it.'
'He	wasn't	just	another	hero,	was	he?	He	was	more	complicated.	Poor	Carlo.'
They	began	to	talk	more	freely.	'Are	you	very	famous	then?'	Pelagia	asked.
'Only	in	the	sense	that	other	musicians	have	heard	of	me.	I've	retired	now...	In	fact,	I	was	thinking...	I
want	to	rebuild	the	old	house.	I	want	to	live	in	a	nice	place.	A	place	with	memories.'
'Without	water	and	electricity?'
'I'll	put	them	in.	Would	you	sell	me	the	site?'
'You're	insane.	I	don't	even	know	if	we	own	it.'
'Then	you	don't	mind.	I'd	pay	you	to	come	and	clean	it,'	he	said	wickedly.
She	took	him	seriously.	 'What?	Do	I	need	money?	With	this	taverna?	Go	home	to	Athens.	Anyway,
Lemoni	would	do	it.'
'Little	Lemoni?	She's	still	here?'
'She's	as	big	as	a	ship	and	a	grandmother.'
He	fell	silent	again,	 remembering	 the	past,	 then	said,	 'So	do	I	have	your	permission	 to	rebuild	 the
house?'
'No,'	she	said,	still	holding	on	to	her	anger.
'Oh.'	He	looked	at	her	doubtfully.	He	would	return	to	the	topic	at	a	later	date,	he	decided.	'I'm	going
to	come	and	see	you	tomorrow,'	he	said,	'with	a	surprise.'
'I	don't	want	any	surprises.	Go	to	hell	with	your	surprises.	You	owe	me	a	life.'
'Ah.	I'll	bring	you	a	life	then.'
'Stupid	old	man.'
He	turned	up	the	next	day	with	screaming	brakes	in	a	cloud	of	blue	smoke.	Pelagia	shook	her	head
disapprovingly	as	he	climbed	carefully	off	 the	motorbike,	which	was	bright	red	and	looked	as	 if	 it	had
been	designed	for	racing.	'Do	you	know	where	we're	going?'	the	captain	said.	'We're	going	to	see	if	Casa
Nostra	is	still	there...'	he	tapped	the	machine	'...	on	a	motorbike.'
'Do	you	really	think	the	hut	survived	the	earthquake?	And	do	you	really	think	I'm	going	on	a	thing	like
that?	At	my	age?'
'I	hired	it	specially.	It	goes	very	well.'
'No,'	she	said.	'My	knees	are	too	stiff.'
'Don't	you	want	to	see	Casa	Nostra?'
'Not	with	a	madman.'
'I've	got	it	for	two	days.	We	can	sit	on	a	rock	and	watch	the	sea.'	It	took	a	long	time	to	persuade	her.
As	they	swung	dangerously	from	side	to	side	along	the	stony	roads,	she	held	on	tightly	to	his	waist,	her
face	buried	between	his	shoulders.	Corelli	noticed	that	she	held	on	to	him	even	more	desperately	than	in
the	old	days,	and	from	time	to	time	he	deliberately	swung	to	one	side	of	the	road	so	that	she	would	hold
him	tighter.	'May	the	saints	save	me,'	thought	Pelagia,	and	in	search	of	safety	slid	her	arms	right	round	his
waist	and	linked	her	fingers	together.
-	THE	END	-
Hope	you	have	enjoyed	the	reading!
Come	back	to	http://english-e-books.net/	to	find	more	fascinating	and	exciting	stories!
