 
Velichko V.L. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CAUCASUS 
 
RUSSIAN AFFAIRS 
 
AND 
 
INTERTRIBAL PROBLEMS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Baku - «Âàòàí» - 2007 
 2
 
 
 
 
Velichko V.L. “Caucasus. Russian affairs and intertribal 
problems”. — Baku: “Âàòàí”, 2007-154 p. 
 
 
 
 
 
The book “Caucasus” written by the prominent russian 
scientist, journalist and historian V.Ë.Velichko is one of the 
most valuable reliquiae of Russian culture. It is of great scien-
tific interest. “Elm” publishing house realizes issuing of his-
torical books on “The history and culture of the peoples of the 
USSR”. The book “Caucasus” is the first edition of this series.  
Although there existed a number of uncomplimentary re-
ports about the native inhabitants of the Caucasus including 
azerbaijanians, the publishing house took an opportunity of 
presenting the book “Caucasus” to the wide circle of readers 
from its original version. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
© «Âàòàí» publishing  2007
 3
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The first pages of this book were printed in V.L.Velichko’s 
life-time; the death prevented him from completing a deed 
which he considered to be one of his major and fundamental 
tasks and the thought that the labour endured for many years 
wouldn’t be completed agitated him till the end of his life. 
Granting his last will, we completed publishing the 
book with participation of the person who collaborated with 
Vasiliy Lvovich Velichko on the problems of Caucasus and 
was well informed of his views and plans. 
A number of articles, published in “Russkiy Vestnik” 
served as a basis of the book; first four chapters were carefully 
worked out by the author, the rest were enriched as far as pos-
sible and annotated from V.L.Velichko’s scientific works. 
A part of the last materials is given in the “Supple-
ment” of the book. 
Unfortunately, we had no chance to enrich the book 
with materials as the author could do it; we set the task not 
to use any thought which differs from his views. 
 
 
Ïóáëèñùåð
 4
 
 
 
1. Introduction. 
 
What a still magic word – Caucasus! How it breathes 
with memories indelible for the entire Russian people; how 
bright is the dream flashing up in mind hearing this name, 
the dream invincible for neither everyday banality, nor 
strict thrift! Is there anybody in Russia, whose family sev-
eral decades ago had not sacrificed its blood and tears to 
this mysterious land, raised ardent prayers to heaven anx-
iously listening to threatening echoes of the exuberant 
struggle boiling far away?! Snow crowned giants and 
burning rays of the midday sun, and legends of old im-
bued with the deepest tragedy, and spontaneous heroism 
of sons of Caucasus – all that is sung by the people and 
prophetic mouthpieces of its world outlook, inspired by 
torches of the Russian idea – our great poets. 
The Caucasus cannot be alien to us: it has taken too 
many of various efforts, is too far organically connected 
with the great Russian world vocation, with the Russian 
cause. 
 With regard to numerous attempts (mostly not dis-
interested) to disorient the Russian society in the inter-
tribal issues it is necessary to establish once and forever 
the life and correct point of view on the Russian cause in 
general. Equally sincere people may have different 
points of view. Some people consider serving to the 
Russian cause the struggle for existence and prosperity 
of people-statehood, the struggle unrestrained by any 
precepts of history, norms of morality or humanity; they 
think that everything foreign, although valuable, must be 
wiped out from the earth since it doesn’t merge quick 
 5
enough and without leaving a trace with our people-
statehood element. I would call that cruel approach the 
German rather than the Russian. It contradicts to the 
Russian world ideal and undermines one of the most firm 
bases of its spiritual and hence political might. 
The other people go to the opposite extreme: they are 
ready to give up everything Russian in favour of something 
breaking our unity, eroding our state power and being 
negative phenomenon itself. This is an approach of the 
“school” of non-resistant with pseudo-national programme, 
real leaders or shadowed instigators of which of course are 
the Russian people. Such a non-resistance to the isolating 
evil forces, even in those rare cases when it is disinter-
ested, is only possible with detriment to the vitality of the 
Russian patriotism and not justified at all by speculations, 
which are usual in such occasions, on topic that we are – 
great and powerful people. Great people – is this a reason 
to allow anyone to encroach on bread of our children, vital 
force of junior brothers, subject our sanctuaries to profana-
tion and allow isolated foreigners to override weak and 
compliant bearers of the Russian cause?! How long the 
definition of great will be equalized with definition of stupid, 
weak and unprincipled?! 
Only the following third point of view is correct, just 
and at the same time practical. The great and powerful 
doesn’t look at life with somnolent eyes, but in due time 
establishes a truth of life, develops its collective or 
unique identity being equipped with inherited legends of 
the past, “cold notices of mind and sad marks of heart”. 
The great and powerful is not satisfied with patterns and 
nicknames covering untrue, blurred or parti-coloured 
concepts. He must press up lazy blur by effort of mind, 
has to distinguish colours and tints of the parti-coloured 
picture. 
 6
If the multicoloured Caucasus still remains the tortur-
ing puzzle for our educated classes, then it means that 
they are neither great, nor powerful, and not absolutely 
free from slavery of strangers’ words and concepts, from 
the yoke of the abovementioned and alas, typically-
Russian lazy blurriness. Recent spring up of the Russian 
Convention and what’s more important its development 
independent from external fake and arch influences con-
firm correctness of my words, and along with that shines 
as bright ray of hope for better days, rise of the Russian 
farsightedness, Russian thoughtfulness and spiritual 
power. 
Our soldiers and people after them called the Cau-
casus “deathful”, because its conquest was accompanied 
by incredible strain of heroism and heavy losses. But our 
nation doesn’t spare sacrifices: the dead do not have 
shame, and exploits are crowned with glory. “Deathful” na-
ture of the Caucasus took different shape, perhaps disas-
trous, and maybe useful at the end, discovering internal 
pests of our life, feebleness of our spirit, omissions and er-
rors of our provincial policy, even blurriness and instability 
of the state-national attitude to world of most of the Rus-
sian people, including those serving, as well as those un-
dertaking courage to influence society through press.  
The Caucasus is the large academy with various 
natural laboratories opening to observer and explorer 
wide open space for independent conclusions. It has 
special importance for sociologist and particularly for the 
representative of the state science, which is spread so lit-
tle, - alas! – even among our ruling classes, who should 
more consciously treat their duties before motherland 
and Emperor instead of regarding life from the point of 
view of the 20th day of month. The phenomena of life and 
human characters in the Caucasus are very bold even 
 7
when they are simultaneously complicate. Combination 
and sometimes complete coincidence of the racial issues 
with socio-economic ones is of special importance. This 
feature of the Caucasian life predetermines that consid-
erable difficulty of administration in the region and super-
vision over activity of local authorities, which sometimes 
truly and sometimes pretended to misunderstand practi-
cal meaning of the peculiar basis of local social estab-
lishment and everyday life. 
To look to the roots of main issues and phenomena 
one has to study the past at least in general terms. 
 8
 
 
 
2. The character of the past. 
 
The past of the Caucasian region represents the 
picture, which is as multi-coloured as its natural condi-
tions and multi-tribal combination of population. Gener-
alizations of positive character are quite difficult under 
such circumstances, some bright colours may mark only 
some most obvious contours of that past, which are, in 
addition, negative from the cultural point of view. 
First, the Caucasus had never had peace, neither 
internal, nor external. For centuries it was one of the 
routes for aggressive invasions of Asia into Europe; 
passing through its mountains and valleys every tribe 
washing away the seeds of local culture by its wave left 
its own trace instead, mostly ill-natured, because invad-
ing tribes are impudent about everything and everybody. 
On the other hand, this highly crossed landscape, which 
is rich for impassable gorges and unattainable heights, 
given significant climatic, soil and tribal complexity could 
not become the territory of tightly joint and culturally de-
veloped country. The mountainous thickets used to be 
and still inhabited by many small tribes different for origin 
and rudiments of racial cultures, engaged themselves in 
permanent fight with each other, but nevertheless united, 
in biologic sense, by similar conditions of nature, indus-
try, way of life and religious substrata, which regardless 
of differences of formal worship consists of total adora-
tion to the terrible forces of nature, subjugating the hu-
man, his thoughts, character and belief. These people 
could not create a state, because they are unskilled for 
statehood at all, which, by the way, hardly can strongly 
 9
develop at the crossed heights since some gorges be-
come isolated from the rest of the world for seven or 
eight months a year by snow or waters.  
To the south of the main range, in the western Tran-
scaucasia since prehistoric times settled the Kartvelian 
tribe (Georgians, Imeretians, Gurians, Mingrels, Lazis, 
Ajarians, Kobuletis and others); this tribe united for short 
periods in the Middle Ages, but was dispersed for the 
rest of the time. In the eastern Transcaucasia – there are 
tribes of Turk-Mongolian-Iranian blood and Armenians, 
the people of unidentified origin with undoubtedly signifi-
cant addition of Jewish, Syria-Chaldea and Gipsy blood. 
Only the Georgians among all those tribes have dem-
onstrated the utmost ability for statehood, but even they 
had failed to establish a state in true meaning of this word. 
It was hindered, first of all, by geography of country open-
ing wide space for the feudal isolation; second, chronic 
alien anarchy was serious obstacle: the wild hordes used 
to raid unexpectedly and so great in number that some-
times resistance was not successful; invasions left their 
sorrowful imprint and all country’s life was subjected to 
endless accidents. Hence – absence of thrifty households 
and comfort being fruits of lasting peace, sharply offending 
one’s eyes nearly everywhere in the Caucasus. Even huge 
proprietors set up their well-furnished country-seats only in 
recent times. Life in general still bears traces of bivouac 
character: such strong is the habit to expect an armed raid, 
to conceal or remove property; that centuries old habit al-
ready became a feature of character and still hinders blos-
soming of peaceful culture and development of the so-
called bourgeois virtues. 
The climatic conditions and particularly malaria vari-
ous for symptoms, but almost omnipresent in the Tran-
scaucasia has been in the past and is still the huge obsta-
 10
cle for the cultural development of the region. The no-
madic way of life practiced by the most part of the Cauca-
sian population, usually attributed by unperceptive ob-
servers to inherent instinct of nomads, can be explained 
and justified more rationally only through climatic condi-
tions: the nomads save their lives and health in summer 
climbing to the heights from valleys and steppes beset by 
malaria and where their flocks would stay without food. 
Whatever the reason for migration is its evident result 
would be again absence of household and lack of culture.  
Influence of the climatic and general natural condi-
tions on public-state life is extremely serious: malaria, 
and mountainous rivers, first drying up and then flooding 
beyond measure, and storms, and downpours, and hail, 
and scorching heat – all that maliciously affecting the ag-
riculture leaves deep negative imprint on the moral 
stance of population, smoothing over tribal differences by 
common troubles; mind loses consistency, will – its en-
durance, morality – its catechism, labour – its system, life 
in general – its rational foundations. 
Quite notorious that in different ages of old some of 
the most cultured tribes – the Greeks, the Romans, the 
Persians (at the time of blossoming of the Persian civili-
zation), and then the Genoese and others – tried to es-
tablish colonies in the Caucasus – but none of them and 
never succeeded. The Transcaucasia is full of traces of 
different styled architecture, names, titles and legends of 
clearly extraneous origin; faces of different nationalities 
bear the mark of cross-breading of many races; but in 
general there is little of something large, solid, and not 
erased by extraneous influence or time. 
With a view to that fact it should be mentioned that 
before the beginning of the XIX century none of the states 
neighbouring with the Transcaucasia had an opportunity 
 11
to establish itself firmly in this land. In fact, explanation for 
that should be sought not only in local reasons, but in 
character and political defects of states and tribes claim-
ing that region as well; nevertheless local particularities 
had an overriding importance, and that can be seen even 
from history of this land since the time of its unification 
with Russia and extremely slow assimilation of local tribes 
with the state ethnos. 
The most evident and deep enough of all traces left 
in the Transcaucasia by its neighbours is the imprint of the 
Persian administration, or better say misadministration. 
The khanates of the eastern Transcaucasia formed by 
treason of local rulers committed against their duties be-
fore the remote central Persian authorities, they were le-
gally considered to be Persian provinces, but in fact they 
were independent despotic possessions, smaller copies of 
the Persian specimens. Reasons for that were partially ra-
cial because majority of rulers of those domains were to 
the greater or lesser extent Persians by origin; on the 
other hand, the shortcomings of the Persian state struc-
ture and, by the way, widely practiced family succession 
of administrative positions played role as well. 
It’s clear that in the mountainous areas blessed with 
all natural conditions for military isolation that custom 
could not fail to empower feudal structure of life, anyway 
evoked by local conditions; the racial difference between 
the rulers and their subjects is undoubtedly one of the 
factors of feudalism – and that factor used to be im-
planted periodically during the rise of the Persian influ-
ence on the Transcaucasia. For instance, mainland 
Georgia (Provinces of Tiflis and part of Elisabethpol) has 
been subjected to strong Persian influence, and Imeretia 
and other western-Kartvelian possessions – to the Turk-
ish, although less intensive, but equal for its conse-
 12
quences. Political shortcomings, administrative, spiritual 
and communal structures of both neighbours, being im-
planted in different local conditions, have affected the 
multi-coloured Transcaucasia and reflected in shape of, 
undoubtedly, uniting, but devaluing features of mostly 
negative character.   
The dynasties in both of the Oriental despotic 
states, Turkey and Persia, do not last long, and their 
power is subject to sharp changes like mountainous riv-
ers; the bureaucratic system providing stability of political 
trends, interests of popular welfare, rights and safety is 
not available at all; everything is based upon graft, flat-
tery, force and harem intrigues, i.e. foul accidents. Fluc-
tuation of uncontrolled state income influenced political 
instability and people’s spirit. 
Yesterday’s insurgent feudal, predating administra-
tor, plunderer or traitor instead of the deserved punish-
ment could in one moment gain respect and power, sat-
isfying the Asian ruler by beautiful woman, horse, jewels 
or just brilliant flattery. 
The deepest and all-inclusive materialism was the 
driving force excluding any adherence to principle in the 
European sense of this word; the harem intrigues and 
sensitively-oriental psychology in general played an over-
riding role even in areas illuminated by the light of Chris-
tianity. Even in Georgia for many centuries fighting for its 
faith and tribal originality, the Christianity in a view of the 
abovementioned mighty reasons had accepted special 
local colour instead of lighting up world outlook of people 
and bringing in various fruits of its main constructive 
ideas. 
Since the simple groupings of people are the only 
possible combinations under such anarchical disorder of 
things, besides, evoked by instinct of self-preservation, 
 13
so kinship with its narrow morality and weak adherence 
to principle became such a grouping. Tight borders of the 
latter are confined between the following formulas: “my 
relative was assaulted or killed, therefore I’ve to become 
defender or avenger” and “my relative committed a 
crime, but since he’s my relative he is right, and I will 
take all actions to protect him from punishment”. 
Deep traces of that psychology remained there till 
now. It is clear that noble and pride families building up 
reserves for struggle for their supremacy by military hero-
ism, skilled policy, gain of treasury and harem success 
were in turns the masters and offenders of any inde-
pendent truth. It took them nothing to betray unexpect-
edly their tsars or other masters, to suppress interests 
and sacred feelings of the slaved people, and even to put 
on the mask of a convert or to deny completely the faith 
of their fathers in case of emergency. 
The people’s mass, settled on the land and cultivat-
ing it, is always oppressed by such anarchy – this is why 
the Georgian people still venerates the memory of the 
king David the Reviver and “queen of queens” the great 
Tamara, whose reign established more decent order, il-
luminated by glory of triumph over the alien enemies; this 
is why overwhelming majority of plain people of the Tran-
scaucasia blindly believes in power and justice of the 
White Tsar, despite many negative aspects of admini-
stration in the province. 
Although the spotty mass of the Caucasian popula-
tion (except for mountainous patriarchal republics) has 
for many centuries been predominantly passive and suf-
fering element of the local history and could not specially 
love its fickle rulers or consciously share their views – the 
latter left their special mark; oriental despotic rules and 
definitions deducted from that have infiltrated legal men-
 14
tality of people down to the lowest strata. Western-
Georgian peasant, and Kakhetian, and subject of the 
khan of Shirvan or Ganja equally knew that gold, flattery, 
woman, boys may be paid to indemnify from unjust op-
pression, or fulfilment of state requirements, rationality of 
which was unclear for everybody, and from deserved 
punishment for crime. 
Arrival of the official person itself used to serve a 
signal for graft, and nearly legal, since there was no fi-
nancial system the positions in accordance with the ori-
ental tradition were unpaid and relied solely on bribes 
from population and gifts to different authorities. 
Absence of wide adherence to principle constitutes 
the core line of local psychology, environment and a kind 
of law of local life. A man entering this environment must 
extremely brace himself for not to be exposed to corroding 
influence. 
Since several millions of people for many centuries 
got used to regard things with vale practicality, represen-
tatives of differing views get infertile soil for their realiza-
tion; one can assert in advance that if they are not execu-
tors of the thoroughly thought rational system, but in addi-
tion are being put in difficult living conditions – then they, 
as well as the entrusted tasks will inevitably give way to 
the established local traditions, the Russian decency and 
service honour will succumb to assault of communal Asian 
conditions, undermining state prestige and future destiny 
of the province. 
Obviously transfer from one type of establishment 
and way of life to another must comply with popular psy-
chology, and change of nature of relations must be ac-
companied with possibly less alteration and complication 
of their forms. Even with this condition in mind the work 
directed to the cultural unification of any land, remarkable 
 15
for alien communal rules, requires guidance of leaders 
extremely wise, steadfast and having comprehensive 
knowledge of local conditions. Not only servants of law 
and order must be so, but also creators by vocation, 
zealots of the widely understood national-state cause. 
It was realized even before unification of Georgia by 
outstanding Russian people like Potemkin and Bur-
nashev, representative of Russia at the court of tsar 
Heracly II. The recently published book dedicated to the 
latter person contains a lot of interesting elements de-
scribing the epoch. Burnashev and his immediate leader 
count Pavel Potemkin, commander of the Northern-
Caucasus troops, - were truly Russian men confident in 
the Russian truth and benevolent to population of the 
Caucasus, unlike their contemporary foreign adventurer 
Totleben. 
“Your labour does honour to you, its fruits – fame to 
the name and gratitude of the Georgian people”, wrote 
Potemkin to Burnashev. He interferes even into smallest 
details; for instance, once having heard about the quarrel 
between two princes because of some princess, he rec-
ommended Burnashev “to take trouble to explain them 
that there’s no such maiden in the world which could be 
worth of quarrel between brothers”. Potemkin remarks 
even slightest mistakes. “I have received a complaint 
from knyaz Erast Amilakhvarov, claiming that doctor at 
your service took away his wife and broke his head. 
Study this case, do not allow self-will to start in a land 
where one has to catch hearts and tie to himself.” Advice 
is as simple, as great. 
But the first place among the Russian governors of 
this land undoubtedly belongs to Yermolov as a man who 
didn’t give way to self-will. He was threat for disobedient, 
strict, but just protector of peaceful interests of all people, 
 16
which he had been nursing in spirit of law and order, and 
he was the first person to realize the importance of the 
Russian national element as a tool consolidating aliens 
with Russia and seriously strengthening Russian author-
ity in the province. 
Yermolov invented and started realization of the 
most practical of all previously applied methods of the 
Russian colonization: he had established a settled way of 
life for the married soldiers of the Caucasian troops at 
the military settlements under head-quarters; there were 
formed 9 of so-called married companies by 1826; the 
process was followed by land disputes with local popula-
tion; the lands comfortable from military, climatic and ag-
ricultural perspective were selected. 
At that time the administration clearly realized that 
after having people resettled at the strange land one 
can’t leave them for their own fortune; assistance was 
given not only on paper, but in deed. 
Fruits of that action still remain on and if there is 
anything to be sorry about, that would be less wide and 
confident continuation of that activity after Yermolov. No 
matter how jealous was Paskevich about Yermolov’s 
fame, how tried to demonstrate supremacy over him – in 
this issue he had to follow prescriptions of his predeces-
sor; but that service to the Russian popular cause was 
counterbalanced by Armenian colonization of some parts 
of Transcaucasia, which had actively started under 
Paskevich and taken clearly dangerous scale, specifi-
cally now, right after the sublime Throne just recently 
recognized that as undesirable. 
The same mistake, by the way, was made earlier by 
Yermolov himself, asking for establishment in Georgia of 
colony of the “industrious Germans, whose good exam-
ple and obvious benefit to economy would implant a de-
 17
sire with the local people to imitate them”. The further 
events broke that hope, since those German colonies 
once having established their welfare at the expense of 
the treasury and local neighbours, didn’t implant anything 
good to the latter, but sometimes turned them into subju-
gated servants. 
The Russian settlements founded by farsighted Yer-
molov reached their absolute blooming under governor 
knyaz Vorontsov, whose instinct to creation had mani-
fested itself more successfully in this case, than in many 
other spheres. 
Although knyaz Vorontsov followed on Yermolov’s 
path in taking care about Russian popular interests, but 
anyway with less consistency and persistence. For in-
stance, he realized the state interest in engagement of 
Russian tradesmen and capitalists to the Transcaucasia, 
but after the first unsuccessful attempt in Tiflis he aban-
doned that idea and gave his support to the Armenian 
tradesmen and manufacturers, opening them wide op-
portunities for enrichment and inciting them to entrepre-
neurship. He used to give them contracts, places for 
shops and caravansaries, and sometimes almost vio-
lently involved them to the profitable business activity. 
He did much for the “Europeanization”, but as much 
for the cultural isolation of the local society: he used to 
invite local representatives to the shining balls and eve-
nings, support literal development of local languages; for 
example, the first Georgian theatre was established dur-
ing his term. In general terms, the period of the Russian 
reign from Yermolov to Vorontsov inclusively was ex-
tremely happy time for the spiritual bloom of population 
of the province and strengthening of the Russian cause 
as well… By the way, the Georgian poetry being remark-
able for such an exhausted and small people had blos-
 18
somed. The names of Baratov, Vakhtang Orbeliany, and 
later on – princes Ilya Chavchavadze, Akaky Ceretely 
and others are quite popular across the Caucasus and 
their works have been translated into many European 
languages. 
Being the Russian patriot for his feelings and inten-
tions knyaz Vorontsov for his mindset and political pro-
gramme was rather western-European, Anglo man with 
aristocratic tendencies. It’s not only he attached extensive 
interpretation to the Georgian feudal views and rules, but 
introduced excessively aristocratic and absolutely alien 
elements into the life of the Muslim population, which was 
democratic by nature of its religion and racial traditions. 
Enormous emergence of knyaz, beks, agalars and 
others was harming not only interests of popular life and 
rational Russianization, but representatives of the higher 
class themselves, and consequently has created such 
order of things, where one could hardly miss political and 
social danger. Once having multiplied the higher class 
artificially knyaz Vorontsov paved the way to its devasta-
tion because life became more complicated and dearer. 
Thereafter that class absolutely lost its prestige, although 
that state official pinned exaggerated hopes on its unify-
ing role. There is a conjecture that it was not a mistake 
by Vorontsov, quite to the contrary, it was farsighted pol-
icy aimed to weaken the strongest local elements. 
Nevertheless, his name is extremely popular across 
the Transcaucasia mainly because he had acknowl-
edged legality and usefulness of original cultural devel-
opment of local tribes under the Russian rule and spiri-
tual influence. Besides, he didn’t spare efforts and 
money for the economic progress of the country; closely 
studied all needs of population and sought possibly more 
frequent immediate communication with it. There are still 
 19
many simple people can be found in the Caucasus re-
calling with admiration that knyaz Mikhail Semenovich in 
person had a talk with them about their life. 
The schools blossoming under military regiments in 
time of knyaz Vorontsov had a huge importance for state; 
their curricula was narrow, but taught well and there on top 
of all and most important were elements of breeding and 
discipline, almost unavailable now at the Russian school at 
all from top to bottom. A real plethora of outstanding com-
manders, administrators and public actors was brought up 
by the military schools of the Vorontsov period. 
The epoch of reforms of the sixties had complicating 
and nearly fatal outcomes for the Russian cause in the 
province and the way of life of local population. The so-
called “civil administration” introduced before the 60’s in 
some places of the region also heavily damaged the 
Russian cause, because people without school and insti-
tutions without traditions have emerged on the scene. 
Old fundaments were being destroyed and there was no 
appropriate material for new creative work. Absolutely 
alien laws and cabinet utopias were called to rule life in-
stead of customs and views naturally grown on the origi-
nal local ground, although the rest of Russia, which is 
relatively closer to the western-European order, still did 
not digest them itself. 
Liberation of peasants in accordance with the prema-
ture and quickly drafted plan turned the social order estab-
lished in the regions of Transcaucasia since prehistoric 
times upside down. In addition, that thrust was unskilled 
and incomplete: despite legal abolition of serfdom, it still 
exists in practice in many places of the Tiflis and Kutaisi 
provinces where temporarily-commissioned peasants find 
burden of dependence on the landlords heavier than if 
they were their slaves legally. 
 20
Simultaneously wide opportunities became open for 
development and progress of that element, which itself 
doesn’t make a positive influence on the life anywhere, 
and especially in the Caucasus, since negative profes-
sional characteristics are aggravated there by racial 
faults and tendencies. We refer to those Armenian ex-
ploiters, who since the sixties with special diligence and 
freely started sucking all waters out of the local popula-
tion. I do not speak here indiscriminately about all Arme-
nian people, but about the class of kulaks, usurers and 
shadow businessmen representing strongly coloured 
element characteristic for this tribe. Both the nobles and 
peasants were trapped in the web of those predators, 
The sharper socio-economic reform, the more dili-
gent must be service for its realization discharged by 
stable, but flexible state and public institutions: admini-
stration, courts, educational centres, press etc. Mean-
while everything of that was subjected to reforms simul-
taneously and from the point of view of interests of the 
Russian cause in the Caucasus everything changed to 
worse. Legal formalism for people historically taught to 
quick decision on nature of the case; competitive court 
process for people who have athletics developed in their 
blood for centuries; transfer of life important issues from 
authority of military class, regarded by local population 
as having prestige of recent victories, to hands of poor-
spirited Caucasian bureaucracy still including great per-
centage of offal; classical system with refuse from breed-
ing tasks for children of martial, vivid tribes, who histori-
cally had no inclination to large portions of dreary book 
knowledge, obviously crippled by its inapplicability in life; 
and finally, Greek gifts of the Russian public opinion and 
press of the period of self-nihilism and loss of national 
sense – undoubtedly all that was poisonous spiritual food 
 21
from prospective of the Russian interests. The Cauca-
sian press since the sixties is full of highly insolent 
mockery over those interests. Even that what was in the 
mainland Russia tough, but reasonable and benevolent 
for consequences criticism of defects of our life, in the 
Caucasian province used to be and still is a pretext for 
gloating ridicule, indiscriminate denial of everything Rus-
sian in creative sense of this word. 
Much has been done in that direction by personal 
staff of that former Russian element, considered by lo-
cal residents as Russian actors. Besides, people used 
to come to the Caucasus unwillingly, politically unreli-
able, not sparing expressions of their hatred to the 
whole Russian order; the local population was eagerly 
listening to tales and sharp speeches distributed by 
such people, whose mood was supporting or even evok-
ing centre running aspirations among the newly born na-
tive intelligentsia. 
For instance, in different times quite a huge number 
of the Polish has been exiled or recruited to the Cauca-
sus, who didn’t accept the Russian statehood and refrain 
from the Jesuitical methods to harm the Russian cause. 
The fruits of the destructive work still can be traced in 
some areas. Being strange Russian officials by their uni-
form and language they exploited, oppressed and 
mocked the popular masses lowering and discrediting 
the Russian name in its eyes, and along with that they 
were getting closer with the most disturbed circles of the 
multi-tribal native intelligentsia, implanting and intensify-
ing its negative attitude to the Russian statehood.  
There are many signs giving serious grounds to as-
sert that some local disturbances broke out with the Pol-
ish interference and that the Armenian insurrectional 
programme, which will be spoken about later, is nothing, 
 22
but the variety of the similar programme of the Polish 
jond developed in the thirties and improved in the sixties.      
The influx of Germans into the staff of the Caucasian 
bureaucracy had a negative impact as well, because even 
the best and most loyal men of them could not have that 
tension of national sense and self-awareness necessary 
at the outskirt to be subjected to cultural amalgamation.  
It’s obvious that the colouring environment espe-
cially in terms of absence of majority in number must be 
rich for colouring elements. The Germans with their cos-
mopolitan mindset were incapable to undertake such a 
Russian task. If the above expressed conclusion is not 
clear to many representatives of the Russian ruling class, 
then the reason is our little acquaintance with science of 
statehood accompanying the weakness of national self-
awareness and dignity. The nature of this issue is per-
fectly understood in Germany, where they very skilfully 
distribute the Prussians as representatives of the state 
concrete to all necessary places. 
Everything that was created in the Caucasus in the 
sixties – new governmental institutions, class changes, 
tribal relations, political tendencies, economic and com-
munal changes – all that came too dear for the interests 
of the Russian cause, and majority of the local population 
as well. Of course this damage is temporary, at least as 
far as the main issue is concerned, i.e. liberation of 
peasants. From the prospective of wide lines of history 
and prospective of the originally-democratic vocation of 
Russia that act was necessary, because it has evoked 
formerly oppressed and faceless popular masses to an 
independent life and art in different spheres; this is itself 
a seed capable to bring rich cultural shoots. 
To preserve these shoots from destruction and 
transformation into something ugly, antisocial and anti-
 23
government the deliberate measures for protection of lib-
erated slaves from new forms of exploitation and general 
rapprochement of the new order of the Caucasian life 
with the creative fundaments of the leading Russian cen-
tre should have been taken timely. Meanwhile, that was 
the exact thing undone. Nevertheless the main deal of 
responsibility mostly falls not onto the then supreme rep-
resentatives of the Caucasian authority, but onto the rul-
ing ideas of the centre, low level of the public and state 
science in Russia – and as whole on the spirit of that 
time, when even governmental institutions were under 
pressure of different utopias.  
The individual leading actors understood unsuitability 
and even the danger of application of many Petersburg’s 
cabinet tendencies to the historically alien material; K.P. 
Yanovsky, supervisor of the Caucasian educational dis-
trict, was an outstanding statesman courageously fighting 
the excesses of the pseudo-classical system and smooth-
ing its application. But the general flow was too wide and 
strong, and its devastating consequences would keep 
showing up in the local life for long time. 
The reign of bourgeoisie over all remaining popular 
classes and circles is one of the largest outcomes of es-
tablishment of legal order everywhere around. One Ger-
man scientist once said that the legal liberalism is the 
worship of the bourgeoisie. At the same time this is its 
most reliable weapon, quite dangerous for any state and 
social organism.  
Once the obstacles blocking the supremacy of the 
unprincipled money are abolished by “legal” way, then 
principles lying in foundation of the state power and of 
the customs, ruling the popular life more deeply than the 
easily deviated law, become shaky; even freedom itself 
is reduced to zero, because for real existence, not only 
 24
on paper, it needs ideological support of people inde-
pendent from the power of money.  
For instance, when striving for the real truth the gov-
ernment allows the press great deal of license, then rep-
resentatives of the ruling bourgeoisie opposing dissemi-
nation of some ideas do the following, first, they take al-
most all of the influential press bodies in their hands, 
second, using other sometimes incomprehensible meth-
ods they practically always can block publications they 
find unpleasant. In the republican France the will of 
baron Rothschild deprived the play “Degeneracy” of 
stage, although derision over the Christian religion is 
permitted and encouraged in any form. 
Perhaps the inevitable has happened: the serving 
class fulfils the will of bourgeoisie there. 
The danger becomes complicated when that bour-
geoisie mainly belongs to the tribe, which is not inter-
ested in the welfare of the state or, moreover, wishing 
good to that state. Then what received is parasitism in 
the most disgusting and dangerous forms. 
The oriental parasitism is aggravated because it 
doesn’t have any limits, since it is deprived of any re-
straining moral or socially-ennobling bases. 
In the Caucasus the socio-economic issue coin-
cides with the tribal one: the bourgeoisie almost exclu-
sively consists of Armenians, forming an interlocking mob 
on the top of that class and representing major social 
threat for local population, as for the state affairs – there 
is a political threat as follows from example of some ori-
ental powers, whose slackness and slovenliness had 
opened space for the Armenian parasitism. 
The legal order and all other steps in this direction 
in the Caucasus are useful only for Armenians, because 
for many centuries numerous Armenian businessmen 
 25
had a practice on deviation of any laws and power de-
crees, as well as on subjugation of other people’s will, 
free or powerful by appearance, but not prepared to nei-
ther freedom, nor power. Everybody became in bondage 
to them, including local institutions from top to bottom. 
Other natives strongly criticize Russia for upgrade of the 
Armenian might saying that it could not be even spoken 
about under the Georgian tsars, because things used to 
be resolved not theoretically in cabinets, but on bases of 
strict requirements of life. 
Nevertheless local population recalls the sixties with 
love and gratitude and moreover both feelings are 
evoked by not only the rise of cultural hopes and political 
aspirations appeared that time, but sympathy to person-
ality of the grand duke Mikhail Nikolayevich as well, who 
was Royal governor at that time. 
The moment of victory of legal formalism over the 
custom, idea over faith and feelings, and everything ab-
stractly formal over the life-established things, costs too 
much for environment, where such change is little com-
patible with its spiritual structure. That environment feels 
something like moral cold – at this point lovely and cor-
dial attitude to that from supreme master of local desti-
nies has special price. 
Paternal care of the Royal governor about needs of 
the Caucasian population, especially native, is still highly 
appreciated by the Caucasians never missing a chance 
to express him their gratitude and loyalty close to the 
mystical feelings of faithful loyalty. 
That brought some benefits to the Russian cause, 
smoothing damage caused by tendencies and system of 
the sixties. But damage was enormous, even in political 
sense immediately because the isolating aliens, con-
fused by “movements” and political dreams of that pe-
 26
riod, used to be imbued with the so-called “Austrian state 
ideal”, dreamed about “federation” and regarded central 
figure of the empowered governor as symbol and support 
of their separatism. Meanwhile, in the communal sense 
the Russian popular cause suffered losses because of 
the transfer of the Russian military settlements from mili-
tary ministry to the indifferent civilian authorities – and 
since then had grown faint. 
The sixties and seventies in the Caucasus are 
marked by beginning of the more active implantation of 
civilization and economic growth; but both in fact served 
mainly to isolation of that province, rather than to tight 
rapprochement with centre. Partially that can be ex-
plained by the spirit of that time, partially by little signifi-
cance of the Russian national idea in the views of local 
and metropolitan governmental circles of that time. 
For instance, integration of the Transcaucasia with 
the rest of Russia by the shortest railroad was under dif-
ferent pretexts postponed for years, meanwhile there 
was established a Transcaucasian railroad that formed, 
so to speak, economic blood circulation of the province 
completely separated from the rest of Russia. 
And because of that the Russian capitals, which 
could have the province connected with centre economi-
cally, now have difficulties in getting access to the local 
industrial world. The native and foreign industry of Baku 
was granted an opportunity to develop itself to such a 
grandiose scale that from prospective of national consoli-
dation the current road from Beslan to Baladjary is more 
than a delayed act, and it would finally serve rather to in-
crease of local isolation through influence of Baku millions 
on the Petersburg circles and press, than expansion of the 
Russian cultural influence in the Transcaucasia. 
It is extremely interesting to remark how construc-
tion of the Transcaucasian railroad influenced situation of 
 27
the individual areas and tribes. Armenians were the only 
victors, who economically caught Baku and Tiflis in their 
hands. 
Since they have relatively small population and 
minimal economic influence in Kutaisi, another Kartvelian 
capital, the Transcaucasian highway deviated Kutaisi 
under the pretext of facilitation of the Persian transit – 
hence once blossoming city is gradually loosing its previ-
ous economic importance, despite the undisputable tal-
ent of its citizens for industry and trade. 
The Armenian industrial companies and banks 
seized the predominant positions in Poty and Batumi – 
Black Sea destination points of the road, which has com-
pletely got in their hands this way. 
On the other hand, the railroad has connected previ-
ously separated from each other branches of the Kartvelian 
tribe and greater spiritual isolation, sometimes taking nerv-
ous political forms, can be observed there since then. 
If the road to Tiflis crossing the main range was 
constructed instead of or at least simultaneously with the 
Transcaucasian road, then picture of local life would be 
different, far less desperate from the prospective of the 
Russian national-state interests. It seems that the su-
preme Caucasian administration at all times treated an 
idea of establishment of comfortable and fast communi-
cation between Tiflis and Petersburg without special 
warmth. This is the matter of … provincial psychology, 
particularly Caucasian, grounded on the Persian admin-
istrative traditions. The further from the controlling central 
government, the deeper is breathing. But even true pro-
ponents of consolidation of the outskirt with centre could 
not see the nature of the matter.  
Unfortunately, not only then, but until now the na-
tional character of capitals is underestimated, and often 
 28
deliberately ignored by the relevant spheres. He, who 
has money, is the real master of situation, particularly 
where class of officials has poor material maintenance, 
and public opinion doesn’t have national stability. Clear 
examples of the malicious reign of native capitals can be 
seen even in such countries like France and Austria, 
where independent economic activity of local population 
is ten times more than with us. That lesson possibly is 
not learnt or deliberately masked by people stating that 
capitals have no nationality by their nature and every-
where have objectively-positive influence. By the way 
such statement is not always disinterested…  
   From the objective, not national civilian, point of 
view the development of the Caucasian province since 
the sixties was abnormal, inharmonious – and occasional 
in some places external city improvement is accompa-
nied from one side by rudiments of deep-rooted sav-
agery, and from the other one by symptoms of such a 
sharp social corruption, which is only possible on the 
ground of the Asian corroded unscrupulousness stock-
piled for many centuries of darkness and bigotry. To 
comprehend that chaos one necessarily has to cast a 
closer and separate look at the life and characteristic fea-
tures of at least the main tribes inhabiting the Caucasus. 
Undertaking that task one has to pay special atten-
tion to terminology and refuse some of the names and 
generalizations that only appropriate for common talk. 
For instance, the word native doesn’t fit any more if we 
want to find the essence of subject. It is invented by lazy, 
straight or negligent Caucasian officials to have a formal 
character meeting number of various, unequal and often 
contradicting definitions, and which could justify actions – 
either unreal or sluggish, but anyway harmful. 
If to divide the population of the Caucasus into lar-
ger groups, to some extent solid and coloured by the 
 29
leading idea, then such groups would be: the Georgians 
as the main, stated nation in the province, close to us for 
spirit and origin of culture; the Armenians as the element 
far more alien to us, and on behalf of its aggressive 
bourgeoisie hostile to peoples of the Caucasus; the Mus-
lims, mostly of two categories: Aderbeidjani Tatars being 
under strong influence of Persia, and highlander Mus-
lims, whose spiritual environment is formed under harsh 
natural conditions and strict requirements of the Islam. 
The Muslim Georgians and Turkish are not considered 
here because of their small number. 
All this native peoples of the province are not dis-
persed, but strongly interrelated with each other, partially 
organically, like Armenians with Georgians and Muslims 
through mixed marriages and violent crossing for many 
centuries, and partially through communal occasions, like 
highlander Georgians with other highlanders on the 
ground of paganism, or Armenian tradesmen with differ-
ent neighbours through exploitation of the latter. And fi-
nally there are Russians constituting over 2% of popula-
tion in the Transcaucasia and divided into several differ-
ent categories: there are people of higher stand with pro-
tection, influencing destinies of the province without any 
business related acquaintance with that; there are val-
iant, straightforward Russian warriors, and bunch of hon-
est, educated people, and sectarians stubbornly keeping 
national particularities, and long-suffering settlers. And 
finally, people of different kind and status, who became 
so much Caucasusionated in the bad sense of word as 
they lost the national feeling and understanding of the 
Russian cause. 
 
 30
 
 
 
3. Brotherly Georgians. 
    
The beautiful Georgia, country of ancient temples, 
towers, flowers, songs and legends is not sung by our 
poets occasionally! The Iberian land is a corner of 
Madonna, land of the Saint George, - “Gurjistan” in Per-
sian – much spoken about with distant love by our 
blessed ancestors many centuries ago as an ancient 
seat of the Orthodoxy. The sufferings of the little heroic 
people for faith and originality had echoed by brotherly 
compassion in hearts of the northern co-religious broth-
ers. Consolidation was steadily growing, - especially 
since Russia has undertaken the mission of the Third 
Rome, - and completed by benevolent unification of the 
Kartvelo-Kakhetian kingdom to Russia hundred years 
ago. It was benevolent unification, not in quotes, and 
unlike small states of the Middle Asia unwittingly flirting 
with us, but serious. By the end of the XVIII century 
Georgia several times was “submitted” to Russia, but the 
Georgian tsars had remained enthroned and the internal 
order of Georgia had not been altered; it means that in-
terpretation of definition of “subject” was at least incor-
rect: that status authorized Georgia to have protection of 
the Russian arms against the predating Asian 
neighbours and imposed the only duty on Georgians…to 
protect their motherland against the same enemies and 
arrange provision for the Russian troops. Strictly speak-
ing such “dependence” even was not typical vassalage 
and more looked like a union of the weak with the strong 
for the purposes of self-defence. It should be also noted 
that numerous representatives of the Georgian royal 
 31
house didn’t compassion to the radical resolution in the 
beginning of the XIX century of the issue of formerly ficti-
tious subjection, and some of the Georgian feudal lords 
supposed that Georgia should have joined Russia not by 
manifest, but by bilateral agreement, i.e. on the ground of 
special autonomy or semi-independence at least. That 
view still remains; it is being stronger, but quite unsuc-
cessfully propagated by some Georgians infected by Ar-
menian separatism and fulfilling, - not always disinterest-
edly, - its Caucasian anti-Russian programme. During 
unification of Georgia and on the later stages there were 
insurgencies on the ground of political enthusiasm and 
misunderstandings and their repetition in future is possi-
ble under influence of foreign interference and some-
times of incorrect administration of the province. But all 
of that, in final count, is infinitesimal and unable to de-
cline broad lines of history. Because the Georgian people 
headed by the overwhelming majority of its leaders had 
joined willingly, unconditionally and forever. It has com-
pleted its historical mission and yielded to the spontane-
ous will of its own suffering soul by joining Russia on the 
basis of common religion. 
As long as we cherish our faith, Georgia is spiritually 
close to us. That link is also fixed by the flows of the Geor-
gian knights’ blood shed under the Russian banner on the 
field of battle for our common cause, for the universal 
mission of the Third Rome, task of the Orthodox culture. 
As long as we believe in that mission and value our ban-
ners, we have to regard the Georgians as brothers and 
view the Georgian people as one of the natural additional 
leverages of the mentioned task in the Asia Minor. 
Let’s admit that for the past century and under pres-
sure of numerous circumstances situation of those 
brothers became worse, their character became less 
 32
pleasant and everyday communications with them don’t 
pass without slight misunderstandings. Nevertheless it is 
necessary to study all that in order not to let trifles of life 
to cover and erase by their garbage the broad lines of 
our cultural history, not to let the infinitesimal to destroy 
the great, like mice nibble pictures of the immortal artists.  
Georgians or more precisely Kartvelians live in the 
provinces of Tiflis and Kutaisi. There are Georgians and 
Kakhetians in Tiflis province; Imeretians, Rachinians, 
Mingrels, Gurians, Ajarians and others – in Kutaisi prov-
ince, beyond the pass of Suram. The Kartvelians of the 
Transuram are so much different from Georgians for their 
type, temperament and character that some connois-
seurs of the region consider them as completely sepa-
rate tribe. The Georgians are more solid and stable; Kart-
velians of the Transuram are less reliable in all issues, 
but more vivid, brisk and enterprising. They constitute the 
main contingent of the dawning bourgeoisie, Georgian 
for their language. 
The origin of the Georgians is not established, what 
testifies about extreme antiquity of this tribe. Apparently 
and in addition this tribe is not absolutely homogenous, 
judging for names, historic-geographical data and variety 
of physical types of the Georgians. The ancient queen of 
the Massagets was called Tamarissa, i.e. Tamara, Geor-
gia was referred to as Iveria or Iberia like part of the 
Pyrenean peninsula; and even now should one takes a 
closer look into the spiritual and physical image of the 
Georgian, then he can be easily taken for the Spaniard, 
Romanced descent of the Celts-Iberians. By the way 
there is knowledge about the Georgian settlements in the 
Northern Africa and Abyssinia. Besides that the Georgian 
language contains some hints testifying that people bear-
ing this language used to live in very hot country, where 
 33
water was the dearest value; hence, almost all of the 
main life definitions – blessing, mercy, and misery – are 
connected with the word “tskaly” – water. Mercy in the 
Georgian is “tskaloba”, miserable – “satskaly”, literal 
translation for that is “belonging to water”, “taken by wa-
ter”… Usually such metaphors do not lie. In later periods 
the Georgians of course had crossed with Jews, who had 
come to that area in times of Nebuchadnezzar. There are 
still a lot of Jews in Imeretia, whom nearly impossible to 
distinguish from the local Kartvelians by their appear-
ance. Story of the Saint Nina enlightener of Georgia testi-
fies about presence of many Jews in Mtskheta, ancient 
capital of that country. Still present numerous biblical 
names of local settlements prove that.  
The northern limit of Georgia lies near Kazbek sta-
tion: that is a kind of Zaporozhe of the ancient Iberian 
kingdom. The monastery on the mountain over the Terek 
River, names of villages like Stepantsminda, or Saint 
Stephan, Sion etc. – everything indicates the light of the 
Saint Nina had shined around these gloomy mountains. 
But from ethnographic communal point of view real 
Georgia starts from the point closer to south, and its first 
breathe and premonition starts from the Gudaur river.  
Having a closer look at the image of nature and 
people in Georgia it would be impossible for one not to 
feel deep traces of suffering, centuries old and modern. 
There is some bad luck hanging over the country at first 
sight created for bliss. 
History of Georgia is one solid martyrs’ log. Even 
Shakespeare could gain there some scenes invaluable 
for their tragedy. As it was already mentioned, there 
hadn’t been a state in literal meaning of the word. The 
power of tsars used to be challenged by the self-willed, 
terrible feudal lords ruling the people. Monasteries were 
 34
more like forts, and religion – a treasury, which people 
could not use fully, because all of their efforts were di-
rected to its preservation from external enemies. Be-
sides, feudal-bishop quite frequently was rather more 
feudal lord, than servant of the altar. If one can express it 
so, the broad lines of soul under pressure of struggle for 
faith were absolutely imbued with Christianity, but small 
features of character and communal conditions had 
mostly remained pagan, and the Church had to stand it: 
for example, family blood vengeance still exists in some 
areas, animals are sacrificed to God. There was no ex-
ternal security and tsars and lords often had to pay off 
the fruits of earth, slaves, flattery, and even convergence 
in favour of predating Turkish and Persian masters, first 
acknowledging their power and then betraying it for the 
sake of national originality or their personal interests. 
Feudalism and kinship had established firmly. This is 
the main line of the Georgian chronicle – Kartlis-tskhovreba 
– and there is nearly no mention about people as an active 
force. Nevertheless this is brisk and intelligent power, as it 
can be seen from beautiful folklore – songs, tales, noble 
and wise proverbs and colourful legends. 
The Georgian popular pipers “mestvire” – are brilliant 
poets-improvisers. People’s language is a treasury of po-
etry. The Georgian peasants conceive images, converse 
the philosophic aphorisms. Half of the flock belonging to 
one khizan – landless renting-peasant – has plagued. He 
accepted that misfortune and said: “Thanks God! He made 
me his brother by taking half of my property!” the following 
are some characteristic proverbs: “Conscience is mediator 
between honest enemies“; ”lie has short legs”. There is a 
high concept of truth and pessimistic sayings along with 
that, not without humour: “When you are about to tell the 
truth, hold your saddled horse ready”… 
 35
  As one young Georgian writer knyaz Avalov cor-
rectly noted that the feudalism saved Georgian nation. 
When tsar submitted himself to some foreign rulers, then 
it didn’t mean subjugation of Georgia in whole, because it 
was too far difficult to seize all castles of feudal lords and 
pull up tribal originality. But feudal anarchy hindered de-
velopment of the state-popular culture. The latter used to 
bloom only in times of short flashes of strong monarchi-
cal power. Such flashes, and quite bright ones, are re-
lated to the names of tsar David the Reviver, Queen of 
queens (shakh-in-shakh, or in the Georgian – mepis-
mepe) Tamara the Great, and later George the Brilliant 
and finally Heracly II, who became the subject of Russia 
on the basis of vassalage in time of Catherine The Great. 
During their reign the cultural seeds concealed in the na-
tion started bringing three hundredfold harvest, the coun-
try was built-up with magnificent temples, the holy arte-
facts and books with miniatures of unparalleled beauty 
had appeared in churches. The immortal verses of in-
spired poets were sounded across the place, like poem 
of Shota Rustaveli “The Man in Tiger’s Skin”, notorious 
for its undying beauty of expression and sympathetic 
wisdom; it is translated into main European languages 
(the German translation by Arthur Leist – “Der Mann im 
Tigerfelle” is extremely good), but there is no full poetic 
translation in Russian. 
The people appreciated its tsars, who gave them 
truth and peace. Everything catching one’s eye – tem-
ples, ruins of towers, mysteriously beautiful places – is 
connected with name of the Great Tamara; people un-
ceremoniously call tsar Heracly II, who was a terror to 
Persians and Turks, “patara kakhi” – the small Kak-
hetian. These examples show how deeply democratic is 
the basis of any powerful monarchy. 
 36
There was serious flaw in the original social struc-
ture of the Georgians, what they had suffered from and 
maybe even would cost them, if not existence itself, at 
least welfare of the whole tribe: they had no bourgeoisie 
of their own. In all of the numbered Georgian towns en-
trepreneurs, tradesmen and craftsmen mostly were for-
eign and infidel Armenians, hiding underneath the Geor-
gian sword from the Muslim chase. Apparently they 
played the same role for the Georgians as aphis for the 
ants: made good use of the peace under protection of 
the Georgian sword, gained wealth and from time to time 
unwillingly shared that profit with their masters, whom 
they were trembling of servile fear before. Zealous Ar-
menian patriot the late Caucasian general Kishmishev 
angrily told the story in some brochure that when rich 
Armenians refused to pay money required by feudal 
lords, the lords used to put them in sacks and soak in the 
fast-running Kura river threatening to drawn in case of 
disobedience; they say, ancestors of that author were 
among those who suffered that. Although the method of 
extortion itself was naturally unprepossessing, but tightly 
connected in logical and communal sense with the 
equally unattractive method once used to be and still 
employed by the Armenian bourgeoisie for multiplication 
of its wealth, a fruit of obviously wayward grubbing. 
 The Georgian tsars and lords were not abstract 
supporters of the legal order doctrine: they instinctively 
realized that the monetary feudalism, i.e. capitalism – is 
the enemy of statehood, when bursts over the reason-
able limits. Regular feudal lord is not that terrible, be-
cause it’s always known where he can be found and how 
he can be dealt with; the “capitalist lord” is more fearful, 
because it’s unknown which of the royal servants he can 
bribe, what kind of armed people may hire, which inter-
 37
ests of people, especially of the alien one, he is ready to 
betray for his own benefit. Such issues used to be re-
solved simply at that time, and it should be pointed out 
that under condition of observation of humanity and 
modesty that order was more reasonable, than the socio-
economic chaos reining in most of the modern countries 
blessed by the European civilization. 
Anyway, in the independent Georgia Armenians 
didn’t produce such fatal threat for the Georgians that 
they do now, in terms of the current administration in the 
province, which is distractively principled in theory, but 
frequently unprincipled in practice. Nevertheless, ab-
sence of the native Georgian bourgeoisie then, that role 
was played by Armenians parasitically, was basically as 
abnormal, as if one person would have in his body the 
implanted stomach of another man, secretly working for 
the sake of the latter. That example is an incredible in the 
everyday life, but quite ordinary in states; that anomaly 
was one of the reasons for collapse of Poland where 
economic field has been seized by the Jews. 
The same anomaly should be fought more vigorously 
by our state too, particularly as the current times became 
far more sharp and less rich for the instinctive state sense: 
heterogeneous bourgeoisie – means supremacy of the 
anti-Russian putrefying ideas in the press, and in school, 
and in public institutions, and even among the class of offi-
cials, who are always poorly maintained; the individuals 
standing on top of some business channels may succumb 
to songs of such sirens like some Jewish banker or Arme-
nian oilman… That can be seen now. 
Part of the Georgian Armenians, whose tribal talent 
is not only economic pushing, but bureaucratic worming 
brought up by the amoral Persian-Turkish administration 
school as well, has infiltrated into the Georgian class of of-
 38
ficials and even aristocracy. Except for two or three cases, 
that was inexcusable mistake of the Georgian tsars, a sign 
of their weakness, and frequently of corruption of many 
powerful persons, not excluding crowned ones. 
In this regard, expressions of one the latest Geor-
gian tsars about the Armenian family of the Korganovs1 
are quite characteristic. Once upon a time somebody 
brought a complaint to tsar, who acknowledged truthful-
ness of the complaint and established the guilt of Kor-
ganov, but replied that he was unable to do anything 
about it: “They are poisonous people; there is a dead 
Korganov lying on the Solak Mountain. Wolves are cir-
cling round and smell him, but afraid to touch! What is 
you expect me to do about the living ones?!” 
The history has shown Georgians that one should 
not trust people having natural inclination to espionage 
and treason: the Armenian meliks Abo and Majnun by 
names, blessed by the Heracly II, who sheltered them 
from the Persian chase, went over to the Persians in time 
of extreme and guided hordes of Agha Muhammad 
Khan, which had plundered and flooded Tiflis with blood 
in 1795. It’s useful to remind that fact when Armenian 
publicists too strongly insist on the Armenians’ being 
zealous Christians… 
The absence of own bourgeoisie is extremely dan-
gerous for any people in our days, when economic is-
sues have an overriding importance; it’s vitally important 
to have such class of people with industrial energy, 
which could be filled not only from bottom, but top as 
well, i.e. with representatives of nobility accommodating 
to new circumstances; otherwise the bankrupted nobles 
would fall right into the “gutter”, and the popular mass 
                                     
1 That branch of the Korganovs family ceased existence. Author  
 39
would be enslaved by alien exploiters. The level of all 
cultural institutions and forms of life will depend on that: 
Church, and school, and the press, and charity – all that 
becomes weaker without material and ideological sup-
port from the energetic industrial class. Literacy falls – it’s 
not occasional: educational institutions are located in cit-
ies – and it’s difficult for provincial village inhabitant, even 
possessing large but less profitable estate, to maintain 
two houses while educating one’s son in gymnasium, or 
preparing him to enter there; it’s expensive to pay for full 
board and child will be parted from family; instead, any 
tiny manager, manufacturer, pigsty keeper of the Arme-
nians living in the city can bring his son up to university 
nearly free of charge. When such a difference of situation 
manifests itself through sufficient number of occasions, 
then, in final account, the whole nation lags behind in cul-
tural sense and loses huge chances in struggle for sur-
vival. In this case, from the point of view of the Russian 
statehood, it is extremely disadvantageous, since the 
Georgian people is the closest to us across the Tran-
scaucasia for spirit and basis of culture, has high moral 
traditions, and besides, is distinguished from all other lo-
cal tribes for greater talent to the scientific and spiritual 
development, as it can be seen from the bunch of reports 
of the supervisor for the Caucasian educational district. 
From the beginning of the XIX century the Russian 
power has established firmly in Georgia, bringing bene-
fits of peace and opening space for comprehensive de-
velopment of the province. Meanwhile for original Geor-
gia the peace has occurred to be not absolute, but rela-
tive benefit. It is undoubted that peace has brought some 
negative results too. First, in days of permanent threat 
the Georgians used to spend most of their time in the 
mountains, but after establishment of peace they have 
 40
settled themselves in sultry valleys, where fatally affect-
ing health malaria became their cunning foe; the inher-
ited traces of malaria still can be seen on faces of new-
born children. 
Second, although winery used to blossom in Georgia 
since ancient times, the chronic absence of security was 
blocking abuse of its fruits. Feasts of that time were rare 
and solemn like celebrations of victory or salvation. The 
traditional song “mravaljamier” (longevity) used to be fin-
ished (the mountainous Georgians still do) with the word 
amen and crossing. At present, when people hold feasts 
differently and at loaf, too often, that song became trivial 
table song, and its solemn Church tune is frequently sub-
stituted with recklessly funny one. Abuse of feasts – is not 
a joke: in some areas one can see many children begot-
ten by fathers in state of intoxication. That, at least, has 
negative influence upon volitional centres of many people, 
especially in such an historical time when serious system-
atic labour, intelligent self-activity is required. 
One characteristic and cheering symptom more and 
more frequently seen in Georgia should be mentioned: 
the youth often feels disgust to wine; one may think that 
the racial instinct of self-preservation dictates that. Hope-
fully it will bring good fruits. 
Unfortunately, the psycho-physical state of popula-
tion in different areas of the Empire is relatively little stud-
ied now; such studies would be extremely important at 
the outskirts with mixed population, where conclusions 
made on the basis of precise empiric data could have not 
only practical state, but general scientific meaning as 
well. In particular, such task, although in limited scales 
but with availability of sufficiently full characterizing data, 
could be undertaken by administrations of educational 
institutions, especially of the closed ones. The local ca-
 41
dets’ corps in Tiflis in the late 90’s was headed by I.D. 
Smirnov, who had held very important records rich for 
valuable data of that kind and sharp witted conclusions, 
which unfortunately still remain unpublished. For in-
stance, he paid compassionate attention to the studying 
Georgian youth and noted the following sequence of 
changes frequently occurring to the young generation: lit-
tle Georgian under 14 or 15 is distinguished for extraor-
dinary comprehension of lively or scientific impressions, 
ingenious, brisk, accessible for pedagogical influence; 
then about indicated age, coinciding in the south with 
early puberty, he fades away, becomes stupid, loses in-
terest to science and sometimes demonstrates some sin-
ful inclinations; two or three years later he relieves from 
that state that can be called disease, but resources of 
former spiritual forces do not revive again and there 
comes quite trite young man, bearing traces of some 
sickness. Obviously that is influenced by nature in gen-
eral and malaria in particular, as well as results of the in-
herited alcoholism manifested through weakening of the 
volitional centres; and significant lack of family control 
over boys in critical period of initial passions, unre-
strained by anybody or anything. 
To complete circle of psycho-physical changes one 
may guess that centuries old wars created such features 
in the nervous system of Georgians that get perverted 
because they cannot find application for themselves now; 
courage and knights’ valour found an application in ca-
rousing, gamble, bloody quarrels, unaffordable vain lux-
ury etc; the slope becomes more and more steep running 
from former feats to shameful destruction or the dock; 
looking at the faces of people sitting there one can’t 
abandon painful feeling: it is so obvious that many of to-
day’s criminals under other circumstances could be he-
 42
roes; they are driven not by ill will, but explosion of aim-
less and locked nervous energy. 
In countries where definition of economy of popular 
life is developed better that spontaneous force could be 
given better application like army on the other border, or 
some other spheres as maritime navigation etc, requiring 
disciplined courage in capacity of creative element. The 
current Caucasian authorities have lost the momentum to 
raise an issue of forming of squad from bankrupt, landless, 
carousing contingent of Kutaisi nobles in time of the Chi-
nese war, or chain of stanitsa on border with Manchuria. 
The state in ancient Greece was developing artifi-
cially those features we have gained in the Caucasus for 
free and now leave to grow shallow and decay with obvi-
ous damage to public security, innocent people and the 
Russian cause of state. 
Another characteristic feature should also be men-
tioned. The Georgians like serving in their motherland, 
and get strongly disappointed if they fail to do so after 
completion of education at the higher educational institu-
tions; they tend to regard it as the “policy of Russification”, 
although it has nothing to do here. Neither native of Pol-
tava or Tambov province does require to be given em-
ployment right at the place of his birth: in our times of over 
production of the absolutely unprepared graduated intelli-
gentsia, he must praise the fortune if he is given any place 
at all. But the Georgian is certainly willing to get “em-
ployed” in Georgia. Meanwhile, there is the place where it 
is most difficult to do anything sound, become useful to 
people or promoted in service, because many conditions 
of the local life are strongly hindering that. The country still 
lives through painful-transitional situation. The old order 
was destroyed, but population did not accustom to the 
new one. Former customs and traditions are dying away, 
 43
i.e. namely grow shallow and decay; only despotic frag-
ments and forms remain in force integrating mostly with 
negative sides of new definitions. All around one can meet 
“intelligent” Georgian, whose mind and feelings are con-
fused with mixture of kinship revenge and feudal ambi-
tions with banal formulas of more or less extreme “liberal-
ism”. Under pressure of such internal contradictions it is 
difficult for the art to emerge and develop on the shaky 
ground of changing concepts and moods. The Georgian 
lawyer sticks at indelible tribal origin, supervisor of state-
owned land interests – at the organic, spontaneous disre-
spect to them, zealot of peasants’ welfare – at rudiments 
of firm feudal instincts, writer – at jealousy requirements of 
the tribal isolation. Everywhere and in everything – there 
are obstacles to the broad view on the general state and 
human interests, although principle-based progressive 
creation is incomprehensible without it. If that is added by 
vindictiveness of people considering themselves offended, 
and importunity of those striving to get something deviat-
ing law, one can imagine how complicate is situation of 
any Caucasian Georgian official, connected with local 
population by family ties, neighbourhood, friendship or ha-
tred, at least. Denunciations, harassment and threats – 
complete hell!.. Even when the sphere of his activity 
doesn’t touch vital interests of his fellow-countrymen he 
hardly can work systematically, he is prevented from 
peaceful seating at the desk either by guests requiring 
warm welcome with wine and songs or friends inviting to 
receptions with wine and songs. The climate is coddling, 
custom is making slack and distracting from serious work, 
and myriads of idle people, as if evocated to prevent their 
neighbours from working. 
It is quite remarkable that the Georgians appear to 
be talented actors in different fields, but under condition 
 44
of being parted from their motherland. Many examples 
could be cited here, but I will dwell upon one very bright 
and instructive from the beginning to the end. One knyaz, 
spending his time in carousing, causelessly killed some 
modest inhabitant, who was unlucky to call at local res-
taurant and to attract sudden anger of that “knight”; the 
criminal first was exiled to Siberia and then to one of the 
southern provinces of the European Russia. In both 
places of his exile that man gained general respect and 
compassion for his decency, diligence and useful activity; 
for instance, in the south of Russia he took trouble to 
teach population silk culture, gardening and viticulture, 
and became close councillor of the governor in his en-
deavours to raise people’s welfare. Suddenly came the 
news that mother of the exiled knyaz was dying. He was 
allowed to visit home – on his way he called to the fa-
mous war general and administrator knyaz N.Z. 
Chavchavadze, who happened to be in Vladikavkaz 
then, to ask his support to the appeal for complete am-
nesty of the exiled knyaz. Although knyaz Nikolay 
Zurabovich received the so-called “chapar breeding”, 
meaning that he didn’t have any diploma, he was self-
educated and remarkably wise person. He looked at the 
applicant with compassion and replied: “What is that 
dragging you, silly man, back to Georgia?! You should 
avail of that you can calmly work, get wisdom and study 
something abroad! Once you get back – you will become 
a heaven smoker again, and even once again will resort 
to crime. Anyway you will hardly be able to become a 
useful person there”. But the exiled person missing for 
motherland was insisting – and respectful knyaz surren-
dered: he received complete amnesty for that man. But 
his provision came true, as if it was prescribed! The par-
doned deportee received good governmental appoint-
 45
ment in motherland, but lost it too soon for his own fault 
and turned to mastering at the piece of inherited land; 
first came neighbouring feasts, then carousing in towns, 
and finally some fellow rake disembowelled him with 
dagger. Although he has survived, he had naturally gone 
far further from an opportunity to be a “useful person”... 
Life of the Georgian society, especially of its higher 
circles, sharply turns to worse, and order is decomposing, 
especially because of the fatal inconsistence between his-
torically developed character of people and new socio-
economic circumstances, not mentioning laws. Loss of the 
native customs and traditions inevitably leads to decompo-
sition. Change of the way of life doesn’t come easy. Not 
finding the usual forms for their satisfaction, the athletic and 
organic thirst for strong nervous impressions transform into 
not only ordinary criminality, but passion for anarchical uto-
pias. Trouble-makers can easily drive the Georgian youth, 
which is loyal-hearted and likeable in general, to commit 
outrages with sorrowful outcomes: sometimes it’s enough 
to say that some adventure leads to glory or that the Geor-
gians must be “pioneering people” and so on. The popular 
masses, especially beyond the Suram mountains, i.e. in 
Imeretia, Mingrelia, Guria, is quite sensitive to the anarchi-
cal whispers; the agrarian relation in Guria (uyezd of Ozur-
gethy) have taken extremely sharp character long ago. The 
remarkable growth of general crime on one side, socialist 
nonsense from the other side, and equally illegal colourful 
forms of former wild instincts and concepts from the third 
side – all that creates rather dangerous mass of the in-
flammable material for close future in the western Georgia, 
resembling either Italy with its carbonaries, or Corsica with 
its bloody anarchy and original wild colours. The small book 
“Colomba” by Prosper Merimee, describing the Corsican 
rites, makes one to transfer spiritually to the Transuram 
 46
Georgia. By the way, the extraordinary theatrical talent of 
all population from top to bottom is the characteristic Geor-
gian feature. The Georgians, especially western, are born 
actors, poets and artists. The powerful, beautiful and stern 
nature, influencing their spirit and history full of adventures 
speak through them: adventures and inclinations of prede-
cessors transform into game of fantasy and namely into or-
ganic artistic character of descents. When that phenome-
non takes importance and scales of the mass occurrence, 
then it means that nerves of the entire nation are perma-
nently excited, sensibility becomes morbid… 
The following fact can be interesting illustration to the 
abovementioned. In 1895 in Kutaisi somebody Luka Co-
stava by name was brutally killed by the Jewish crowd. 
Mother and widow of that man showed up in Kutaisi with 
undone hair, scratched breasts and angry screams. Their 
appearance disturbed within a moment all population, 
which had immediately caused gigantic devastation of the 
Jewish quarter. Entire local intelligentsia supported plun-
derers; everybody spoke about usurious yoke of major 
Jewish beachheads over local residents, about reprehen-
sible relations between the rich Jew Tsitsianishvili with lo-
cal administrator (dismissed soon after), etc; anti-
Semitism was general. Several years after; Jews of St. 
Petersburg and their lackeys have erupted well-known 
scandal in Maliy Theatre at the performance of “Contra-
bandists” – the same play has provoked similar scandal at 
the city theatre of Kutaisi soon after: recent “convinced” 
anti-Semites became defenders of the malicious instincts 
of Jews. In both cases the main part was played exactly 
by nervous sensibility and artistic character, connected 
with inclination to the Frond… 
Entering the depth of the purely psychological field, 
one should have mentioned that the world and new cir-
 47
cumstances of life have made an extremely negative im-
pact on the Georgian Church. For centuries religion was 
inscribed by blood of martyrs and faith was a feat. De-
spite the presence of bishops-lords and undeveloped 
theology, the Georgian Autocephaly Church was high-
lighted by self-consciousness. With establishment of 
peace the faith has lost its tragic character, attributed to 
the very nature of the Christianity, and hence become 
depleted. Grounded by the common sense of state the 
Autocephaly Church was abolished and its extensive 
land possessions were taken to the treasury. Let’s admit 
that the mentioned act has been carried out by request of 
the Georgian priesthood realizing its inability to rule it. 
That shouldn’t be a disaster, if the sequestered Georgian 
church was not neighboured by the impressive building 
of the Armenian theocracy towering in Echmiadzin, rich 
for lands and money (administration of that was just re-
cently transferred to the treasury), politically organized 
and frequently engaged in open fight with the Russian 
power. Seeing that picture, able to inspire separatist feel-
ing in any people, and regardless the newly announced 
reform of administration of the Armenian Church prop-
erty, the Georgians are still entitled to conclude that it is 
beneficial to be secessionist in the Caucasus. 
Finally, that idea could go to the background as 
well, if the Orthodoxy enjoyed sufficient care and atten-
tion of the class of officials and society of the province. 
Meanwhile, religion in the capitals and centre of Russia 
itself was not in advantage till recent times, serious turn 
to better has begun only after the royal-creative initiative 
of the late Emperor Alexander III, although that saving 
movement reached Georgia only in limited scales. Sev-
eral years ago one prominent Caucasian official asked 
exarch of Georgia whether or not the reverend gentle-
 48
man was planning to go to the station to meet Catholicos 
of all Armenians. That official was surprised to hear 
negative response: 
- As far as I know, patriarch in religious hierarchy 
stands above Metropolitan or exarch? 
- Yes, - calmly answered the prelate, - but the Or-
thodox patriarch, not heresyarch. 
Official just shook his shoulders, but didn’t dare to 
insist. There is another example as much characteristic. 
Some censored Armenian newspaper, printed in Russian 
alphabet, has published malicious insinuations against 
one of the most ancient and noble among the Georgian 
monasteries – shrine of John of Zedadzen. By the way, 
that clear hint referred to the miracle (the pool waters it-
self in the day of shrine’s holiday), which that shrine of 
the IV century is famous for, as nothing but fraud. Like a 
witness, who visited that eagle’s nest inhabited by five 
miserable and hungry hermits, I wrote an answer de-
served by the slanderer. The censor banned me. When I 
came to the relevant official for personal explanations 
and started convincing him that assault against people’s 
sanctuaries through the newspaper was a dirty trick and 
indignant press word could serve the best antidote to 
that, - the gentleman I was speaking to, answered with 
an air of the astonished liberalism: 
- What is that passion to religion?! Excuse me, but 
your point of view is a bit of gendarme-like. Why should 
you bother to support that obsolete ruin?! 
It was at least inappropriate to hear from the official 
person!.. 
To illustrate that casus I will add something else. The 
author of that filthy article was political deportee, nearly of 
participants of the March 1st conspiracy. Once settled in Ti-
flis, he systematically served to the Armenian usurer-
 49
separatist intrigue through local press and using the pretext 
of liberalism misinterpreted many things that dear to real 
Georgians and Russians. When that rogue died, one of the 
leaders of the local nobility, a man proud for his title and 
noble status, honoured the funerals among the rascals and 
imbeciles of Tiflis. Obviously, he did that by order of the 
Armenian bosses, who he had debts to.  
Importance of such fact as decline of the religion is 
crucial for the people, whose whole culture and spiritual 
life was based upon that ground. That disaster was ag-
gravated by bunch of the naturally produced phenomena, 
and reforms of the 60’s have become the most fatal 
among them, especially for the Georgian people; I say 
for people, not only nobility, because immediately after 
dissolution of the ties between them both nobility and 
peasantry have fallen into tenacious paws of the Arme-
nian bourgeoisie. Everything that could be restrained by 
powerful hands of such wise rulers as Yermolov and Vo-
rontsov in terms of the patriarchal order of the pre-
reformed administration – now has grown wide under 
coverage of the abstract legal order giving the pushing 
swindle and advantage before the patriarchal and not al-
ways (only in extraordinary cases) strict traditional arbi-
trariness. New courts, and moreover, unprincipled attor-
neys have developed chicanery, muck-rake, perjury, 
substitution of normal honesty with formal impunity etc. 
The Imeretians are especially famous for that. They give 
hundreds of royal stamps to their daughters as dowry. 
Once upon a time in the city park of Tiflis I was looking 
after conversation between two Imeretian cooks with 
watch in my hand; within fifteen minutes their Georgian 
speech was more than fifty times interrupted by shouting: 
“cassation appeal”, “referring to articles” and so on. 
The urban self-administration of new type with un-
believable speed became accumulated in hands of the 
 50
Armenian plutocracy, which was ruling insolently and 
clearly negligent about interests of the more numerous 
multinational mass of population. Armenians grabbed all 
banks, including the state bank, and trade of the agricul-
tural products into their hands. All the economic life of 
the region is in the iron jaws of mob. 
The Georgian land proprietorship is melting incredibly 
quickly. Various Mantashevs, Aramyants, Arafelovs, Makar-
yants and other Armenian bosses buy Georgian lands for 
nothing and fill them with settlers from Turkey; chapels and 
even churches transfer into hand of Armenians. 
It should be noted that major part of that process is 
accomplished secretly: Armenians do not dare to present 
all their documents and terminate all intertribal issues in 
the land sphere yet. They are afraid of burst of despera-
tion in the Georgian society and suspect that due to the 
sharp crisis Russian government would take a closer 
look at the Caucasian affairs. 
The modern school entertaining itself with pseudo 
classicism and almost deprived of good educational sig-
nificance has heavily damaged the Georgians. The pre-
vious battalion and regiment school of times of Yer-
molov and Vorontsov, as it was said above, had been 
simple, but well oriented. It used to raise minds and 
characters preparing them for switch to new order of 
state. It has brought up a plethora of outstanding Geor-
gian military commanders and administrators. The num-
ber of the outstanding persons among students of the 
new school is small, but number of the disoriented peo-
ple is countless. In Georgia – where factories are nearly 
absent, and its ridiculous to speculate about workers 
proletariat – it’s easy to meet the convinced Marxist; in 
country where wine flows as river and tobacco is 
smoked even in bed, one can encounter pseudo follow-
 51
ers of Tolstoy. A mass of intelligentsia receiving Rus-
sian diplomas cannot find employment, grow shallow 
and transform into people without any particular colour 
or with Levantine tinge. 
The struggle fought by the late supervisor of the Cau-
casian educational district K.P. Yanovsky with then ministry 
of popular educational was for adaptation of the pedagogi-
cal practice to the local ground. That notorious teacher did 
not live the day of triumph of his ideas, and God knows 
when that day would arrive. The malicious prejudice of the 
“united school” is still strong; they mix concepts of aim and 
tools. Although it seems to be clear that aspiration for simi-
lar final goals under different circumstances must reach 
success only through diversification of tools. Ideal of the 
school is differentiation, not unification. 
Elementary school doesn’t comply with its commit-
ment fully, because sometimes it rushes to push out natu-
ral language of the population too fast. That formal statisti-
cal or more exactly career success is reached at the ex-
pense of damage to the spiritual development, because 
natural language is normal organic instrument of the latter. 
Of course, people need command of the state language as 
an access to all benefits and advantages of the plenipoten-
tiary Russian citizens. People is thirst for knowledge of the 
Russian, but representatives of the local intelligentsia, who 
don’t want to allow that, are guided by serfdom feelings and 
thoughts: they find it beneficial to drive people into the dark 
corner of ignorance to exploit them as much unimpeded as 
possible. Similarly wrong those teachers who inflate the 
simple and clear matter of language into irritating trouble, 
building career upon nerves of people generally inclined to 
be our ally in the Caucasus. Obviously, official state and 
native local languages may coexist peacefully, not exclud-
ing each other: this is an issue of tact and benevolence to 
the population. 
 52
I didn’t deteriorate colours while describing negative 
sides of the Georgian life. It should be noted, major part 
of knyaz and nobles, especially those ones living in Tiflis 
and spending more than they earn, do fall not only finan-
cially, but morally, submitting to influence of rich Armeni-
ans, who more and more reasonably consider them as 
owned political tools. Level of the female morality and 
dignity falls remarkably as well under influence of such 
life and negative sides of the ludicrous European civiliza-
tion in Tiflis in general. 
Was the ancient Georgian lady moral? Travellers 
like Charden and Dumas deny that. I think they are 
wrong. Typical Georgian ladies of old breed, whom I met, 
deserve absolute respect to themselves. Possibly it was 
nature itself, which prescribed yashmak and original eth-
ics of the past for the southern passionate woman. 
Situation is bad, nut not hopeless. First, destruction, 
nasty destruction awaits the overwhelming majority of the 
higher class for centuries representing almost all of Geor-
gia. That is bad, because every people needs the su-
preme class with noble traditions; there were ones. Part of 
the higher class, more modest, will possibly hold in their 
estates. They are – various retired captains, under-officers 
of militia with badges of military order in their tab and so 
on; they are real native Georgians, men of honour, loyal to 
their people, Tsar and fatherland. The Georgian bourgeoi-
sie will gradually grow from both the top and bottom, if 
really-progressive Georgians and Russian power would 
realise that this cause strongly needs help. Level of the 
Georgian intelligentsia will improve with salvation of the 
Russian school and press; finally, the popular mass re-
tains a lot of vivid power inside; but every popular mass 
needs help and careful attention of the government. 
 53
Nowadays the Georgian peasant is still oppressed, 
confused and misguided, although freedom was an-
nounced to him, but reform has been carried out care-
lessly; the compulsory land ties are not resolved yet, 
likewise boundaries and many other things. The eco-
nomic conditions oppress him; on behalf of the buyers-up 
and Armenian kulaks he has got more cruel masters than 
the previous lords, whose tyranny could be mitigated by 
numerous good traditions bringing classes closer to each 
other. The former strict feudal power had kept peasants 
in obedience and made them to respect the strangers’ 
property. Now that power is abolished, but concept of le-
gality has not rooted in the popular conscience because 
change was too sharp and people weren’t ready to that. 
The agrarian misunderstandings happen more and more 
often. Moreover, peasant doesn’t comprehend himself as 
citizen with definite rights and obligations… 
Yes, he loves his motherland spontaneously, like any 
Georgian, because it cannot be unloved. And he regards 
the Russian Tsar not as ordinary manager, but his legiti-
mate Tsar, natural successor of previous dynasties. That 
is patriarchal, filial love without any tinge of servitude. 
Here is one of the thousands of characteristic stories 
told by plain people of Tiflis about journey of the Emperor 
Alexander III to Kakhetia. Once their majesties left Tiflis on 
the highway they met a simple man, who was squatted 
down and roasting kebab. Being incredibly delighted he 
waved his hands and shouted, raising his glass of wine: 
- Alexander, Mariamo, gamardjoba! Let God send 
you victory! 
Tsar made that Georgian happy: he took a gulp of 
wine and drank for his loyal Georgian people. 
 
 54
 
 
 
4. Russian-Georgian relations. 
      
The issue of the Russian-Georgian relations is very 
interesting. The lower popular classes reproach perfectly 
like two relative, impulsive origins. Thousands of the 
Russian pilgrims visit the ancient Mtskheta and Bodbiy 
monastery and fraternize with Georgians. In the army 
Russians come more closely with Georgians, unlike Ar-
menians, who are not admitted to club by the officers’ 
families of some regiments, for instance, Nizhegorodsky. 
The Georgian generals are popular among Russian sol-
diers as men with appropriate carriage and courage. 
Even two years after departure of knyaz Amilakhvary 
from position of corps commander some soldiers contin-
ued to believe that he was on “temporary leave” and “in 
case of combat operations would take command again”. 
Relations between the class of officials and Geor-
gian nobility – are quite horny – undoubtedly because of 
the fault of both parties. First, the local higher class has a 
lot of aggressive ambitions, but frequently lacks civil 
principles. Should one official reject impossible or illegal 
request by some feudal offspring, then the latter would 
acknowledge all officials to be torturers, and Georgia to 
be offended unfairly. The logic is somewhat female: 
should one man offend a lady, then she would certainly 
call all men tyrants!.. Meanwhile those lords themselves 
arrogantly treat officials promoted from seminary stu-
dents or plain family, thus creating enemies. 
Some representatives of the old famous families 
distinguished for their psychology of small “rois en éxil” 
are specifically “uncomfortable”; those who can’t tolerate 
 55
their new situation, or engage in any business and do in-
cline only to the “showy” searing of life, have spent 
money received from the treasury as compensation for 
the lost “estates”, and then quickly lost some “allow-
ances” and fees gained from court processes against the 
same treasury – they are the most furious enemies of 
everything Russian, even when they keep receiving 
benefits; their complaints are full of the organic sorrow 
for the lost “tyranny upon chicken paws”, so to speak. 
Having extensive relations in capital circles these gen-
tlemen sometimes turn into real disaster for the Cauca-
sian Russian authorities; being driven by permanent 
need for the money to maintain their parasite “shine” they 
get hobnobbed with rich bosses of the Armenian move-
ment and become guides for their tendencies and in-
trigues in circles they have an access to. They usually 
catch the magnanimity of the Russian government, ex-
pressed by vague formula “Il fout faire quelque chose 
pour ces bons Géorgiens”, in their favour. The lion part of 
that “quelque chose” is immediately caught by people fed 
to teeth with various blessings, but it’s no good for the 
Georgians, as nation. Arrogance and snobbism of the 
privileged parasites evokes indignation of the Russian of-
ficials’ class, almost turning into hatred. The Russian 
man is democratic for his nature and doesn’t understand 
the feudal pride: he acknowledges achievements, not 
coat of arms. 
There should be definite policy in relations between 
plain people and officials. When the Armenian wishes to 
get anything he spreads as carpet, crawls as snake at 
the feet of clerk and reaches his goal by subtle flattery. 
The Georgian aristocracy and intelligentsia have neither 
that “convenient” character, nor that higher and more re-
spectful character called endurance. This is why their 
 56
business position is often shaky. They also harm them-
selves by passion to kinship: even the most benevolent 
official, naturally, would have less trust to any person 
who is reasonably suspected to hide party or family 
combinations behind the proposals of principle nature.  
Mixture of the medieval senses with theoretical 
definitions of the XX century obviously creates confusion, 
harmful for its bearer. Being impressed by frequent mis-
understandings, both of the interested parties incline to 
the groundless opinions and easily believe in lie, conse-
quently the relations become tenser. The Georgians in-
cline to consider all of the Caucasian officials as abso-
lutely bad people, what is of course wrong: many of them 
truly are, but not all! Many Caucasian officials incline to 
assert that all Georgians are serious separatists, what is 
absolutely wrong as well. 
The Georgians like to emphasize the word truly-
loyal, what in the symbolic Caucasian language means 
confession of loyalty to Tsar, but reluctance to submit to 
the Caucasian authorities. The Georgian nobles have an 
amazing ability to “sulk” at the officials and thus to harm 
themselves. It’s unspeakable how much suffered and 
tolerated slight pins on his dignity the late knyaz Dondu-
kov-Korsakov, who had truly wished good to the Geor-
gian people, but finally had been forced out of patience. 
They say that once upon a time when that person arrived 
to Kutaisi, he had been welcomed by the following slo-
gan: they reproduced initial letters of his name D.K. and 
placed above and between them the word “ura”2. They 
did that like schoolboys, in vain, just to say! Chain of 
such actions is grounded by dissatisfaction with abolition 
of the procuratorship system better suiting the negative 
                                     
2 Altogether it makes the Russian word “durak” – stupid. Interpreter. 
 57
sides of the oriental world outlook and way of life, than 
the cold-strict order and legality. 
The Caucasian environment, corrupted by the Ar-
menian flattery and bribery and intensified by the Geor-
gian nervousness, specifically affects the Russian offi-
cials’ class, and authoritative representatives feeling to 
be distant from St. Petersburg, easily succumb to temp-
tations of the oriental bureaucratic customs. The cunning 
elements of population take that moment into account 
and benefit, but nervous ones lose on that. One old 
Georgian once stated with humour that he was unable to 
distinguish limits between definitions of “government”, 
“patronage” and “supremacy”. Generally there is a lot of 
bitter humour in the Georgian speeches. For instance, 
one knyaz formulated his situation as following: “Armeni-
ans deprived me of my estate, administration deprived of 
service, the only things left there are my loyalty feelings 
and good appetite. It’s all right, I can live”! 
From time to time officials or the press raise the is-
sue of the Georgian separatism. Leaving exaggerations 
and, maybe, dreams of a bunch of unimportant people 
aside, that accusation should be infringed in the real lim-
its of the existing fact. 
The glorious history cannot be forgotten – and con-
scious classes of people, absolutely not betraying their 
loyalty feelings and not objecting to the benevolent unifi-
cation of Georgia with Russia, would hate to lose their 
ethnographic originality. They keep dear their national 
image, language, common and religious ones, songs, lit-
erature and symbolism of customs.  
That hardly can harm anybody. Moreover: since 
morality and integrity of human personality is based upon 
rights and customs, racial fundament, then from the pro-
spective of the widely-comprehensible state interests the 
 58
typical Georgian is more preferable than the Georgian 
torn off the ground and unattached tightly to the Russian 
roots; the latter takes an image of the Levantine, a man 
with tribal shortcomings and without traditional tribal 
goods, i.e. a man good for nobody: neither candle to 
God, nor poker to devil! 
The sharpest forms of isolation, as was mentioned 
above, can be remarked beyond the Suram Mountains, 
Kutaisi province. Explanations to that must be looked for 
in history, very anarchical for its nature, and feverish cli-
mate, and extreme nervousness of Georgians of that 
area. Besides, the Imeretian kingdom was rather con-
curred than benevolently united. At last, under such cir-
cumstances the socio-economic phenomena take spe-
cifically important essence and due to them the most 
conscious part of population, grounded on shoat, dem-
onstrates symptoms of anxious nature. 
There are many internal contradictions between as-
pirations of the isolated part of the Georgian society. 
Representatives of these trends, on one hand, look back 
in the past, have passion for kind of an amateurish ar-
chaeology, nervously keep dear their outfit, dagger, ar-
chitecture and various external forms bearing tribal im-
prints on, on the other hand – they wish the common 
Russian institutions like court of jury, municipality, uni-
versities and other higher educations establishments to 
reach out Georgia; from one side they stand for the invio-
lability of the Georgian language, from the other one – for 
the Marxist class struggle, denial of importance of lan-
guage and traditions. These antagonist ideas are sup-
ported by different groups of intelligentsia, quarrelling 
with each other, but joining in the common flow of the 
centre-running aspirations; sometimes absolutely contra-
dicting tendencies live together in mind of one person, 
confessing the confusion of definitions. 
 59
The Georgians are people simultaneously apolitical 
and having passion for nervous sensitivity, produced by 
theatrical sides and sportive forms of the political strug-
gle. At first sight, the abovementioned includes the con-
troversy. But nervous passion for the policy is not a vo-
cation crowned with successes. Strictly speaking, the ti-
tle of the “political people” is most deserved only by 
Germans, and especially their Anglo-Saxon branch: 
popular governance works there regularly, reasonably, 
successfully, besides the society is nearly integrated 
with government; majority of other peoples needs strong 
central power and administrative order, because their 
citizens are either unable “to fit in well” or indifferent to 
policy, or too nervous (practically all southerners). “Po-
litical” people can be shallow and bourgeois-banal (for 
instance the Dutch and others), and “apolitical” people 
can be the great, like the Russians, for instance. It is not 
an issue of the spiritual level, but degree of “unification 
of atoms” of the people, so to speak. From this point of 
view, the most southerners can be compared to the 
gaseous bodies… 
Unfortunately, not only isolated, but all of the intelli-
gent Georgians strongly lack the farsighted tribal patriot-
ism, thought plan of actions to reach a deserved privi-
leged position to that nation in the Russian Empire. That 
status is usually reached either by weapons in hands, or 
by good; but Georgians incline to the third and quite un-
productive way: they often absolutely unreasonably be-
come “sulky”, frond – and spoil their business, thus 
pleasing other Caucasian competitors. The Georgians 
have great potential for success: they are sympathetic to 
the Russian people, worship the state religion, easily ac-
custom (when desired) to different conditions. They could 
have taken prominent positions with us, if they wished, 
 60
and influence the common Russian affairs. Alas, they 
lack self-control and far-sight as well… 
The Georgians incline to attach the sharp character 
of politics to any issue, not only related to their ethno-
graphic originality, but even the simplest commodity or 
economic matter connected with electoral agitation, 
speeches, ballots and so on. 
The recent elections of boards of noble land banks 
in Tiflis and Kutaisi have demonstrated very colourful 
characteristic picture. All of the more or less intelligent 
Georgia participated in that noisy struggle. Speeches 
accompanied by the unspeakable uproar of claps and 
protesting screams filled the house of the Georgian no-
ble theatre; flowers and hysteric cries have poured out 
of boxes occupied by the expansive grand-daughters of 
formerly strict and snobby Georgian matrons. Speakers 
from time to time squeezed their weapons, but luckily 
never used them. Meanwhile the irreconcilable hostility 
spilled over like wide wave far beyond limits of banking 
sessions and interests. The party of “machabelists”, 
named after knyaz I.G. Machabely, who later became 
missing, was especially notorious for its hostility. Every-
thing was mixed and involved here: ladies’ sins, compe-
tition of literary men, and echoes of old feudal animosity 
between particular “gorges”; possibly the latter was that 
element specifically intensifying discussions on “loaners”, 
“directors”, “revision commission” and other issues. This 
way or other, both the hostility and forms of struggle 
have borne truly Corsican character: a kind of a “rabbit”, 
point of madness distorting the whole world outlook, the 
whole nervous system, and the whole life had emerged 
and ineradicably established in heads of combatants… 
Removing or, at least, strongly smoothing the sharp 
forms of the banking struggle the Russian power did a 
 61
great favour to the Georgian society desperately longing 
for tranquillity; it should be noted, that while the Georgi-
ans dedicated their time, means and forces to those 
quarrels, the gangrene of the Armenian exploitation 
more and more successfully was decomposing their 
welfare. 
One can easily imagine what the land institutions 
could become! It’s not occasional that the Armenianized 
press insists on their introduction. The Armenians – 
zealots of the economic and spiritual enslavement of the 
Caucasus – naturally would very much like to see the 
land institutions in Georgia turned into arena of contra-
dictions, on one hand, and on the other hand – into the 
seat of isolation, inclining to transform the business-like 
administrative establishment into small parliament, and 
finally to distract attention of the Georgians from cities 
being keys to the economic supremacy, because only cit-
ies, especially big ones, make prices for the agricultural 
products, being extensive markets for their trade and 
centres of credits. It’s amazing how sensible are Georgi-
ans to the Armenian prompting, despite their bitter ex-
perience!.. I will never forget one of many sessions of the 
nobility assembly in Tiflis dedicated to the issue of land 
institutions. The proponents of the latter were knyaz G.M. 
Tumanov, “Armenianizing Armenian”, untalented, but 
stubborn propagator of the “Armenian-Georgian solidar-
ity”, and knyaz D.Z. Melikov, owner of the “Novoye Oboz-
reniye” newspaper and half-Armenian by birth, very 
popular among Armenian financial circles and then 
elected leader of the Tiflis nobility. Both of them “softly 
sang” about land institutions and audience listened to 
them passionately. The only wise and reasonable word 
then came from colonel knyaz G.I. Orbeliany demonstrat-
ing deep knowledge of local conditions and political 
 62
mind. He has remarked the sufficient difference between 
the forms of institutions and their content; if there is no 
serious factual ground to hope for establishment of full 
correspondence between them, then institution works 
poor, bringing harm to residents and benefits only to 
those, who can catch fish in stirred up water. “We re-
joiced, - continued knyaz, - to introduction of new urban 
statute in Tiflis, but what it had come to? The city be-
came less comfortable, they forced us, Georgians and 
Russians, out of the Duma, it is rather more difficult for 
the Georgian worker to find a piece a bread than to new-
comer from Turkey, our ancient capital gradually stops to 
be the Georgian city; nothing to say, we have reason for 
joy! No, gentlemen, we need governor! It’s rather better 
to confess it sincerely than to follow down the path of ad-
ventures!”… 
Sensitive and well-grounded speech by knyaz Orbe-
liany was welcomed by applauses, but then… after fol-
lowing sessions the assembly spoke in favour of intro-
duction of the land institutions, it’s noteworthy that later 
some nobles confessed cordially that they voted “pro” 
exclusively because of the fear to be considered “illib-
eral”. Luckily for the Georgians that project didn’t en-
counter compassion in the governmental circles. True (in 
literal meaning) supporters of the project forgot that the 
land activity was administrative work and one can’t do it 
without appropriate knowledge and practice; if people are 
unable to organize well the agricultural unions of mutual 
assistance, consumers’ societies and so on, then what 
kind of land administration they could have, how unpro-
ductively and tendentiously would self-taxation grow?! 
That would be strange for a man having poor knowledge 
of main rules of arithmetic to deal with logarithms: any 
charlatan can cheat him on this “cipher”! If in some areas 
 63
of the mainland Russia the land institutions were liming 
in the beginning and people got used to them later, then 
it is difficult to expect the same at the outskirt with multi-
national population, especially where the trade-industrial 
class is composed of the predating nation enslaving the 
Georgians more and more. It’s obvious that subjugation 
will grow even stronger if not stopped by adoption of the 
restraining law, becoming more actual day by day. 
The representatives of the isolated part of the Geor-
gian intelligentsia are equally little far-sighted when striv-
ing for the establishment of university or polytechnic col-
lege in Tiflis: they would get only “residues” of that bene-
fit, which would be grabbed by the Armenian plutocracy 
to be transformed from the higher educational institution 
into academy of the Armenian intrigue. 
The Georgians quite reasonably explain their sen-
sitivity to the Armenian influence saying that Armenians 
represent the only real force in the region and even the 
Russian power doesn’t offer them appropriate counter-
action in any field; the Armenian bosses have freely 
grabbed all life important sources: markets, banks, and 
influence (although secret, and hence more dangerous) 
of destinies of officials and enjoy impunities in cases, 
when any other Caucasian resident would be punished 
in the most cruel way. From the prospective of transient 
and temporary advantage they are right, but at the same 
time they confess of serving their personal benefits, not 
high ideals like their ancestors knights. Let’s be hopeful 
that they will be right not for long, from the practical 
point of view as well: necessity of counteraction to Ar-
menianization of the Caucasus by radical actions be-
comes more pressing. From the point of view of the 
Russian historical mission that would be a sin to submit 
the co-religious and generally loyal to us people to be 
 64
ate; equally sinful would be a bad policy, because it 
would be disadvantageous from the prospective of the 
Russian state cause to allow Georgians to become the 
conductors of the Armenian movement!.. Armenians 
lead there consistently and systematically, but succeed 
only in respect to the ruined smokers of heaven. The 
Georgian people don’t believe them. During religious-
popular holidays in Mtskheta, Alaverdy and Bodby the 
blind Armenian singers freely sing “Georgian” revolu-
tionary songs, composed specially by the Armenian poli-
ticians of bankers. People listen without attention, with 
scornful smiles as hearing some nonsense. But once 
somebody starts singing beautiful lyrical song by popu-
lar poet, knyaz Tseretely or Chavchavadze – everything 
wakes up and turns into ear… For the nervous intelli-
gentsia the Armenian bosses publish “La Géorgie” 
newspaper in Paris in French, but they don’t succeed 
here as well: the newspaper is prepared without talent, 
deals with shallow gossips and dissemination of libel. At 
first public has shown slight interest to that, but nobody 
speaks about it seriously at present… 
It is a fatal combination of circumstances that the 
more or less stubborn, although not very dangerous of 
course, seat of the Georgian isolation is that field of lo-
cal life, which serves the strongest chain uniting the 
small Georgia with the great Russia. I’m referring to the 
Church. The Georgian priesthood cannot forget the 
autocephaly of its Church, and there are narrow minded 
people among the Russian priests in the Caucasus un-
able to separate religion from politics, as well as the “ca-
reer-makers in frocks” ready to shake the very funda-
ments of the holy Church’s cause in Georgia for the 
sake of career ambitions. It should be also noted that 
the Georgian priesthood itself is not distinguished for ei-
 65
ther high cultural level, or useful influence on the popu-
lar masses and enjoys nearly no authority among them. 
That is not a fruit of the Russian regime; quite to the 
contrary it is a result of exhaustion of the spiritual power 
in Georgia by the end of the XVIII century. I had a 
chance to see one recent official correspondence: two 
prominent priests were accusing each other in criminal 
offences: A accused B in hiring assassins to make an 
attempt on his life. B proudly responded that there was 
no need for assassins since he had many young rela-
tives ready to kill anybody at his first sign. 
Family vengeance between priests, especially su-
preme ones, has not turned into legend yet. Under such 
circumstances it becomes clear that presence of the eth-
nic Russian and objectively benevolent exarch, not con-
nected with any political unification tasks which can be 
carried out by thousands of other methods, is extremely 
useful from the prospective of religion and spiritual inter-
ests of the Georgian people. The most thoughtful Geor-
gian patriots understand that. While the Georgian ortho-
doxy was pressing all its efforts for not to be ruined, the 
Russian church, protected by strong power and inacces-
sible for neither external enemies, nor family vengeance, 
was promoting representatives of the deep and calm 
spiritual thought, fruits of which are useful for the co-
religious suffering people. 
Along with that, it is necessary, of course, to safe-
guard the Georgian church language and traditional 
songs. I confess they have always made a deep impres-
sion on me: they breathe with amazing mystical antiquity; 
it seems that listening to them one ascends closer to the 
times of Jesus. Many plain Russian pilgrims I met in the 
Georgian monasteries share that feeling. By the way, 
 66
some of the Georgian church songs remind our old song 
of sign. 
Here are some more words about Georgian patriot-
ism. When wide lines of history and main fundaments of life 
eloquently speak in favour of the tight Russian-Georgian 
union, then local patriotism may become dangerous only in 
case of unsuccessful conduct of the provincial policy in 
general. I will speak about it with more details in of the 
paragraphs dedicated to the issue of the Armenians. Under 
normal circumstances the local patriotism will contribute to 
the state cause, if it would be looking forward, not back-
ward, and dwelled upon the reasonable ground of the eco-
nomic care about people’s welfare. 
Of course, one must renounce the fantasies de-
scribed in the saying composed by people – “inflated 
like Liakhva”; Liakhva is a river near the city of Gory fal-
ling into the Kura River, usually it is very shallow, but in 
times of flood it overflows and causes great damage. 
One of such “Liakhvas” is a claim of some particular 
“cultural-historical” mission of the Georgians in Abkhazia 
based on the fact that the kingdom of Abkhazia some-
times was vassalage of Georgia (in XII century!) and 
that lords of this feud Georgianized Persian princes 
Shevarshidze (transformed from Shirvan-shah, Shirvan-
shahidze) bear name ending with “dze” and regarded as 
the Georgian aristocrats. Some priests speculate the fic-
tion of the “Georgian-Abkhaz church”, although the 
Abkhazians speak language having nothing in common 
with the Georgian. As the late Caucasian linguist baron 
Uslar once jokingly said “the Abkhazians speak such a 
complicate language that it is astounding how they un-
derstand each other at all”. And suddenly the cultural-
historical rights over Abkhazia are claimed by the Geor-
 67
gians, whose native land property sleeps through their 
fingers!.. 
The Georgians would better strive for not fantastic 
“grease”, but own survival! The self-activity is the first 
thing to be reached for – and many people understand 
that fine. I heard sincere wishes to have more of the Rus-
sian orthodox tradesmen in the Georgians centres, be-
cause that would have helped the life-important develop-
ment of the Georgian bourgeoisie and the cause of the 
church and the cultural development in the economic field. 
The agricultural syndicates, consumers’ societies, 
depots and other entities emerge in different places of 
Georgia. The government should have helped them, and 
we should have supported the economic revival of the 
closest to us people of the Transcaucasia. 
The late knyaz K.I. Bagration-Mukhransky, the last 
of the typically Georgian leaders of the nobility of the Ti-
flis province, once said that all of the Georgians are con-
servators. Only few people understood these words, be-
cause too many people certainly want to be regarded as 
liberals; but basically knyaz Mukhransky was right. I can’t 
forget how one company of progressive great talkers was 
openly speculating about constitution and different forms 
of the provincial isolation with my presence. Suddenly 
some young knyaz rushed in and brought news about 
expected visit of their Majesties to the Caucasus. Next 
moment, without any arrangement, all eyes shined, and 
wine glittered in the goblets and choir started singing 
“mravalzhamier” – many years to Tsar. 
Knowing the flaws of the Georgian life and short-
comings of their society well, I many times openly told 
Georgians of them in the Caucasus, I still cannot con-
sider that suffering and nervous people alien to us. 
Keeping faith in vitality of the uniting us cultural values, 
 68
covered with trash in minds of the high circles of both 
peoples, but alive in depth of the nation’s soul – I follow 
the path of Slavophil, my views coincide with ones of 
such people like Ivan Sergeyevich Aksakov and Rosti-
slav Fadeyev, who didn’t consider alien the people 
united with us by historical mission, glorious deeds in 
the past, and community of faith, Tsar and fatherland at 
present. 
 69
 
 
 
5. Armenians 
 
As says Lebon – The century and a half ago the 
philosophers, quite ignorant about primordial history of 
human being, modifications of his intellectual organiza-
tion and laws of heredity – have thrown in the idea of 
equality of individuals and races. That idea, although it is 
deeply wrong one, has shaken the bases of old societies 
and evoked the biggest of revolutions. The modern soci-
ety regards institutions and breeding as cure – and only 
few people dare to fight the idea, flimsiness of which is 
evidently proved by both the modern public psychology 
and life. The names of things are changed in history of 
peoples, but old and hardly changeable facts live under 
new words. Every nation has the intellectual organism 
which is as stable as its anatomic features. 
Our cosmopolitan press, pleasing the foreign insti-
gators and provincial politicians remains silent about sci-
entific conclusions, always cries out if somebody utters a 
word about common, colouring, typically negative fea-
tures of any nation, beside Russians. One can “analyze” 
the Russians forth and back! To say truth about other na-
tions – God save! They cry that this is obscurantism, 
misanthropy and so on. They not only shout, but take ac-
tions not restraining themselves in choice of methods. 
The story with “The Contrabandists” (play) is quite re-
markable. Our public and to some extent state life (in 
provinces) is rich for such instructive examples. 
Just like the nature has entire classes of things and 
creatures different for their distinguishing characteristic 
features, the human tribes have the same features and 
 70
receive the appropriate characteristics from history and 
their contemporary neighbours.  
The opinion composed since the ancient times 
about the Armenians is negative – and naturally that is 
not groundless, otherwise that could have not emerged 
at entire nations and in different ages.  
But of course one can’t overlook injustice contained 
in the indiscriminate and unqualified opinions, samples of 
which will follow. First, one has to distinguish Armenian 
popular masses from the predating plutocracy, obscurant 
politicized priesthood and pseudo-intelligent jacket-men, 
i.e. from those ruling Armenian public circles, oppressing 
not only their neighbours, but innocent plain people of 
their own as well. Second, undoubtedly there is sufficient 
number of people among the ruling class, mostly not bad 
and mainly guilty of craven obedience to the terror of 
their leaders and hypnosis of the ill-developed tribal, or 
how they call it (without any right) national idea. 
The honest man predominantly facing those chiefs 
and their hirelings easily starts feeling indiscriminate ani-
mosity to Armenians; but taking a closer look at that mys-
terious tribe, its historic destiny and current situation one 
would definitely become imbued with compassion to the 
Armenian popular masses, which undoubtedly has much 
good stuff. 
The more compassion we give them and the closer 
look at their situation we take, the more disgusting would 
appear to us their heartless tribal chiefs, politicized op-
pressors and troublemakers.  
They can contradict me saying that the Armenian 
ruling classes originate from the same people, and con-
sequently its sons are embryos of the same predators. 
But, first of all, the higher circles are not always monitors 
of the spiritual level of the people, and second, historical 
 71
and economic conditions the destiny has put the Arme-
nian people into used to and still contribute to the raise 
on surface and heights of the local life of the worst, most 
sinful and cunning representatives of that race. 
 
 72
 
 
 
6. Historical background 
 
Who are the Armenians? Their main genesis is not 
established well. History tells about their amalgamation 
with large masses of Jews, first during the Babylon cap-
tivity, and then after destruction of Jerusalem. From the 
anthropological point of view most Armenians are ex-
treme brakhycephalic, i.e. short headed, and in this re-
gard they are very close to the Mountainous Jews and 
Syro-Chaldean, as it can be seen from researches of 
Shantr, Erkert, Pantyukhov and others. The English sci-
entist Bertine considers them to be the same people as 
Jews of the pre-Palestine period. 
Professor D.N. Anuchin says that Armenians are 
not the Arian tribe, but rather Arianized (for language). 
Besides that, not all of those who identify themselves as 
Armenians do really belong to the native Armenian tribe. 
The Armenian magazine “Murch”3 writing about signifi-
                                     
3 The “Murch”, 1897. Article titled “Armenians out of Gypsies”. 
“There are only two nations in the world without national language and 
motherland: Jews and Gypsies. Neither Asian tyranny, nor merciless 
medieval chases, nor even modern humanist culture could assimilate 
them with other peoples, and thus all those mighty factors became 
powerless to strangle material greed of one people and unrestrained 
unlimited aspiration for roaming of the other one. Everywhere, in Asia 
or Europe, in the old or new world, the Gypsy remains Gypsy, the Jew 
– Jew. Only the Armenian people managed to assimilate Gypsies, my 
words are grounded, - adds the author, - by true facts. The Gypsies of 
Erivan, Shemakha, Yelisavetpol, Tiflis and others, whose existence was 
reflected in history 50 years ago, have ceased to be Gypsies and amal-
gamating with the Armenian element become assimilated with Armeni-
ans, keeping only their surnames, as an old memory about their gene-
sis. No matter how to approach to this issue, conclusion will be the 
 73
cant ability of the Armenians to assimilate other peoples 
had indicated existence of large number of the assimi-
lated Gypsies among Armenians by the end of the 90’s. 
The familiarity with both tribes gives an observer a suffi-
cient material proving conclusions of the mentioned 
magazine. The Caucasian anthropologist doctor I.I. Pan-
tyukhov has come to even more interesting conclusion 
about large groups of Armenians. That honourable scien-
tist has taken his chance when Tiflis was flooded with 
semi-savage refugees from Turkey and subjected many 
Turkish Armenians to the anthropologic measurement. 
He figured out that most part of those uninvited guests 
for their anthropologic parameters were – pure-blooded 
Kurds. That fact opens space for proposition that some 
episodes of the Armenian massacre in Turkey were re-
sults of old family accounts between the Kurdish tribes of 
different religion. 
The issue concerning the Transcaucasian Albania, 
or Agvania in the Armenian language, is highly interest-
ing as well. That country included the present province of 
Yelisavetpol, part of Tiflis and Dagestan and was popu-
lated by peoples of non-Armenian origin, who received 
Christianity from Armenians. Before the XIX century 
there was separate Catholicos of Agvan or Gyndzasar, 
competing with Echmiadzin and from time to time becom-
ing absolutely independent. At present the Christians, 
who were the parish of the Catholicos of Agvan, are con-
                                                                                
same – no nation managed to accomplish the task of mass assimila-
tion, but Armenians. The assimilated Gypsy-Armenians have even 
brought up talented people. For instance, professor of the St. Peters-
burg University Kerobe Patkanyan had a Gypsy origin, so had the 
monk-poet Alamdaryan, two of the modern Armenian writers also have 
Gypsy roots, popular poet Ganes-ogly, who has written many verses, 
and others…”  
 74
sidered as Armenians, intermixed with them and ac-
cepted their character. 
The Armenians also had unwilling, forced crossings 
with other nations. The Persian hordes, Azerbaijani 
Tatars, Turkish, Georgians and highlanders probably 
never had ceremonies with women belonging to nation 
which had lost own statehood and methods of proud, 
brave self-defence connected with it long ago. 
Under such circumstances it becomes evident that 
the Armenians have any blood in their veins. That ex-
plains a fact that people, whose cowardice became 
proverb in the Asia Minor, from time to time gives birth to 
talented and brave commanders as bright exceptions on 
the dark background: it is clear that blood of other martial 
people speaks in them, while normal, pure-blooded Ar-
menian is “afraid of rabbits”, as states the common Cau-
casian proverb available in different languages. That 
character is undoubtedly Semitic. By the way, there are 
many Semitic characters in the Armenian people: there is 
a historical inability to have a little bit stable statehood, 
and gradual disappearance of the authoritative family ar-
istocracy, and the long standing transfer to the under-
ground politics of the theocratic regime, and sharp signs 
of collectivism in utilisation of the irrigated lands, which 
still can be found among the peasantry (ampa-
charekism), and significant racial talent for trade, usury 
and unlimited money-grubbing. Their arrogance and cru-
elty in respect to the weakest and slavish glowering be-
fore the powerful, and finally, astounding, phenomenal 
talent for advertisement and insatiable vanity – all those 
are the Jewish characters, but they become more curse 
and intensive with Armenians. 
The Armenians hate to be compared with the Jews 
and instruct their defenders not to miss a chance for 
 75
speaking more vigorously about the Arian origin of the 
people of haik. Possibly in provision of such facts the 
Georgian saying wisely states: 
“Only slave, when he is ordered, states that apples 
grow on the oak.” 
Unfortunately a lot of such slaves can be found 
among officials, publicists and even scientists in our age 
of worship to the golden idol… 
Besides all that, ignorance about the Caucasus and 
its tribes is widely spread among us – moreover that ig-
norance is self-confident and irritating the connoisseurs 
of the issue. By the way, the distinguished professor of 
Warsaw D.I. Azarevich, unacquainted with me person-
ally, has written to me from village the following text 
about recent articles by Mr. Syromyatnikov4: 
“Without a library at hand I only remind you that dur-
ing the last archaeological conference held in Moscow 
the anthropologic section under presidency of Mr. Virk-
hov had heard report by some Frenchman (I think Figuet) 
about Semitism of the Armenians. Papers of that confer-
ence can be easily found in the Emperor’s public library, 
and that report can be found there as well.” 
The respectful scientist, who hopefully wouldn’t find 
my reference to his authority immodest, probably was 
confused by negligent attitude to science on behalf of the 
excessively brave defenders of Armenians against sus-
picion in Semitism. Position of such people can be to 
some extent justified by direct indication of the thesaurus 
by Brockgaus and Efron statin that Armenians are – “the 
branch of the Iranian group of the Indo-European tribe”. 
Here one can hardly forget the aphorism: “calendars al-
ways lie”, that can be successfully applied to the diction-
aries published by the Jews… 
                                     
4 The “Novoye Vremya” newspaper, 1903, No.9708.  
 76
Here should be noted that the Armenian patrons 
among oil businessmen take strong care about creation 
of the completely special history of Armenia, exaltation of 
this small people and its heroes, starting with occasional 
generals deserving respect and ending with ordinary 
contrabandists of different kinds, deserving… respect, 
but from the opposite side. In particular they do not miss 
a chance to highlight their historical “services” and cur-
rent decency by parasitic way, I mean by flinging ad in-
terim the shadow on the neighbouring peoples, who had 
more clear, doubtless and decent history. They shame-
lessly plunder the Georgians in the historic-
archaeological field: they scratch the Georgian inscrip-
tions off the monuments, invade ancient Orthodox chap-
els and abandoned churches5, compose historical non-
                                     
5 There are many examples of such outrageous facts and we will cite 
two of them happened within last two months. The “Caucasus”, June 
1897. The parishes of the St. Nicholas church of the city of Dushet 
have made a verdict instructing two members of their community to ap-
peal to the supreme Caucasian administration to take actions against 
conquer of the chapel “Bodavis-tsminda Georgis-nishi” and adjacent 
land site (half a mile from Dushet city) by the Armenian priesthood. Like 
authors of the verdict said, antique icons of that chapel have been sto-
len and relocated to the Armenian church of Dushet long ago, and the 
land site has been joined to that church on 15th of the last May by un-
known way, and the chapel itself has been renamed as “Surp-Geurk”, 
and since then the orthodox priests are not allowed to worship there. 
The “Iveria”, April 1897. City of Akhaltsykh. Close to the city, on the op-
posite bank of the Potskhovy River there is a medicinal spring and its 
water cures from headache. There was long standing Georgian chapel 
and small cell near the spring. The medical effects of that spring were 
widely known and suffering people from different parts of Georgia used 
to come here to get cure. People used water for free and collected 
great amount of benevolent donations in the chapel. In the beginning of 
the last March somebody has conceived and idea to display the Arme-
nian icons in the chapel, to install doors, to lock them and take keys 
away. The right honoured priest D. Khakhutov reported to the exarch of 
Georgia about that invasion.    
 77
sense and show places where every stone speaks about 
the past of the Georgian kingdom as the ancient Arme-
nian possessions. 
The first hireling of the Armenians in the Russian lit-
erature was Senkovsky, writing in such spirit under pen-
name of baron Brambeus. Then Armenian “historians” 
Emin (History of Moses of Khoren), Khudobashev (Out-
look of Armenia), in later times Yeritsov (The Caucasian 
Antiquity 1872, No.1) have been working in that direction 
contradicting to such eloquent witnesses of the past like 
monuments; for instance, they are trying to steal from 
Georgia the historical rights for the region of Saatabago, 
i.e. possessions of the atabek Jakely, the present uezd 
of Akhaltsykh. Any Caucasian knows that the indisput-
able traces of existence of the queen Tamara the Great 
still remain in that area, and that the Muslim population of 
that uezd consists of the Georgian-speaking Turkonized 
Georgians, while Armenians in large numbers have ap-
peared there in the first part of the XIX century as refu-
gees from Turkey, not native inhabitants. 
The professor-Armenist Patkanov6 is also little re-
strained with facts, referring to such pseudo-scientists like 
Senkovsky, roaming botanist Kokh and others. The Geor-
gian writer Bakradze had timely exposed him, but that dis-
pute didn’t reach the most part of the Russian public; Mr. 
Marr, student of Patkanov, doesn’t miss an opportunity to 
cut something off the Georgians in favour of Armenians 
and promises to prove that notorious old Georgian poem 
“The man in tigers’ skin” was a borrowed piece. 
That is desirable to the Armenian politicians because 
Armenians don’t and never had any significant poetic 
                                     
6 This is the man whose Gypsy origin was mentioned by the Armenian 
newspaper “Murch”.  
 78
piece during entire time of their existence, i.e. one of the 
visible signs of blossoming of the national spirit. No matter 
how hard are trying rather persistent than talented literary 
nestlings like Mr. Yuri Veselovsky and others to convince 
the Russian public in existence of the good Armenian lit-
erature they can’t go further than prattling, because noth-
ing gets nothing despite all endeavours. 
Somebody Mr. Ezov by name has compiled a book 
phenomenal for its impudence and titled “The relations of 
the Great Peter with Armenian people”, there against the 
common sense the author had attributed some special 
diplomatic importance to unknown rascal named Israel Or, 
or Orius, who had been trying to involve the Great Peter in 
war with Persia in the hottest time of his struggle with 
Sweden – that Mr. Ezov extracts from everywhere the 
quotations disadvantageous for Georgians and for that 
purpose goes far beyond the limits of his task. Similar 
quotations are deliberately palmed off to the reader in the 
philanthropic collection titled “The fraternal help to Arme-
nians suffered in Turkey” with epigraph taken from Glad-
stone: “kindness, kindness and… kindness”! What came 
out is quite poisonous kindness, in the Armenian style.  
Famous Georgian poet and publicist knyaz Ilya 
Chavchavadze has dedicated very interesting brochure 
(“Armenian wizards and flagrant stones”) to that lie and 
all those historical-archaeological attempts and thefts of 
the Armenians. That brochure is translated into Russian 
and rich for the characteristic facts. 
When they speak in Tiflis about Georgian-Armenian 
intertribal relations, people recall some Cutuly, the corre-
spondent of the “Temps”. Once that man arrived to Tiflis 
he was captured by the cunning hunchback Artsruni, tal-
ented political agitator and chief-editor of the “Mshak” 
newspaper. The Armenian bosses pleased and fed Cu-
 79
tuly not letting him to step aside from them. He had com-
pletely lost ability to regard things around by his own 
eyes. They even resorted to presenting all beautiful 
women passing by as Armenians, and all ugly as Geor-
gians. It was so comic that even Georgians, with their ex-
tremely sensitive historical-archaeological self-esteem, 
have been powerless to get angry while reading travel-
ling impressions of the naïve or submissive Frenchman. 
It was extremely interesting to watch not long ago 
how the Armenian politicians and “history makers” have 
been trying to seduce the French scientist baron de Bay, 
who was writing much about Russia, and how they have 
been disappointed by setback. By the way, he visited 
Echmiadzin, the capital of the Armenian Catholicos, 
where has been demonstrated some extremely ancient 
things, some crowns, cups, embroidered covers and so 
on. The experienced archaeologist noticed full discrep-
ancy of the chronologic data mentioned by Armenians at 
once and has expressed his view with humour in press. 
Moreover, he found that some of the pseudo-ancient or-
naments belong to the late rococo. Fury of the local Ar-
menian papers published in the Russian script reached 
the point of indecency. 
The painful pride and vanity of Armenians and their 
inclination to advertise their eminence in the past and at 
present can be to some extent explained and justified by 
their desire to get rid of that bad reputation they have 
gained for centuries. 
The unbiased, humanist and moral Tacitus, who was 
able to praise the Germans, enemies of Rome, refers to 
Armenians in the second book Ab excessu Augusti, para-
graph 53, as following: Ambigua gens ea antiquitus homi-
num ingeniis et situ terrarium – that is originally ambigu-
ous people for its character and geographic situation as 
 80
well; saepius discords sunt, adversus Romanos odio et 
Pathum invidia, i.e. always filled with hatred to the Ro-
mans and envy to the Parthian. In the book 12, paragraph 
46, he refers to the “known enough treachery of Armeni-
ans”, satis cognitam Armeniorum perfidiam. 
“You are coward, you are slave, you are Armenian!” 
– says Pushkin by lips of the old highlander. The Georgi-
ans say: “movida somekhi – moytana skhva mekhi” – 
Armenian came and brought new trouble. Number of the 
folk sayings refers to the expulsion of the Georgian no-
bles by Armenian tradesmen and then jacket-men: 
“blood-horses died – now donkeys have the space”, “the 
strange hen pushed domestic chicken out of house” and 
etc. The Transcaucasian Tatars say: “even if you light 
your ten fingers as candles to illuminate the road to the 
Armenian, he won’t thank you”. The Russians have an 
old inclination to call Armenians degrading names, con-
nected with either contempt or mockery. 
The progressive and humanist poet Nekrasov says: 
 
Жениху с солидным чином 
Отказала, осердясь, 
И с каким-то армянином 
Обвенчалась, не спросясь. 
 
(She angrily denied the bridegroom with good title 
and married some Armenian without permission.) 
 
Equally humanist Zhemchuzhnikov (in Kozma Prut-
kov) sings the following: 
 
На узкой кровати 
Лежу я один, 
В соседней палате  
Кричит армянин. 
 81
(On narrow bed I lie alone, Armenian cries in the 
neighbouring room.) 
 
The word “cries” is quite typical here: they incline to 
cry at every occasion. When they are not allowed in 
somebody’s house, or their nasty deeds are disclosed, or 
thieves of their kind are subjected to trial – they not only 
cry, but force to cry the aliens, stupid or corrupt people. 
Our impartial belle-letter is not benevolent to Arme-
nians as well. For instance, Leskov in his “Soboryane” 
has a black-mailer with excessively developed pelvis – 
Termosesov. 
France and Germany are places where the Arme-
nian revolutionary groups function and where the strong 
agitation in favour of Armenians is conducted at the ex-
pense of money from Baku oil manufacturers, but there 
are unbiased people at least familiar with the issue and 
raising their voice against them. The French traveller to 
Armenia, Kurdistan and Mesopotamia count de Chole, 
describing life of those Turkish provinces with good 
knowledge and being indignant with merciless attitude of 
Muslims to the Armenian popular masses, speaks about 
Armenians: “nevertheless, despite of that great compas-
sion created with me by their poverty and suffering, I 
have never been able to become attached to them, that 
disgusting was their swindling, that shameful was their 
baseness and outrageous their meanness”. 
The German traveller Alfred Koerte in his “Anatolian 
sketches” dedicated to the famous German statesman in 
Turkey Kolmar von der Holz, where the author would 
hardly dare to speak without reason, says the following: 
“almost everyone who touches the nucleus of people in 
these provinces learns to respect and love the Turks, to 
put down the Greeks and to hate and contempt the Ar-
 82
menians…The below saying is justified everywhere – 
Greek can cheat two Jews, but Armenian two Greeks. 
Should you become cheated somewhere in Anatolia, 
then one can say for sure that you had business with 
Armenians”. The same author quotes the words of one 
large contractor from Eski-Sheher: “when I negotiate 
business with the Turk, then I do without written contract 
– because his word is enough. With the Greek or other 
Levantine I conclude written agreement, because dealing 
with them it is necessary and useful; with Armenians I 
don’t have any even written business, because even the 
written agreement doesn’t protect from their deceitful-
ness and intrigues”. 
Strictly speaking, the intelligent Armenians long ago 
understood that their tribal name has had malicious repu-
tation. It is not occasional that until recent times they 
have been trying to pretend themselves before the peo-
ple unacquainted with the Caucasus as the Georgians, 
or for more poetry – as the “Circassian”. They and publi-
cists compassioning them still incline to substitute the 
word “Armenian” wherever possible with words “native”, 
“Caucasian” and especially “the Christian”. That empha-
sis on the “Christianity” is very typical, because Armeni-
ans would love to gain something at the expense of their 
Muslim neighbours, and because the name “Christian” 
gives them a privileged position, and they feel comfort-
able in cases when unintentional comparison with the 
Jews suggests itself. And they have so many Jewish 
characters that if all scientists of the world had mistak-
enly acknowledged them as the Arians, then the life itself 
would become indignant with such determination… 
It doesn’t matter how inaccurate is the written his-
tory of Armenia, it has many characteristic and instructive 
things – as in the high impudence of the narration tone, 
 83
and facts themselves as well. Starting with the Catholi-
cos John VI (“History of Armenia from the beginning of 
world up to year of 925”, French translation by Saint-
Martin) and till the recent times – the Armenian historians 
pretend for precision of data specifically referring to that 
legendary period. Armenians claim to be descents of 
Noah; the mythical Haik was grand-son of Japheth and 
grand-grand-son of Noah. As spoke the Armenian 
archbishop Joseph who has dedicated his book to the 
emperor Paul I – “the most credible narration of the pedi-
gree of forefathers of the Armenian tribe states this: 
Noah begat Japheth, Japheth begat Homer, Homer be-
gat Thyrasus, Thyrasus begat Torcomus begat Haik, 
who was engaged in Babel together with Nimrod. And 
since Haik didn’t want to acknowledge the supreme 
power of Nimrod over himself he left that undertaking 
and returned to his land, therefore Nimrod started war 
against him, but Haik became victor and killed Nimrod. 
This is why the peoples submitting to Haik, respecting 
him as father and king, started calling themselves Hai-
kan”. After that comes the chain of equally trustworthy 
and proved facts. Pages are coloured by “great” names, 
unknown to all histories, but Armenian, and sometimes 
figures of less suspicious origin appear in highly exag-
gerated shape. 
If one had to inscribe on the tables of the Armenian 
history a word, besides “fabrication”, which could pre-
cisely characterize the plausible facts, then it would be 
impossible to evade the word “treason”. Suspicious mas-
ters of Armenia, a country with permanently changing 
borders, always depend on the neighbouring powerful 
monarchies and always, systematically betray them. No-
bles (nakharchs) betray kings, and people – both of 
them. The cruelty of customs and unreliability of mutual 
 84
relations are phenomenal. Once Persians, Romans or 
Arabs appoint somebody the ruler of Armenia, that per-
son immediately starts preparations for disorder. 
In the mainland Armenia, i.e. Armenian plateau, the 
least independent kingdom was abolished very long time 
ago, in the fifth century, when Armenia clearly became the 
Persian province and theocracy headed by the Catholicos 
had established itself factually over the Armenian people 
as the nearest and organized power. Since then the Ar-
menian bosses quite clearly trade through two shops: sell-
ing out motherland and people to either the Persians with 
Muslims in general, or Byzantium, and conduct their un-
dercover struggle for their tribal originality. 
Some ghost of the statehood had appeared by the 
end of the XI century in tiny Cilicia, but absolutely van-
ished in 1375. 
 85
 
 
 
7. Crossing to the theocracy and monophysitism. 
 
The first mention of Christianity (knyaz Abgar of 
Edessa) among Armenians, because of their tribal prox-
imity with the Jews, belongs to the earliest ages, first 
century AD, but formal, although very doubtful for es-
sence, introduction of the Christianity dates back to 301: 
the Saint George Illuminator converted king Trdat, who 
then baptized all his subjects and after that died sud-
denly: probably he was poisoned by new Christians. The 
Bible in the Armenian language appears only by the V 
century, translated by Mesrop. Life of true Christians and 
leaders of church was very hard in Armenia; for instance, 
by the end of the IV century Catholicos Nerses the Great 
led furious and basically indecent struggle with king, not 
for the sake of the Christian ideals, but for establishment 
of the theocracy, and as per some information died be-
cause of unnatural causes. King Tigran II forced Armeni-
ans to worship the idol of Julian Apostate. 
The moment of convergence of Armenians from the 
Orthodoxy is of special interest. That derived from the 
theocratic aspirations, material and political interests, 
took long preparations, but formed up and found dog-
matic quibbles only by the VI century, when Armenians in 
order to please the Persian king Khosrov had absolutely 
denied the formula of the Khalcedonian convent and 
joined to the monophysits. Persians needed that to im-
plant discontent into the Christian world and to weaken 
Byzantium. The Arabs demonstrated the same aspiration 
using threats and money – those means the descents of 
Haik could not resist to. At price of treason to religion the 
 86
Armenians have stepped into the way of slavish relations 
with heterodox masters, on one hand, and on the other 
hand – fixed the special type of the underground state 
corresponding to their Semitic instincts, namely theoc-
racy, where political and material interests have special 
importance against religious ones. 
Such extermination of the open statehood requiring 
courage, loyalty, and ability to willing, benevolent disci-
pline, sacrifices of material goods and blood – obviously 
cannot serve a patent of nobility for the race. But it 
should be recognized, that external conditions were very 
difficult and open struggle with neighbours would have 
been too unequal, and hence transfer to the slavish 
struggle had been unintended. On the other hand, the 
shift to theocracy undoubtedly was practically-wise act, 
because theocracy had preserved originality of the Ar-
menian race and demonstrated extraordinary capacity for 
revival of that originality in such field, where the latter 
seemed to have slept away forever. 
The whole further history of Armenians, full of hu-
miliation before large and small heterodox masters, is 
pierced by slightly visible string of never exhaustible 
hope for revival of the Armenian people and state.  
Naturally, rather individual patriots than the popular 
masses dream about that, predominantly the priests, rich 
tradesmen, nakharar and meliks7, who had favour of 
shahs and sultans. It is quite characteristic that this 
dream is growing by the course of the territorial expan-
sion of Russia and rapprochement of its victorious ban-
ner to the Asia Minor. 
Relations of Armenians with the Russian govern-
ment are quite spotty. The Great Peter, who perfectly 
                                     
7 Small local rulers. Interpreter. 
 87
understood importance of the Russian historical mission 
in the Middle East, naturally had nothing against people 
considered Christians and rioting against their Muslims 
masters, enemies of the Orthodoxy and Russian-Slavic 
cause. That is why he allowed the abovementioned ad-
venturer Israel Orius to speak out; but nevertheless the 
tsar didn’t bite his hook. The Great Emperor ordered to 
verbally announce to the Armenian envoys that “he was 
busy with the Swedish war”, and thus didn’t let to involve 
himself into adventure. The emperor also instructed to 
answer to the request of Israel Orius about accompany-
ing Russian troops at that war saying that “he had noth-
ing to be there for”. 
   It is remarkable that among queens of the XVIII 
century Anna Ioannovna (possibly on the ground of in-
formation received from Volynsky, who knew Armenians 
well) treated them without trust, although she had con-
ducted the Christian policy and her commanders tri-
umphed over the Muslims. Unlike that, Catherine II 
reached the extreme limits of benevolence to Armenians, 
what possibly can be explained by decay of morals and 
outrageous splendour reigning at her court. Naturally 
there were royal servants receiving “peshkesh”8 from the 
Armenian sellers of precious goods. Besides, the “illus-
trious knyaz of Taurus” undoubtedly was a man with fan-
tasy, and he was amused with a thought of restoration of 
the Christian state on the Armenian plateau. 
During reign of Catherine II Armenians had a man, 
remarkable from different angles, with unrestrained en-
ergy and great political entrepreneurship, reaching point of 
importunity. That was Archbishop Joseph, originating from 
the culturally Geogianized old Armenian family, which had 
                                     
8 Presents. Interpreter. 
 88
received the knyaz title from the Georgian tsars. His sur-
name was Argutashvili-Mkhagrdzely, literally meaning Ar-
gutov-Plechistiy9, but later it had been translated with “fan-
tasy” and entered in Russian circle as “Argutinsky-
Dolgorukiy”10. That name of course had nothing common 
with the Rurikovich Dolgorukiy’s. In 1779 the mentioned 
archbishop established Nakhichevan-on-Don, the Arme-
nian city inhabited by 15000 of settlers from Crimea and 
Turkey. The settlers were granted fairly well privileges: 
transportation of all property from Crimea at the state ex-
pense, 12000 acres of pasture-ground, indemnification 
from all duties for 10 years, liberty from soldier quartering 
and recruitment; every household was given 30 acres of 
land, free wood and items for construction, and seeds, 
cattle and inventory under condition of return after 10 
years. The complete code of laws contains precise infor-
mation about all of the abovementioned. 
Under the Georgian tsar Heracly II, due to the ef-
forts of Argutinsky striving to wake up the Armenian self-
consciousness, some Karabakh meliks with their subju-
gated peasants were settled in Georgia and formed the 
Shulavery settlement. Two meliks – Majnun and Abo by 
names – immediately betrayed their new master and be-
came scouts of the Persian shah Agha-Mukhammed-
khan, who had destroyed Tiflis in 1795. This fact was ac-
knowledged by ethnic Armenian lieutenant-general S.O. 
Kishmishev. Professor of the St. Petersburg university 
A.A. Tsagarely reasonably noticed that by the end of the 
XVIII century Archbishop Joseph demonstrated great 
energy, “but in direction dissonant with view and plans of 
the Russian government”! That conclusion is supported 
                                     
9 Argutov-wide shouldered. Interpreter. 
10 Dolgorukiy is name of an old and famous Russian noble family. Inter-
preter 
 89
by academician N.F. Dubrovin, saying that by summer of 
1796 the Armenian Archbishop Joseph concocted to in-
tervene in affairs of the conquered Derbent khanate, 
never missed a chance to pick on the Muslim population, 
tried to humiliate them before Armenians – briefly speak-
ing, during short period of his stay in Derbent he turned 
all population against himself. Count Zubov called Jo-
seph to the headquarters, but even there they had to 
take steps to restrain wirepulling of the archbishop. Con-
tacting the patriarch of Echmiadzin and without asking 
anybody’s permission, together with him Joseph wrote a 
“collective message to Armenians living in Karabakh and 
other places of the Transcaucasia”; that manifest de-
clared that the Russian troops had entered Persia with 
main purpose “to liberate Armenians from the Muslim 
yoke and make them independent”. That message has 
created common disturbance among people of the Tran-
scaucasia; the Armenians were dreaming about restora-
tion of the Great Armenian kingdom. 
P.G. Butkov, the contemporary of the mentioned 
archbishop, testifies about unlimited ambition of Joseph, 
who was planning to make his nephew king of Armenia 
and even had prepared the royal crown. While being in 
Russia Argutinsky-Dolgorukiy, planning to ascend to the 
Echmiadzin throne of patriarch, ordered his engraved 
portrait in patriarch’s closes.  
Very interesting moment of political history of the 
Armenian church is described in the brochure titled “Be-
ginning of relations of the Echmiadzin patriarchal throne 
with the Russian government”, product of pen of the 
abovementioned Mr. Ezov, who can’t be suspected in 
critical or at least unprejudiced attitude to Armenians, 
considering him one of their main leaders and apologists. 
By the end of the XVIII century, despite the principle of 
 90
all-national election of the Catholicos of Echmiadzin, that 
seat was taken by Archbishop Gukas (Lucas), elected 
exclusively by priesthood of Echmiadzin. The Armenian 
patriarch of Constantinople Zakharias brought protest. 
While Gukas was writing tender letters to Zakharias the 
Armenian community of Constantinople managed to ob-
tain dismissal of Zakharias from the Turkish authorities. 
The haste of Gukas, praised by Ezov to heaven, can be 
apologized by necessity to evade ascension of Israel, pa-
triarch of Agvan (Gandzasar monastery near city of 
Shusha), to the throne of Echmiadzin. It was about deal-
ing a blow at the isolating patriarchate of Agvan and es-
tablishment of the theocratic monarchy. Due to the igno-
rance or corruption of the involved officials the Russian 
and Turkish governments have supported his actions 
with touching unanimity despite of controversy of their in-
terests. Tomara, our envoy to Constantinople, had been 
passionately reporting to the government in 1801 about 
plans of Gukas “to restore his nation with help of Russia”. 
To please the foreign Catholicos the patriarchate of Ag-
van at first was extremely squeezed, and then – after 
unification of Karabakh and Ganja to Russia – impercep-
tibly abolished, disintegrated. It appeared that our politi-
cians are less farsighted than even Turks, who guessed 
to support in their country the independence of patriar-
chate of Siss and Akhtamar from the “Catholicos of all 
Armenians”. 
At the time of unification of Georgia the Armenian 
priesthood tried to show that Armenians have been play-
ing some specifically outstanding role and that only Ar-
menians made sense here. Since educated Russian 
hierarchs were well aware of the monophysitism of Ar-
menians and Russia saved and embraced Georgia as 
co-religious kingdom, archbishop Joseph had taken trou-
 91
ble to disseminate possibly more benevolent information 
about Armenian Gregorianism. The book titled “Worship 
of the Christian religion of the Armenian Church” by Jo-
seph, archbishop of the Armenian people, residing in 
Russia, was published in St. Petersburg in 1799. Page 
14 refers to Christ: “single Face, single shape, and joined 
in the single entity”; on the page 50 Joseph says that 
here entity is equal to definition of face. Then why he had 
to mention two equal definitions? Obviously it was done 
to conceal monophysitism of Armenians. Of course, he 
had thoroughly silenced about Catholicos John IV of 
Otsny, called “philosopher” and canonized by the Gre-
gorian church to the rank of saint. To please Muslim Ar-
abs and in exchange for their generous fee, that hierarch 
convened the council where he had anathematized the 
Khalcedonian convent and announced the following de-
cisions: “Let he, who says that Christ was a man by na-
ture, and mortal creature by flesh, and subject to suffer-
ing, be anathematized; let he, who doesn’t worship Christ 
as unique immortal entity, be anathematized”. 
Seeing that all this compromise the Armenian 
church in eyes of the Orthodox people, the Armenian his-
torian Kirakos in the XIII century, and mentioned Joseph 
and Catholicos Nerses at later periods, tried to conceal 
the monophysitim of Armenians. It is interesting how pro-
fessor Troitsky from the clerical academy of St. Peters-
burg, “Interpretation of faith of the Armenian church” 
1877, and Mr. Anninsky, “History of the Armenian 
church”, Kishinev, 1900, have unmasked all that machi-
nations. 
By the way, Archbishop Joseph worried about that 
issue in vain. At that time our bureaucracy took little care 
about the Orthodoxy and comprehended that even 
lesser. Since then the Armenian cause within the Rus-
 92
sian borders continued to grow, sometimes progressing 
by great thrusts. In accordance with the Turkmenchay 
tractate Echmiadzin joined to Russia and Catholicos re-
mained the universal patriarch of all Armenians. We have 
timely abolished the Georgian autocephaly church taking 
all of its lands to the treasury, and simultaneously admit-
ted into scope of the Russian limits a theocratic state-in-
state, in fact inaccessible for control and enjoying huge 
authority in eyes of its “political parish”. In time of Paske-
vich colonel Lazarev was sent to Persia to invite Armeni-
ans and approximately 40000 men had re-settled to the 
Transcaucasia. The patriarch of Echmiadzin took part in 
that combination as well: he ordered Armenian priests to 
move from Persia and the parish had followed them. In 
accordance with the Adrianople accord we have received 
more than 100000 of the Turkish Armenians; archbishop 
of Erzerum Karapet brought up to 70000 men alone. 
Since then the gradual resettlement of Armenians from 
the Muslim states was going uninterruptedly, sometimes 
as slightly visible stream, and sometimes as wide jet, like 
it has been in recent years. Today when it has become 
more or less clear what consequences brought an aspi-
ration of the Caucasian administrators to involve some 
more Armenians, one can easily remind the Ukrainian 
saying: “bought a trouble to himself for his own money”. 
Naturally Joseph Argutinsky and Catholicos Nerses, 
who was sitting on the patriarch’s throne in 1843-1857, 
both were giants of the Armenian idea in comparison 
with their other co-ethnics. From Armenian point of view 
the creative activity of Nerses during his term in position 
of archbishop in Tiflis and Kishinev is truly terrific. 
 93
 
 
 
8. The tribal isolation and economic supremacy. 
 
The mass of the Armenian population, possibly, was 
thinking about autonomy in Turkey and Persia; after re-
settlement inside of the mighty Russia and specifically in 
the Transcaucasia, which has been reasonably adminis-
tered at that time, the Armenian people didn’t buy absurd 
speculations at first. It was having rest from heavy or-
deals, getting wealth and preparing economic ground for 
itself imperceptibly. For example, rioting in time of Yer-
molov would be very inconvenient. 
The “Overview of the Russian possessions beyond 
Caucasus” (St. Petersburg, 1836) published by the Royal 
decree says the following on pages 197-199: “The Ar-
menians, like people of Moses, had to spread all over the 
earth, collecting the wealth, which they could not enjoy in 
their own land under the yoke of their masters. That gen-
erated the reason of flabbiness of Armenian: he became 
cosmopolitan; his motherland now is that country where 
he can use his cunning brain for making profit with 
maximum advantage and security for himself. But timidity 
of his spirit can be seen to some extent here as well; 
there must be too obvious, too positive advantages to in-
cite an Armenian to undertake any important trade op-
eration. Even in such cases the fear to lose the gain fre-
quently becomes reason for failure in the started busi-
ness. All of that could originate partially from the op-
pressed situation they have been in under the Asian rule, 
because wealth could put life in danger, and gain at least 
should be thoroughly concealed. Cunning and slyness – 
necessary quality of obscurant, and moreover commer-
 94
cial peoples – are attributable to Armenians: they con-
sider any deceit in purchase and sell permissible, any ac-
tion for gain – legal. They seized the trade of Tiflis and all 
of the Transcaucasia; carry out different missions, hold 
nearly all buy-outs, accept all contracts, discharge duties 
of commissionaire and supply commissions. They are in-
terpreters, reporters, manufacturers; briefly speaking, 
wherever is an opportunity to receive income, Armenians 
are certainly there. The greed is the first driver of all their 
contemplations and actions”.  
Those characteristics are still true, except for refer-
ence to cosmopolitism. Long time has passed since the 
30’s and the Armenian tribal isolation has developed with 
extraordinary speed supported by clerical and secular pa-
triots, fast enrichment and unrestrained use of wealth, as 
well as absence of foresight at many Russian rulers, whom 
Armenian bosses using substantial and even material ar-
guments, as per Caucasian customs, managed to convince 
in their unbreakable loyalty to Russia. By the way, as they 
say, that loyalty was confirmed in time of every war, when 
Armenians served as spies against Turks and Persians; 
that proof is less reliable, because craft of espionage itself 
contains reason for distrust to its bearer. 
The remark of the author of the “Obozreniye” about 
timidity of spirit of Armenians, even in the sphere of in-
dustry, is quite characteristic. Knyaz Vorontsov nearly 
forced them to engage in profitable enterprises laying 
foundation of huge fortunes. The parasite origin, not 
creative one, was and still remains the main driver in 
their enrichment since first days. The German economic 
literature calls that Conjuncturgewinn, i.e. gain produced 
from specific combination of conditions, accidental or ar-
tificial. All forces of the Armenian bourgeoisie in the first 
half of the XIX century were directed at refinement of 
 95
such cream-taking, ensnaring of local authorities and 
alien population. 
What author of the “Obozreniye” calls “flabbiness” of 
Armenians should rather be called an ability to be assimi-
lated by appearance, to take alien names, clothes and 
customs. Many Armenians in Georgia received names 
ending with “shvili”, in Muslim provinces appeared Yusuf-
beks, Kara-beks, Ibragim-khans and other covered Ar-
menians; not only names with Armenian root and Rus-
sian endings, but also Krasilnikovs, Sapozhnikovs, Lis-
itsins, Sergeyevs and Popovs appeared in Russia. There 
was an arrant Armenian usurer with typically Russian 
name in Astrakhan, called the “red sash”. His descents 
managed to penetrate into nobility and such high circles, 
where nobody had expected them… 
As it became clear later, assimilation was quite su-
perficial and temporary. Armenians held stone of isola-
tion into their bosom, that stone was growing, at first in-
conspicuously, but during the second half of the XIX cen-
tury – at visible, dizzy speed. 
Idea of isolation was prompted to Armenians also by 
Englishmen, who from the beginning of our Caucasian 
war were striving to incite all local tribes to riot against 
Russia, and Polish, in two influxes in 30’s and 60’s, Ger-
mans in recent times, and finally Armenians themselves, 
migrating from foreign countries. Two especially “poison-
ous” families have distinguished among those Armenians. 
The first one followed by clerical-separatist way, and the 
second one has set separatism on the bourgeois-liberal 
ground, sometimes with radical colours. Every war be-
tween Russia and neighbouring Oriental states on one 
hand increased number of Armenians, including elements 
imbued with instinctive inclination to unreliability in the 
chaotic Asian despotisms; on the other hand – war has 
 96
extremely enriched their industrial class. Contractors, 
spies and looters made a fortune, while prices of all nec-
essary stuff have grown fast under pretext of war and then 
remained on that abnormal level. Pogodin visited the 
Transcaucasia during knyaz Baryatinsky and remarked 
extreme dearness of life, obviously artificial. 
Governance has served much to the raise of the 
economic might and tribal isolation of Armenians. That 
form of administration is undoubtedly obsolete for the 
Caucasus now, but in the referred historical period it had 
its reasonable ground, while having then its dark sides as 
well. For example, governor knyaz Vorontsov pursuing 
goal of “Europeanization” of the Caucasian nations had 
led them by the path of sharp increase of demands, in-
crease of splendour and noisy publicity. Economically 
unprepared elements became ruined, while predating 
ones, i.e. representatives of the Armenian bourgeoisie – 
became rich on the bones of the conceited nobility flying 
to the light of new baits. A kind of a court was formed in 
time of the first governor, and although it mainly con-
sisted of representatives of well-born nobility, their finan-
cial dependence on the Armenian rich men has turned 
the latter into the actually influential people, not always 
with permission of provincial administrators. 
The provincial isolation could be counteracted much 
earlier by skilled implantation of the Russian economic 
force and, what is important, by connection of the Tran-
scaucasia with the rest of Russia by maximum short rail-
road. But that thing remained undone, as I had a chance 
to notice in previous chapters. The Transcaucasian rail-
road was established instead of that, thus the isolated 
economic circulation of the vast region has been organ-
ized. It is common with us to regard railroads as factor of 
progress and enrichment in general. That view is abso-
 97
lutely wrong and possibly invented by the interested per-
sons and repeated by narrow-minded people without 
proper understanding. The railroad is a tool completely 
serving those, who are economically stronger than the 
others, intensifying and facilitating final of struggle be-
tween the strong and the weak, between mob and sepa-
rated common people. The Transcaucasian railroad 
mainly became a tool for fast predating exploitation of all 
population of the country by the Armenian bourgeoisie, 
just like banks and many other things… 
Under such conditions, the masters of economic in-
fluence on such a vast region desirably start regarding 
that area as their future political territory, taking in ac-
count that all history of the Asia Minor is rich for facts 
urging to similar “dreaming”. How can not dream people, 
who quickly became rich by nasty ways, without creative 
labour, and seeing that they’ve been allowed everything 
for several decades, they can get away with everything? 
Bribery system is organized, local and capital press is at 
service, Petersburg, on behalf of the honest representa-
tives of authority, is not informed…That would be strange 
not to “dream”? Muslim residents of the conquered re-
gions ask with bitter irony – “Where are the Russians? 
Who did they invade us for? Anyway, not for themselves. 
We saw brave Russian soldiers, and now see only weak 
or corrupt Russian officials, frequently not Russian by 
origin. Neither your merchants, nor farmers can be seen 
here! Only Armenians, our former slaves! There’s nothing 
to say! Was it worth of fighting to give supremacy to such 
bad people?!...” 
Two facts had decisive economic and then political 
meaning for the Transcaucasian Armenians and, so to 
speak, broke the dam somehow stopping their fast ad-
vancing movement. The first are the flaws of reforms of 
 98
60’s, and the second is development of the oil business 
in region of Baku. 
The first fact was followed by bankruptcy of nobility 
and fall of its authority, influx to the Transcaucasia of 
many Russians hostile to the Russian order and cap-
tured by new trends from liberalism up to anarchy. That 
people was unable to create the Russian cause or stop 
isolation of the aliens. The legal order, appropriate where 
citizenship and self-activity of all categories and classes 
of people is strongly developed, became a flagrant non-
sense in the Transcaucasia, and submitted everybody 
and everything in hands of Armenians, because they 
were the only ones enjoying features of character neces-
sary for victory under bourgeois-legal order. It wouldn’t 
be exaggeration to say that those features have devel-
oped in them up to ugliness. Due to the historical habit to 
the underground organizations they can, nearly without 
discussions, join in groups, discipline, organize mobs 
and small economic and other plots against all other 
people. In this talent they surpass Jews, who have much 
more creative fantasy than Armenians. 
The pioneers of the oil business in the area at first 
were Russians, but soon their footprints were erased, 
because they have been unable to resort either to the 
Armenian methods of enrichment or the Armenian meth-
ods of forcing competitors out – through criminal acts, 
plots and intrigues in public halls of different offices. For-
tunes amounting to several millions started appearing at 
dizzy speed. Yesterday’s servant, porter, loader from 
wharf, small manager, more or less known smuggler re-
ceiving from “fellow men” a stripe of oil-rich land stolen 
from treasury sometimes after several dozens months 
could become able to buy conscience of dozens of offi-
cials, not maintained, isolated and deprived of moral and 
 99
material support. The real Bacchanalia has risen up and 
continues till present with growing power. 
Part of the local Russian officials’ class has become 
dependent on the Armenian bosses long time ago. There 
is literally no establishment in the region, affairs or pro-
jects of which could constitute absolute secret from Ar-
menians. Higher circles of all local tribes on behalf of 
overwhelming majority of their representatives are hang-
ing on a hook of promissory notes and from moral point 
of view already standing on back steps of new masters of 
the region. Banks, not excluding the state bank, also 
submit to them: Armenians have the overwhelming ma-
jority at the accounting committee of the state bank’s lo-
cal branch and widely use that opportunity. The mutual 
credit society, main capital of which is composed of rela-
tively small old savings of officials, systematically serve 
to maintenance of countryside and city usurers ensnaring 
all local population with strong net. All, now without ex-
ceptions, of the Caucasian press now is at hands or un-
der influence of Armenians. 
Several Russian papers, which are published by 
Armenians and touchingly united with our Jewish press, 
of course just printed in Russian script and imbued with 
animosity to the creative Russian fundaments. 
In accordance with the law the censorship has to be 
objective in the tribal issue, but it frequently was clearly 
more than benevolent to Armenians! 
In order not to be groundless in making that refer-
ence, I will give several examples. As I said above, the 
article full of mockery over one of the ancient Orthodox 
sanctuaries was allowed by censorship and I wasn’t al-
lowed to answer to that abomination in the “Caucasus” 
newspaper. I have a copy of an article where Russian 
woman was calling her female compatriots in Tiflis to 
 100
economy, refuse from excessive splendour and doubtful 
credit and advised to save officers’ honour and dignity of 
husbands, fathers and brothers. The article was banned 
because it could infuriate local bosses, who would be 
displeased by success of such sermon. The pretext to 
censoring that and many other articles was to block the 
so called racial intolerance, although there was not a 
single word about Armenians.11 Meanwhile the racial 
“tolerance” of the censorship didn’t hinder it to allow the 
street leaf of Tiflis to publish a shallow lampoon against 
Islam. Some local hired pen-gangster wrote that Mu-
hammad was pushed down to hell. That was not written 
for fun, but with purpose to provoke disorder. On the day 
of issue of that number at squares and bazaars repre-
sentatives of the Armenian plain people were mocking 
local Muslims with that article. Excitement of the latter 
reached the point when people started grabbing their 
daggers, chief of the region was away and supreme 
leaders of the Muslim priesthood have informed his as-
sistant that they hadn’t been responsible for tranquillity of 
their parish. 
Only due to the latter circumstance the censorship 
allowed me to give very sharp rebuke to that scoundrel, 
who senselessly threw rude mockery over somebody’s 
faith into the crowd. 
To characterize general situation I add that the au-
thor of that article was Georgian noble demoralized by 
poverty, who later interrupted his “pen” career killing a 
man from the ambush because of some disputed pig. 
Armenian-plutocrats feed such people, since their intelli-
gentsia has no talent for writing; they widely use services 
                                     
11 The full text of the mentioned article is placed in the Annex to this 
book as an example.  
 101
of the venal aliens, including local and metropolitan Rus-
sians. The mentioned hero has been under trial for long 
time, while being between the instances he has written a 
touching article in the “St. Petersburg Vedomosti”, exiled 
and later pardoned because of somebody’s merciful in-
tercession, and now he again teaches moral principles to 
the Tiflis public. 
I’m afraid to distract myself and fall into personal 
memories, but I can’t stop and not to tell small fact testi-
fying about cultural level of local, if permissible to call so, 
writers eating from the Armenian trough. Once before 
Christmas a group of city schoolmistresses decided to 
organize a Christmas celebration for poor children and 
addressed through press for donations. Obviously that 
move of nice and dedicated workers should be sup-
ported. But to please the caravansary tradesmen unwill-
ing to donate for that initiative, the abovementioned hero 
stepped forward with the following killing objection: “A 
kind Christian feeling lies in foundation of proposal to ar-
range a Christmas tree for poor people, but energy and 
money is spent, pardon for rudeness, on rubbish. What 
that waste of the myrrh is for: wouldn’t it be better to sell 
and distribute among the poor? These words of the Lord 
are quite appropriate in this case”. 
The satirist of the Armenian paper ascribed the 
words of Judas to Christ. After that the expression “moral 
of Judas” became the saying across Tiflis. 
Something incredible happened to the Armenian 
press. For example, the “Ardzagank” newspaper was 
systematically mocking Russians and I received only 
fragmented information. The honest interpreter in Tiflis 
could not be found even at the expense of gold. Finally, I 
occasionally found such gentleman, not Armenian of 
course, who provided me with translation of the highly 
 102
sensitive sermon of his holiness Catholicos Mkrtych I and 
some other immodest confessions of the Armenian “pa-
triotism”12. As soon as I published these things not only 
Armenianized press, but even censorship screamed out. 
The papers printed in the Russian script called me tradit-
tore – traitor, as if I had sworn to anybody not to translate 
sensitive things published in the Armenian papers, 
which, consequently, consider themselves under-
ground?! Censorship insisted on the inaccuracy of the 
translation I had and generally defended the “Ardzagank” 
newspaper. 
Later on the accuracy of translation was confirmed 
by an authorized person holding official position; the 
“Ardzagank” newspaper was completely closed the follow-
ing year, because its clerical-revolutionary orientation had 
reached the extreme. The abovementioned interpreter 
has absolutely disappeared from my sight… He was 
afraid, and reasonably, to be fired from job, although he 
had served at the Russian governmental establishment… 
                                     
12 In the mentioned sermon, published in the “Ardzagank” No.37, 1897, 
in form of introduction Catholicos warned the parish about coming, al-
though delayed, of “spring” for the Armenian people and benefits it is 
expected to bring to it: “So came the spring, the nature has revived; but 
after long and harsh winter the spring we desire has not arrived yet. I 
don’t know why it delays, but no matter what it takes it must come at 
last. Let’s patiently wait for it, fully relying on God”. 
What “Hairic” had in mind under “spring” can be seen from the final 
words of sermon: “Have faith and rely on God, hope on your liberation, 
love each other as appropriate for true Chrsitian… Follow my example. 
In my all lifetime I stood different tricks of fortune and now reached this 
old age and still believe and hope with full reliance. Don’t be desperate, 
be brave! There is nothing eternal, everything is relative and temporary. 
Only truth and justice triumph always. And what I’ve told you thousand 
times I will repeat to you today again: every time I pray God I ask Him 
to prolong my existence until that day, when I will greet the purple dawn 
with freedom of my poor and longsuffering Armenian people”. 
 103
It is really strange to say such things, but neverthe-
less there is no exaggeration in what I will say. Promi-
nent official person perhaps is still able to defend Rus-
sian interests from attempts of Armenians, but it is not 
safe for junior official to be not only active enemy of the 
Armenian intrigue, but just strictly-honest officer not giv-
ing way to disorder and abuses with participation of Ar-
menian bosses. He certainly will be slandered, his dos-
sier marked black, this way or other he will be forced out, 
unless he has strong support; they will try to influence his 
wife and children, buy his promissory notes, if there any, 
deprive him credit, if that is needed. There is a quasi-
cultural establishment in Tiflis equipped with screaming 
splendour and bearing appropriate name, but specially 
created to involve Russian officials in the course of life 
crossing limits of financial capacity, seduce wives of offi-
cials and generally ensnare local society under pretext of 
pleasant biding of time. That is described in my satire on 
morals of Tiflis “Nor-Cagac” (New City). Banality of mind, 
decay of moral fundaments, dandyism, greed and 
“strawberry”13 – are allies of the Armenian policy. This is 
a big system, complicated one and connected with 
blackmail, shameful for the Russian name. 
In serious issues the masters of region do not stop 
before extreme measures. For instance, death of Strel-
bitsky, honest judicial actor, member of the court cham-
ber of Tiflis, still remains unclear (although “clearable”) 
sad puzzle. He died suddenly, a man full of strength and 
in the middle of important investigation. To the contrary, 
the submissive people “prosper”; for instance, There are 
officials with good position, who afford themselves acting 
in capacity of arbiter to discharge division of large Arme-
nian property and taking “fruits of oil production” in re-
turn. 
                                     
13 Intimate or sexual services – Interpreter.   
 104
I don’t mention direct abuses at all: their name is le-
gion. Tens of thousands acres of treasury lands are plun-
dered; hundreds of outrageous crimes spoken about by 
the whole region are covered. People, known to be deal-
ing with smuggling, looting of lands, forfeit and other 
crimes and who made millions, have reached titles and 
honours highest for their reputation and moral wilder-
ness; obscurants and lechers became patrons of educa-
tional institutions; thieves and supervised people – influ-
ential members of the Armenian religious patronages, 
bosses of banks, leaders of charity societies. 
There’s nothing to say about that terrible picture 
used to be and still represented by urban commodities of 
Tiflis, for example. Although Armenians make only 40% 
there – duma14 is absolutely in their hands. Georgians, 
Russians and Muslims don’t have access there. There 
are no good roads, good illumination, nor quality water 
supply. For many years the left bank of the Kura River 
inhabited by Russians is subjected to floods, children die 
like flies, houses rot. Administration writes, requests, 
prescribes, but load is still there. The Armenian bosses 
openly brag that they will force Russians out of these 
lands. Speaking about plain man Armenians usually add 
the word “dog” to the word “Russian”; they snub intelli-
gent, but not influential people; and keep their servants 
on the roles of heilots15 either comic, or shameful. 
Here’s the fact describing the full picture of rela-
tions. The provincial doctor of Tiflis Mr. Kikodze, Geor-
gian, impeccable and brave local actor, discovered that 
at the city butcher’s yard veterinary surgeon Ispandaryan 
didn’t burn, but sold a large stock of pork carcasses in-
                                     
14 City council – Interpreter. 
15 Slaves in the ancient Sparta – Interpreter. 
 105
fected with trichinosis. At risk to his life, despite the dag-
gers of threatening interested persons, the young doctor 
managed to catch the buying-butcher red-handed, dis-
covered city stock of the known infected carcasses and 
produced protocol. In the course of investigation became 
clear that this system has been functioning for some 
time; beside the immediate culprit, the acting medical-
sanitary inspector and colleagues of Ispandaryan super-
vising the butcher’s yard were indirectly involved as well. 
Ispandaryan killed himself, delegates of duma have been 
excited and under different quasi-excusable pretexts and 
formalities had postponed (almost a year!) discussion of 
this issue in duma. At the same time, as papers reported, 
many poor woodcutters were dying from unknown dis-
ease in forests of Kakhetia. Finally, at the long delayed 
session of duma dedicated to trichinosis the news about 
disease has been directly connected with sale of the in-
fected carcasses to the side. The news was met with ob-
jection that city of Tiflis had nothing to worry about. Fi-
nally Mr. Opochinin, the Russian gentleman, son of the 
merited general, jury and delegate of duma, said that 
since the main culprit had punished himself the case 
should be forgotten. I don’t find it immodest to name that 
gentleman here because right then in Tiflis I had ex-
pressed my indignation through press. Alas, words are 
helpless where “one should have applied power”!... Act-
ing medical-sanitary inspector was confirmed at that po-
sition – that was an end of the case. 
Difficulty of the Armenian question is that tasks of 
parasitism and wirepulling are tightly linked with each 
other, have an organic connection… That can be clearly 
seen during city elections. Such order has developed 
strongly in terms of two “patriotic” Armenian city mayors 
– Matinov, and especially the late Izmaylov, when the 
 106
Armenian policy became main driver of the urban life. 
Many Russians and Georgians are artificially deprived of 
an opportunity to participate in elections, partially be-
cause of deficiency in tax payment, in some cases such 
last minute obstacles were in shape of debts amounting 
several kopecks suddenly presented by uprava16, and 
partially because banks threaten non-Armenian voters to 
demand payment by promissory notes. 
The latter can be reasonably remarked that people 
can be allowed to misguide themselves. But issue is that 
it is difficult for all sons of the Transcaucasia not mis-
guide themselves. Mobsters hold market in their hands, 
life important goods are extremely expensive, and credit, 
which could be normal in other regions, is always dan-
gerous here. In fact, referring to the unenviable situation 
of the Russian people, their weakness and pliancy in 
some cases, I have to make a proviso that even sins can 
be imputed to them only to the least degree. Neither indi-
viduals, who normally can not be demanded heroism 
from, nor even, strictly speaking, individual administrators 
of the region, who can be full of best intentions, but don’t 
have universal knowledge and can’t find sufficient con-
tingent of honest and loyal clerks, are guilty here. That is 
history of the region guilty here, which had created spe-
cial system, special way of life where best initiatives of 
the disinterested representatives of the Russian power 
bring only smallest results. There is a real Gordian knot 
here. Work of many minds, work of the special institution 
is required to establish real, not only formal-report, status 
of things in the Caucasus and its historical reasons: such 
institution should not be distracted by heavy troubles of 
everyday life, like local authority. There are robberies, 
                                     
16 Local administration – Interpreter. 
 107
earthquakes and other natural disasters in this colourful 
area, and necessity to defend this or that project 
prompted by life in low-principled or uninformed metro-
politan circles: time flies, time is short and there’s little of 
peace for labour having its scientific sides. 
Simply speaking, there must be senatorial revision, 
it is important for such senator to be truly Russian per-
son, free from strong influences, as well as prejudices 
and falsity of the bourgeois liberalism; deep honesty of 
not only heart, but mind as well is required. 
If there is a God will, that poor land shall see that 
day. Until that time it must be appreciated that cynicism 
of looting became moderate and vigour of men daring to 
pronounce the word “Russian” with sardonic smile be-
came some less – vigour intolerable for its insolence. 
One can easily imagine how carelessly Armenian 
wirepullers treat other nations. Several years ago in Kak-
hetian city of Sygnakh the Orthodoxies were celebrating 
the holiday of Jordan. Especially with the purpose to out-
rage the Orthodoxy the Armenian jacket-intelligentsia 
hired intolerably screaming zurna and drum, had them 
climbed on the nearest bell tower closest to the Orthodox 
Jordan and sounded such unspeakable noise, that words 
of worshipping could not be heard. Zurna is a pipe that 
can be heard at distance of nearly five miles. The police 
gave those people an opportunity to scandal to their 
hearts’ content, because at that time chief of the uezd 
administration in Sygnakh and his deputy were Armeni-
ans. Later on the trouble-makers were tried and as usu-
ally sentenced to some insufficient punishment, and 
those were not instigators, but hired musicians. 
I absolutely objectively made reference to the wire-
pulling of the Armenian bourgeoisie and didn’t want to 
exaggerate the phenomenon, which can seriously grow 
 108
or be deducted to more miserable forms. That is an issue 
of future, issue of the Russian self-conscience. 
Political dreams of some Armenian bosses and 
quasi-intelligent people have taken more or less definite 
formula, probably, after the Polish riot of 1863, and then 
found support of the following antigovernment move-
ments in Russia and bunches of revolutionaries abroad. 
The former editor-publisher of the “Mshak” newspa-
per Artsruny, deceased now, pursuing the aim to unite 
Caucasian natives under the Armenian leadership, 
played special role inventing the following formulas for 
them, introduced in more or less Aesopian language 
even in the Russian-Armenian publications: “let’s unite 
against the common enemy”, i.e. Russia, and “Caucasus 
for the Caucasians”. The Russian self-nihilists, as usual, 
have been carelessly supporting that. The Georgians, 
meanwhile, caught the point and talented humorist-poet 
knyaz Akakiy Ceretely responded to the call of Artsruny 
with the verse “Mosquito and Flight” published in the 
“Droeba” newspaper, now cancelled, because that could 
not appear in the “Caucasus” newspaper, although other 
papers have been openly propagating “the Georgian-
Armenian solidarity” … against common enemy. 
Such healthy understanding of the situation, of 
course, is a good sign, but living conditions could and do 
bring discrepancy between common sense and absurd, 
even fatal actions. 
In Caucasus the Georgians and debtor Muslims of 
Karabakh sometimes say, smiling insincerely, if Russian 
government withdraws troops from the Transcaucasia, 
then no bone of Armenians would be left here. It’s al-
ready about thirty years as such words are ridiculously 
far from the truth. First, Armenians not just invaded all 
others economically, but partially acquired political ten-
dencies of other isolating peoples; finally, now they have 
 109
their own “army” – rabble from Turkey. In particular, the 
ethnographic picture of Tiflis has strongly changed in last 
years. For instance, it is difficult to meet there mushu 
(porter) from Georgians of Rachy – previously very inter-
esting and likeable type of plain worker: now there are 
only some pirate faces in Turkish turbans and bashliks 
(hats)17. The urban self-administration and mob of pluto-
crats continuously drive plain Russian and Georgian 
people out. 
                                     
17 The Georgian newspaper “Iveria” in September 1897 underscored 
the fact that plain workers, who previously used to flow to Tiflis from all 
of Georgia because of unemployment at their native villages caused by 
land shortage, climatic or other conditions, now have been forced out of 
Tiflis by Armenians from the Erivan province and especially by refugees 
from Turkey. That had happened not because of any competition or 
other political-economic collision, since the salary didn’t fall in these 
years, as it happens during natural competition, but to the contrary has 
significantly grown. For instance, to saw one cubic sazhen (7 feet – In-
terpreter) of thin wood three Armenian “ambals” (plain workers – Inter-
preter) take from 4 up to 5,5 rubles and work is done within 4-5 hours 
and very negligently. 
The same paper has published a reference showing that the number of 
the urban plain workers had reached 300 or 400 men, whereas 93% of 
them had been Armenians. Street sweepers and irrigators, guards at 
the water supply of Avchal, up to 200 men, all – Armenians. Several 
years ago most of those positions have been filled by Rachies and Ay-
sors, wake and good workers, who have now been substituted by lazy 
and rude natives of Turkey with significantly increased salaries. The fol-
lowing fact highlighted by the “Tsnobis-Purcely” newspaper the same 
year of 1897 can brightly illustrate sad results of abnormal conditions at 
the labour market of Tiflis. 
On December 12th, at the post highway of Tionety, near Sabadury, the 
coachman noticed a half-naked, exhausted walker, who happened to 
be Simon Sisaury, inhabitant of Sakdriony village. The poor man was 
taken to Sabadury where he had died of starvation of exhausting. It was 
found that the deceased had been in the great need and departed to Ti-
flis for employment. After biding some time and not finding any job Si-
saury had spent his last money there and headed back to his village, 
where he had never reached.  
 110
 
 
 
9. Truth of the Turkish atrocities. 
 
The last Russian-Turkish war and its political re-
sults, fixed in paragraph of the Berlin tractate concerning 
the Turkish “Christians”, had strong aggravating influ-
ence upon all of the Transcaucasia, and Armenians in 
particular. That was not occasional. Long before that war 
Germany had set its eyes at the Middle East, and where 
Moltke had done good work, as young officer. The article 
of the Berlin tractate about the Turkish Christians was 
the first step of Germany in the path to the Bagdad rail-
road, on the other hand – it was the bursting volcano, 
eruptions of which threaten the European peace, and in 
particular, the Russian cause in the Middle East. It 
should be noted that for the last thirty years Germany 
has been systematically working on the development of 
the Armenian separatism in the Transcaucasia. A lot of 
Armenian groups are concentrated specifically in Ger-
many. Most vivid relations are maintained between Tiflis, 
Berlin, Munich and our Baltic pan-Germans, with active 
participation of the Finnish demagogues. Large groups of 
the German officers of the general staff visit the Tran-
scaucasia as archaeologists, hunting fans and tourists. It 
is characteristic that intelligent Armenians graduated 
from former university of Derpt demonstrate systematic 
animosity to Russia and that Germans serving in the 
Caucasus specifically patronize Armenians. 
In a view of the abovementioned conditions, after 
the Berlin tractate, Armenians conceived definite political 
dreams about autonomy. Any not parasite, but at least 
reliable autonomy requires more or less solid territory. As 
 111
it can be seen from documents of the French foreign 
ministry published in 1897 no condition was and is there 
in Turkey for such autonomy. Page 2 runs: “Thorough 
study of dislocation of different tribes allows asserting 
that Armenians do not constitute majority of population at 
any province of the Turkish Empire”. General Zelenoy 
and colonel Kartsev, Caucasian officers of the general 
staff, clearly confirm that by statistical data gathered in 
the field. Page 12 of the mentioned book reproduces let-
ter of the French ambassador at the Turkish court Mr. 
Cambone to minister Hanotoe saying that, it wasn’t worth 
of even thinking about independent Armenia, and if, due 
to some incredible circumstances, Europe would have of-
fered to create Armenia – that would be nearly impossi-
ble to determine limits of that new state. 
Same Mr. Cambone reports that strong propaganda 
of the Armenian riot, artificially prepared by Britain, is go-
ing on in Turkey, and partially Tiflis became involved in 
that affair, as it can be seen from report of the French 
vice-consul in Diyarbekir of October 5, 1894. This is what 
Mr. Meriet wrote to his chief: “They say the movement 
has been prepared long ago by the “Hnchak” society, 
headquarters of which is located in Tiflis at present, and 
before that was in London and Athens. Insurgents follow 
orders of that society”. 
It can be added here that another group of the Ar-
menian revolutionaries called “Droshak”, i.e. “Banner”, 
has concentrated around the newspaper with the same 
title, which still exists. It is published abroad, but there a 
lot “droshakists” in the Caucasus. 
Mr. Cambone, in a number of reports of the French 
ambassador full of sympathy to Armenians as the Chris-
tians and an aspiration to serious reforms, sincerely 
shared by the Russian diplomacy, counts a row of cruel 
 112
political murders committed by members of the Armenian 
revolutionary committee and their hirelings, and also 
states very notorious fact, later checked by me to some 
extent, main masses of Armenians do not compassion to 
revolution and only small groups of the Turkish Armeni-
ans gradually surrender to threats and terror of their 
leaders and unwillingly enter in the struggle. Many of the 
Turkish refugee Armenians my friends and I had chance 
to speak to had sincerely confessed of running to Russia 
not from the Turkish, but their own terrorists. 
The mentioned books informs about mass disorders 
caused by Armenians, who launched attacks against 
Turks and Kurds in order to provoke massacre. Before 
start of disorder and outrageous atrocities in Constantin-
ople, where, as known, an Armenian gang broke in the 
“Ottoman Bank” with dynamite bombs, the Armenian revo-
lutionary committee addressed to Mr. Cambone with a 
kind of note saying that Armenians decided to hold a 
“peaceful demonstration” and committee would not be re-
sponsible for consequences if police interfered. During the 
followed manifestation Armenians started killing police-
men and even gendarmerie officers. That was an impetus 
to the outrageous massacre of Armenians, one thought of 
which makes one’s hair to stand on end. It can be seen 
from the mentioned book that reason to the Armenian 
massacre mainly was given by revolutionaries themselves 
through their provocative actions deliberately headed to 
that goal, and that the English ambassador and consuls 
paid every effort to inflate and complicate the issue, while 
the Russian and French ambassadors have demonstrated 
great political tact, despite their sympathy to the innocent 
victims of intriguers and infuriated Muslims. 
The genius provision of the never-to-be-forgotten 
knyaz Lobanov-Rostovsky, our minister of foreign affairs, 
 113
was especially notorious as well as his iron will, which 
had prevented involvement of Russia into the absurd 
war. By the way, he was the first person who shook, but 
unfortunately didn’t eradicate the roots of the groundless 
view of our diplomacy at the Armenians as elements 
friendly and useful to us in the neighbouring Persia and 
especially in Turkey. He realised that the Russian-
Turkish relations had to step into new phase, when we 
should have protected Turkey from foreign exploitation 
and interference, and in return could peacefully reach the 
improvement of situation of the Christians in the East and 
strengthen our stance on the straights. Supporters of the 
opposite view were flirting with Armenians in Turkey, 
supported anger in Hildioz-Kioske against us and all the 
Slavonic and at the same time they were indirectly sup-
porting hegemony of the Armenian tribe in the Caucasus. 
But let’s return to the Armenian disorders and mas-
sacres in Turkey. The Ottoman Empire conducted inde-
cently: the government obviously was kindly disposed to 
the participants of massacre – the Muslims – partially 
sharing their irritation and partially, as it became clear 
later, creating rational from the Turkish point of view plan 
of exchange of substances, i.e. concentration of the 
maximum possible number of the solid Muslim popula-
tion in the Asia Minor and extermination or expulsion to 
Russia of Armenians, who caught that hard political dis-
ease. That plan (excluding the massacre stopped long 
ago) is carried out with extraordinary, phenomenal suc-
cess at present. 
Every phenomenon, especially the one turned into 
the property of history, requires exact definition. Un-
doubtedly the Turkish atrocities were terrible for their na-
ture and scales as well. But it is equally undoubted that 
the Anglo-Armenian press on behalf of various Dillons 
 114
and with support of the cosmopolitan press of different 
states has strongly exaggerated scales of that heavy 
popular disaster adding zeros to numbers reflecting tens 
and hundreds of real victims. 
The Russians and Armenians in the Transcaucasia 
were evenly shuddered and indignant hearing echoes of 
death moaning of thousand victims. It is also obvious that 
the expression “Muslim religious fanaticism” was used too 
groundlessly. The Greeks, Catholics and even Armenian 
Catholics have suffered much less than the Gregorians. 
On January 25th, 1896, the French consul reported the fol-
lowing remarkable fact about massacre in the Trabzon 
vilayet: “Before starting the massacre in Gumish-Khane 
village the Muslims gathered at the square. They sepa-
rated Armenians from other Christians and have taken the 
latter away in order not to mix them with the beforehand 
marked victims”. It is clear that the Turkish fanatics were 
fighting against the Armenian-Gregorian and Armenian-
revolutionary organization threatening order and maybe 
even integrity of their state. Anyone who travelled to the 
Asia Minor or knows local socio-political conditions, clearly 
realizes that economic-communal factor of disorders had 
played part there, similar to that one encountered in areas 
of the Jewish settlements; but unfortunately Turks and es-
pecially Kurds can’t be restrained if they infuriated – the 
most grave charge against them is they have reached 
such point of massacre, indiscriminating age or gender, 
rather than limiting themselves to extermination of the 
revolutionary gangs. 
  The appearance of people, who really suffered from 
that rabble and found shelter under the Russian banner, 
represented a soul-tearing picture. The deepest tragedy is 
to great extent the Armenian rich men, priests and other 
wire-pullers themselves have subjected the part of junior 
brethren of their people to death and plunder. 
 115
 
 
 
10. Political role of the church and Armenian 
programme. 
 
The Shrine of God didn’t betray hopes of the long-
suffering beggar-woman; undoubtedly shortcomings of 
the Armenian religious organization and fatal mistakes, 
which can’t be justified, of the Armenian church-
theocratic policy had and still have extremely harmful in-
fluence for not only the Russian state-popular cause in 
the province, but the Armenian people as well. 
It should be noted that escalation of the Armenian 
manifestations and disorders in Turkey and general nerv-
ousness of the Armenian tribe within the Russian limits 
had coincided with accession of his holiness Catholicos 
Mkrtych I to the patriarch’s throne in Echmiadzin. Before 
his arrival to Russia this venerable hierarch was a politi-
cal actor in Turkey, passionate Armenian patriot chased 
by the Turkish authorities for his activities. 
It is hardly surprising that in the declining years of 
his life and hard work the patriarch transferred his world 
outlook, aspirations and instinctive feelings to his new 
motherland. 
Part of the Armenian bourgeoisie and class of 
pseudo-intelligentsia, united by the “Mshak” newspaper 
established by the famous Artsruni, for the bourgeois-
liberal and, maybe, liberal-atheist reasons took the side 
of opponents to Mkrtych by the time of elections of the 
patriarch. And even now many upper tradesmen, bank-
ers, oil-manufacturers feeling disgust to clericalism after 
acquaintance with the European café chant and smok-
ing, treat their spiritual leader without proper respect and, 
 116
pursuing the common with him goal of the tribal isolation, 
suppose that the process would go faster with help of the 
so called socio-economic evolution. 
That discord is rather academic than deeply lively, 
because both parties used to and always concord when 
even the smallest occasion gave them a pretext to “join 
against the common enemy”. 
Administration in the Armenian church of Echmi-
adzin is not completely individual, in accordance with the 
law the Catholicos heads the Synod, while the procurator 
is appointed by the Russian government. The spiritual 
academy of Echmiadzin should have been guided by the 
legal terms of reference because validity of the provi-
sional rules has expired long ago18. Finally, the authority 
of the Russian government in political or common crimi-
nal affairs, of course, encompasses Echmiadzin as well. 
Nevertheless, the legal demands of the government are 
not always carried out and even frequently remain unan-
swered or answered inappropriately. By decree of the 
Senate the new recruits and participants of the court 
hearings must oath in Russian, but the wire-pulling 
priesthood bans clerics to obey that. Several years ago 
the Catholicos sent a cable to the Caucasian administra-
tion threatening to close the Synod, unless the govern-
mental Synod official displeasing his holiness is re-
moved. While waiting for the reply the Synod was closed 
                                     
18 Those “provisional rules”, approved in 1874 for the period of nine 
years by the late Emperor Alexander II, still substitute any terms of ref-
erence of the spiritual academy of Echmiadzin. All of the Catholicoses 
who held the throne of Echmiadzin for the past 30 years had tried by 
every means to avoid development of the terms of reference and, un-
fortunately had reached that goal despite the crying abnormality and 
danger of such situation of things. 
 117
and then, after yielding to the illegal demand, it has been 
reopened by the new kondak. 
The “kondaks” used to be applied very specifically. 
For instance, the editor of the revolutionary-clerical 
newspaper “Ardzagank”, banned by the Russian gov-
ernment, was granted the kondak. Title of the patriarch – 
vekhapar, what means majesty; appeal to him is – tsert 
terutyanut, what means your reign. These epithets are 
signs of the political theocracy, which is independent 
from other authorities. Archimandrite Vagan, member of 
the Synod and former personal assistant to the Catholi-
cos, and Nakhapetyan, rector of the academy, were ex-
iled from the Caucasus by the royal decree for their anti-
governmental propaganda and other illegal deeds, but 
then the Catholicos without asking permission from the 
Russian authorities had appointed one of them to be 
vicar of Nakhichevan and the other one to be administra-
tor of the Chisinau estates of the Armenian church. 
During the last disorder in Turkey, provoked by ac-
tivity of the revolutionaries, the Russian power offered 
patriarch to sound his sobering word, but he instead of 
that started delivering exciting sermons, initiated “night 
watch” – sermons of the same kind signed by archiman-
drite Karapet were published in the “Ararat” newspaper 
of Echmiadzin. 
Echmiadzin possesses huge estates administrated 
more than secretly. Inventory, property registers and lists 
are thoroughly hidden at the monasteries. Property is 
purchased and loaned. For instance, the monastery of 
Echmiadzin has mortgaged the estate of Mr. Shakh-
Azizov-Kamsarakan. On the other hand, the banks freely 
credit the clerical institutions. In conditions of such eco-
nomic chaos it is very difficult to determine what is spent 
for the cause of church and what is spent less produc-
 118
tively from the religious point of view. The fog of the eco-
nomic picture of this region will reach its peak if comple-
mented with the story how several years ago the band 
forfeiting Russian bills was hiding and discovered at one 
of the temples of Echmiadzin.  
The sad story of the Armenian people caused 
blending religious tasks of the church with various affairs 
of this world19. That harms the spiritual development of 
                                     
19 Here is translation of the text written after travel to Echmiadzin by 
French scientist baron de-Bay, who basically made his country ac-
quainted with Russia through number of books and brochures. He has 
traveled across the Caucasus several times and tone of his stories had 
always been distinguished for moderation and impartiality.  
“We approach to Varshapat settlement. The first thing we see is the an-
cient abandoned church of saint Rypsimia, being under reconstruction 
now and encircled by black walls. For some time this church has been 
a dean of money falsifiers. Finally, we arrived at Echmiadzin; every for-
eigner is welcomed warmly there – I have no words to express how 
monks (almost all of them in bishop’s rank) were kind and attentive to 
me. But despite all my gratitude I have to be sincere. This monastery 
has made an impression on me like rather political than religious cen-
tre. His holiness Catholicos is very honourable old man welcoming for-
eigners; he has very delicate, very diplomatic mind; they say he fre-
quently resorts to the allegories in his sermons”… 
Baron de-Bay contradicts the legend attributing the temple of Echmi-
adzin to the IV century and judging for its architectural features consid-
ers it as monument of the XV century and also finds that the murals are 
reflections of the Persian art. The author is sceptical about the “ancient” 
artefacts: 
“The antiquity of relics stored in cabinets, and mainly of the “saint 
spear”, was undermined by scientists more competent in this field than 
me. Since archives of the monastery unfortunately disappeared there is 
no information about items collected in its treasury. People inside of 
these walls are little troubled by archaeology, history or arts work; all 
thoughts and care are dedicated to the modern times and current is-
sues. I admit that people suspecting this place to be the seat of great 
sympathy to England are not wrong. Anyway, England uses all means 
to evoke these sympathies in this place, which is close to the Asian 
Turkey… ”   
 119
Armenians and even the moral image of the Catholicos 
himself and other hierarchs. Neither papers, nor money 
was found after the death of Catholicos Macarius. There 
is a suspicion that his death was violent. The path to the 
better world of the archbishop Jeremy, sincere friend of 
the Armenian people and truly loyal to Russia, was 
nearly the same. 
Secularization of possessions of the Armenian 
church is strongly necessary action, which is aimed at 
not only setting better tranquillity among Armenians, but 
mainly at purpose of giving the Armenian church an op-
portunity to discharge its sacred spiritual mission without 
being distracted by incidental affairs or dreams20. As we 
shall see below, in educational sense the Armenian peo-
ple is abandoned by its leaders, it is artificially spoiled by 
tearing from the God’s truth and human common sense. 
By the way, the supreme Armenian priesthood is 
much guilty of it. The academy of Echmiadzin, seminary 
of Nersesyan, and other seminaries are so much 
crowded by youth that their walls can’t stand it – but the 
overwhelming majority of the priesthood consists of plain 
and ignorant peasants. 
I will shortly touch upon the story of transfer of the 
Armenian religious schools under administration of our 
ministry of popular education. The bodies of the ministry 
established that, despite the obvious and widely ex-
pressed aspiration of the Armenian popular masses to 
study state language, the Armenian church schools had 
been not only blocking this natural way of development of 
citizenship, but even the seats of the curse and fanatic 
isolation. I should mention the absurd textbooks speaking 
                                     
20 V.L. Velichko wrote these lines by the very end of May 1903, before 
the royal approval of the law of June 12th about order of administration 
of the Armenian-Gregorian church’s property. 
 120
about notorious Great Armenia and universal vocation of 
Armenians to civilize all their neighbours – these schools 
also distributed maps of the Great Armenia, reaching 
nearly Voronezh, with capital in Tiflis 21 and various em-
blems serving the same intrigue, which was supported 
first by England and now it is one the favourite offspring of 
the Germanism. I use the word Germanism instead of 
Germany because across the Caucasus even Germans 
being Russian subjects, frequently officials become zeal-
ous supporters and patrons of the Armenian intrigue. 
The late K.P. Yanovsky, remarkable local actor and 
former supervisor of the Caucasian educational district, 
through his enormous efforts achieved issuance of order 
concerning the transfer of mentioned schools under au-
thority of ministry of popular education while retaining 
courses of the Armenian language and classes on Ar-
menian religion. The Armenian priesthood didn’t agree to 
that and has closed many schools at once, preferring 
rather to keep people in darkness of ignorance than to let 
them to get rid of the artificial isolation. The Armenian 
plain people were moaning, while agitators were distrib-
uting deliberate lies saying that schools were closed not 
by agents of the Armenian theocracy, but the Russian 
government. Our quasi-liberal press, through people fi-
nanced by the oil-barons of Baku, strongly supported that 
insolent lies among the uninformed Russian reading pub-
lic. Nevertheless the Caucasian educational district has 
managed to take some schools under its control and now 
they successfully work on new basis. The schools’ prop-
erty has been transferred to this entity along with 
                                     
21 The maps of that fictional country I saw at K.P. Yanovsky, former su-
pervisor of the Caucasian educational district, were distributed in litho-
graphic and even hand sewn shape. The latter belongs to hands of 
some mazut queens trained in foreign style    
 121
schools, as well as sources for maintenance of schools, 
and that inventory, which the Armenian priesthood failed 
to conceal or spend; it should be mentioned here that 
operations of this kind were conducted insolently before 
the eyes of all Tiflis, where the educational board didn’t 
have enough support in endeavours for location and 
withdrawal of the concealed property. 
As it comes to assets (immovable property and 
capitals) for maintenance of the Armenian schools, then 
resourcefulness and chicanery of local business men put 
the educational district in complicated situation – so 
many surprises have come up to light, but they should be 
expected in the Caucasus when it comes to the issue of 
any Armenian property. Obviously school property has 
been to the great extent labelled as monastery’s or 
church’s possession. The claims led by the Armenian ter-
ters with communal resourcefulness of the Jewish barris-
ters and insolence fitting sons of the “Great Armenia” fol-
lowed one another. The forensic practice in the Cauca-
sus is frequently benevolent to Armenians: possibly they 
are really always clean and right, and maybe there are 
some other reasons, close study of which could discover 
many interesting facts. One arbiter (temir-khan-shurinsky 
if correct) even tried to call the honourable supervisor of 
the educational district to his camera by notification. The 
Caucasian court institutions, which have sanctioned 
many seizures by the Armenian predators of the treasury 
lands through their decisions, have resolved high number 
of cases in this process not in favour of the educational 
board. Meanwhile, several cases were suspended be-
cause one big case about the schools property has led to 
Senate. The main question was whether such cases 
have been subject to administrative or court solution. The 
Senate inclined to the second option – and now the real 
 122
mess is stirred up, which is very harmful for the Russian 
cause and prestige at the Caucasus22. 
Such confusion demonstrates the absence of the 
coordinated service of different institutions at the Cauca-
sus to the unique national policy. Otherwise the dominat-
ing approach would be that the issue of popular school is 
the state matter, but not strictly civil one. During determi-
nation of belonging of the property to schools or 
churches the educational institution should have due 
support for correct clarification of all details, while the lat-
ter wouldn’t be given the exaggerated meaning because 
of the cunning-formal signs. That resourcefulness would 
rather motivate the local authorities to move the long 
waiting and clearly insisting issue – concerning seculari-
zation of the Armenian church’s property. With resolution 
of that issue many muddy waves of negative occurrence, 
spilling over the Caucasus without restrain at present, 
would turn back to their natural bed. 
The local Russians, compassionately watching the 
intensification of work of the ministry of interior, expect 
the creative initiative of this central body to make positive 
influence on the shaken fundaments of the Russian 
cause, which is not in advantage in this too remote from 
centre and too deceitful outskirt. 
The Armenian popular mass is thirsty for study of 
the Russian language, which could open it a way to earn-
ing and real culture, but their leaders set obstacles be-
cause they fear to lose people from the sphere of influ-
ence. One can judge about that influence, even in sec-
ondary issues, by fact that the “Mshak” newspaper, 
which took side of Dreyfus along with the entire Arme-
nian bourgeoisie, had a chance to express its exaltation 
                                     
22 The law of June 12th 1903 has settled this issue as well. 
 123
for distribution of that view among semi-savage Arme-
nian peasants of Yelisavetpol. One of those curse-
handed brunets even called his buffalos the names of the 
close accomplices of the Dreyfus case. 
By the way, for censorship rules it was very difficult 
to write against Dreyfus in the province proud for deeds 
of the Caucasian army being nearly the only unshake-
able and impeccable incarnation of the Russian cause in 
the country; the Armenianized and Armenian press, 
reaching down the lowest strata of people, was compos-
ing the hymns honouring that “perverted patriot”. Signifi-
cant group of Tiflis wire-pullers, including some half-
educated rascals, has sent Emil Zola the following cable 
in Russian: “From the country where suffered Prome-
theus we profoundly bow our heads before the crown of 
thorns laid on you by your motherland to the shame of 
the entire human kind. The crown of thorns is the best 
award to the dedicated fighter for justice”. 
Possibly the managers of caravansaries considered 
themselves to be inspired by suffering of Prometheus 
with rights equal to those ones enjoyed by the “Novosty” 
newspapers, when it once called the ancient Orthodox 
Mtskhet and valley of the silver Aragva River the “sultry 
Armenia”. The Caucasian Armenian supporters of Drey-
fus have coincided in their tendencies with some civil of-
ficials; when I asked one Russian subject “German”, who 
was a baptized Jew, why he was “advising” me not to 
write against Dreyfus, he responded shrugging his 
shoulders: 
− Excuse me, but emperor himself found Drey-
fus not guilty! 
− Which emperor? 
− Wilhelm! 
Here I got angry despite all my meekness: 
 124
− Pardon! That, maybe, was your emperor, but 
mine by no means. 
 
Some more words about schools. First of all, it is 
pity that the issue concerning them, or I should say their 
property, used to be and still resolved in the forensic 
manner instead of administrative.23 The judicial power is 
bound by definite regulations and has no right to deviate 
from forms and abstract legal fundaments even for sake 
of the state cause and noble purposes. Some faults, from 
the patriotic point of view, the judicial authority in the 
Caucasus is hastily accused in should be grounded by 
another category of reasons. The court charters and 
many common imperial laws, first of all, do not fit the 
Caucasian circumstances. For instance, such issues 
concern the statute of limitations, competitive process, 
and in this case, transfer of schools. The victory of Ar-
menians in several court cases about school property 
has provoked vivid gossip across the Transcaucasia and 
absurd hopes at Armenian wire-pullers. 
Let’s have a closer look at these wire-pullers and their 
programme. Naturally, they won’t let any Russian-thinking 
person to read this programme in the precise formulated 
shape; but living in the province for several years and tak-
ing closer look at many occurrences would be enough to 
clarify the Armenian programme with all its correctness, like 
a sought quantity of the resolved equation. 
The dream of the uninvited patrons of the Armenian 
people about creation of the autonomous “kingdom” and 
specifically inside of the Russian borders doesn’t fade 
away, but lights brighter. There was no territory in Turkey 
– it is artificially created in the Transcaucasia. Tens of 
                                     
23 This line is written before the law of June 12th 1903. 
 125
thousands of the Turkish emigrants cross in our borders, 
our soldiers do not dare to shoot these “peaceful” bands 
because Armenians move women and children to the 
front. There was no Turkish “atrocities” at all, and Turkish 
government doesn’t admit the fugitives back. Many of 
them refuse to accept the Russian citizenship and almost 
all without exception incline to idleness, contagious dis-
eases and wild criminal offences.  
The Transcaucasian plain Armenians, whose mor-
als became relatively soft for several decades of living in 
Russia, consider arrival of the Turkish co-ethnics the 
great disaster. 
People need the land – and everything that is pre-
sent across the Caucasus and Russian capitals and ac-
cessible for the Armenian influence transfers this land to 
Armenians and opposes Russian colonization, disregard-
ing that governor of the province had openly included 
that into his programme with royal permission. 
In our language to oppose means to object; in the 
Caucasus that word has terrible, wild meaning making 
one’s hair to stand on end. After several years of thor-
ough thinking about issue of the Dukhobors and collec-
tion of facts from the original sources I have sincerely 
come to conclusion that the Armenian intrigue, aimed at 
relocation of the Turkish Armenians to the lands of the 
Dukhobors, had been the origin of their martyrdom, 
madness and doom. The offences of some officials and 
mistakes of the others, sentimental-inhuman nonsense of 
the Tolstoy-minded etc. – all of them are the accompany-
ing factors, not basic.  Fortunately, that aim of the Arme-
nian policy was reached only to the little degree through 
seizures and other deviating ways. 
Inhabitants of the ruined Russian village in Terter of 
the Elisavetpol province know well what means “to op-
 126
pose” in Armenian. That terrible story will be outlined fur-
ther in the article dedicated to the Russian settlers. Story 
told by one of the survived settlers made such an im-
pression on the audience that all atrocities of the Turkish 
massacre pale before the cold-blooded, evil cruelty of 
“peaceful” and “cultural” Armenians shown during expul-
sion of the Russian people from lands conquered by the 
Russian blood. 
The mentioned wire-pullers also want to expulse the 
Muslim population of the region and spoil reputation of 
the Muslims in order to catch their lands in future. The 
farsighted inactivity of officials supporting and enslaved 
by them has blocked determination of the estate-land 
rights in the Muslim provinces and establishment of the 
noble-peasant banks there. Naturally the estate-land dis-
order maintains nervousness of the passionate local 
population, causes discontent and serves one of the se-
rious reasons of plunders and bloodshed. All that is thor-
oughly masked before Petersburg; some “Caucasian na-
tive” Mr. V.S.K. arguing with editor of the “Novoye Vre-
mya” newspaper’s regional bureau made accent on the 
passion and nervousness of the Transcaucasian Mus-
lims, carefully omitting the issue of one of the main fac-
tors influencing that passion. The fact is obvious: the is-
sues of interests of the whole population group have 
been shelved for several decades – there are no rational 
reasons for that! But results can be clearly seen! It is 
easy to guess who operates here!.. As result the entire 
Muslim Transcaucasia is already ensnared by the Arme-
nian nets just like other remaining parts, except for the 
part of the Kutaisi province. The Armenian millionaires 
are the whales lying in the basis of the industrial-political 
terror of “Armenia” – they buy for nothing tens of thou-
sands of acres of lands belonging to the Georgian knyaz, 
 127
Tatar agalars and capture improperly lying treasury es-
tates24; and those estates are still lying very improperly, 
partially because of the inapplicability of the common im-
perial laws to the local ground. 
By the way, the corrupt Russian publicists convince 
Russian people that Armenians are the only peaceful 
and cultural element in the Caucasus. The Armenian rich 
men and their envoys are able to prove the same to the 
influential circles in Petersburg, and alas to many repre-
sentatives of press using oil bonds, delicious lunches 
and even lips of the specially hired beautiful ladies. I re-
peat: our ignorance is amazing, nearly criminal. In rare 
editions of the Russian orientation one has to read that 
Armenians are “stronghold of the Christianity in the 
East”, and editions absolutely non-Russian for their ori-
entation (like notorious “St. Petersburg Vedomosti”) 
reach such heights of bootlicking before Armenians that 
one feels shame and fear for the human. 
The Armenian leaders and their accomplices just 
like Jews try to convince young and naïve Russians that 
Russia has already grown for powerful popular represen-
tation and that true patriotism has to consist of wide use 
of that “maturity”, and of leaving the outskirts and aliens 
to their own devices. Different attitude to the issue would 
be “intolerance” and “obscurantism”. Those who have 
heard enough of such aphorisms in the Caucasus can 
understand many Petersburg writings, no matter how 
they are masked, even by the Russian “nationalism” of 
the special sort. When Armenians and their hired paper-
back writers engage formulas of bourgeois liberalism 
usual for the narrow minded part of the Russian intelli-
gentsia and speak, for instance, about equality and 
                                     
24 These lands are completely inhabited by the Turkish Armenians. 
 128
brotherhood of all peoples, then it is lie, contemptible and 
poorly masked lie, which even a child wouldn’t believe in 
if he’s honest and comprehended what is all about. Per-
sons pretending that they believe in Armenian liberal-
humanitarian assurances are liars just like the authors of 
such arguments. Attentive reading of texts concerning 
the Armenian question and thorough look at the Cauca-
sian affairs would be enough to acknowledge the men-
tioned conclusion as the axiom.  
For instance, it seems that liberal-humanitarian idea 
doesn’t forbid taking care about the Russian popular 
mass, and, to the contrary, demands to render assis-
tance to those groups, which are driven to the outskirts 
by impoverishment of our centre and lack of lands. 
Meanwhile, the fight initiated by Armenian sponsors of 
press against the filling of free Transcaucasian lands by 
the Russian settlers prescribed by the Supreme Power is 
going on for several years. 
Let’s take another abnormality, even more scream-
ing from the Caucasian point of view and obviously con-
tradicting the Armenian formula “Caucasus for Cauca-
sians”. The Muslims constitute the overwhelming majority 
of population in most cities of the eastern Transcaucasia, 
but they do not enjoy the similar rights with Armenians in 
the city administration, under pretext that the latter are 
“Christians”. That pretext can be used to cram only peo-
ple learning the concept of Caucasus from the calendar 
data. Limitation of rights of some groups of population is 
useful and necessary in the multi-tribal state, but they 
must derive from the communal conditions, not formal 
features. One has to limit exploiters, mobsters, wire-
pullers, people of the shadow conspirative order; not 
Muslims, but namely Armenians are people of such kind. 
The Christianity without the Christian morals is forgery – 
 129
it is not occasional that one Orthodox hierarch once told 
me he considered Muslims for their spirit and moral posi-
tion more closer to the Orthodoxy rather than mono-
physite Armenians. But even if one takes the point of 
view of the mechanically-equalizing justice and denies 
any limitations, then it would be natural to grant Muslims 
equal rights with Armenians, especially in the country 
where Muslims are more native inhabitants. 
The Caucasian authority was sincerely striving for 
that and in short period of time the issue has been con-
sidered resolved in a positive way. The Armenian press, 
worshiping all dogmas of the so called “liberalism” and 
carelessly treating the Orthodox shrines, suddenly 
started passionately singing about “Christianity”, all con-
tacts in Petersburg were engaged to keep the limitation 
of the Muslims’ rights in force. Newspapers accessible to 
Armenians at once started crying about pan-Islamism. 
And submissive Petersburg canceled the noble act, 
which has been under implementation in practice by the 
Caucasian authority… 
Armenians and their supporter obviously hide their 
liberalism in pocket when it comes to their tribal interests. 
They even have a saying: “If you want – Isaiah 
Arakelovich, or Arakel Isaiahovich”. They consider all 
strange property, even the one deserved by blood and 
valour, as illegal gain. For instance, despite of Armenians 
being de facto masters of the region for some forty years, 
the Russian power gives more of the visible respect 
rather to the merited warriors and representatives of the 
old Georgian families traditionally loyal to Russia, than to 
yesterday’s managers, manufacturer or invaders of the 
treasury lands. That is “harmful” to the zealots of the Ar-
menian hegemony, and they regard it as outrageous in-
justice! 
 130
Not long before the time I started editing the “Cau-
casus” newspaper the famous “leading” journalist Greg-
ory Avetovich Djanshiyev visited me in the hotel in Tiflis 
with purpose of acquaintance. He enjoyed reputation of 
the sincere impeccable liberal. Respecting any sincerity 
and hearing a lot of good things about him in Petersburg, 
I was very touched by his attention – he completely 
amazed me by width of the theoretical views. I frankly 
told him that I’ve been sharply distinguishing the popular 
mass from the quasi-intelligent class and especially from 
the predating plutocracy. He made a slightly wry face 
and expressed assurance of that people from different 
camps could join for the sake of people’s good, if they 
were not enemies of light, transparency and life truth.  
I was too naïve to believe it. But after the first serious 
exposure of the antisocial swindle and tribal intolerance of 
the city bosses of Tiflis I received very characteristic letter 
from that pseudo-liberal and zealous Armenian patriot (in 
parasitical meaning of that word). Below are the lines of 
that letter where Djanshiyev “opened his cards”: 
“I sincerely wish them (Georgian people) every (?!) 
success, but only on the basis of equality, not in capacity 
of the capricious minion of administration like they used to 
be and still remain as such (?!), it is acknowledged by the 
“Novoye Vremya” itself. The reason why Armenians have 
future is that they nowhere and never demanded privi-
leges for themselves (?!) at the expense of other peoples. 
Your newspaper has a touch of tendency of snubbing 
them as harmful element. One shouldn’t forget that being 
a target for prosecution for the last 3 years they are spe-
cifically sensitive to any injustice, particularly the one 
demonstrated by persons in whose impartiality they have 
believed. In such state of spirit even the just action may 
provoke irritation. What could be more just than equalizing 
 131
Tatars with Christians in the city administration? But I ab-
solutely understand people considering that action un-
timely, because it is obviously instilled by rather hatred (?!) 
to Armenians, than love to justice. Of course you wouldn’t 
suspect the late Unkovsky in animosity to people, but he 
railed (?!) at Milyutin for his Polish farming land distribu-
tion, because it was inspired by animosity (?!) to the Pol-
ish people rather than care about it!!” 
It seems that comments would be unnecessary 
since even the just action may provoke the irritation with 
those sensitive persons, “not demanding privileges for 
themselves”, but objecting to the equality of the Muslims! 
The Russian servants of Armenians have gone 
much further down that way. For instance, at the institu-
tion of knyaz Ukhtomsky the suggestion to settle the Ar-
menian migrants on island of Crete was once acknowl-
edged as undesirable action, since Armenians were 
people specifically talented in the economic sphere they 
would turn dissatisfaction of other Christians in a new 
place against themselves. 
Nothing to say, that is really good “talent” accompa-
nied by inevitable discontent of the neighbouring people! 
Obviously the best place for such “talented” people is in 
the long-tolerant Russia: there is no need for ceremonies 
with this mother!  
Article of the French writer-Armenophile Mr. Pierre 
Moran (“Correspondant” magazine, April 10th, 1897) is of 
special interest, as he was beforehand “prepared” by the 
Caucasian wire-pullers and also opened their cards. 
According to this writer, Russia in moral sense 
didn’t firm its supremacy between the Black and Caspian 
Seas – what is absolutely true. He says, - Idea of origi-
nality and thirst for isolation is deep and active mostly 
with Armenians. They complain of indifference of France 
 132
to their situation, which upon entering the humiliating it 
(?!) Franco-Russian union has forgotten own principles 
and betrayed its traditions; meanwhile the Russian gov-
ernment, failing to carry out its obligation for protection of 
the foreign Armenians, is oppressing the Russian Arme-
nians through irritating actions, par des procédés véxa-
toires. He pretends that Armenians were prosecuted (?!) 
in Russia for their creative energy, wealth, strong intel-
lectual culture (!) and finally “just for being Armenians”. 
G. Moran finds that they are people with iron will, stable, 
captious and industrious – shortly speaking, people with 
great internal strength, á la séve vigoureuse. He ac-
knowledges that everywhere in the Transcaucasia “they 
have captured places designed, seemingly, rather for 
Russians” and they have been creating a new mother-
land for them within the Russian limits, acquiring all big 
enterprises through not completely conscientious meth-
ods, so to speak, from the bottom (par le dessous), like 
merciless usurers, shadow businessmen, “Christian 
Jews”, and Russians envy them because of impossibility 
to compete.  
Moran is deeply-correct in determination of role of 
the Echmiadzin patriarchate saying that even those “who 
have lost their faith in supernatural” (i.e. all Armenian in-
telligentsia), honour their church since it is national insti-
tution and saves their national identity. Armenians attach 
the feeling called a love to motherland by other peoples 
onto the church. 
Information on geography, history and literature, Mr. 
Moran has adopted from the Armenian wire-pullers, is 
subsequently inaccurate. For instance, he says that, Ba-
tumi, Kars and Ardagan with their territories represent the 
originally Armenian possessions and Georgians in fact 
have been sitting on the Armenians lands for long time. 
 133
He slanders the emperor Nicolas I, who ostensibly 
promised to grant Armenians an autonomy, saying that in 
times of Alexander II (period of might of count Loris-
Melikov?) Armenians were strongly counting at revival of 
their “kingdom”, and draws deceitful, coarsely inaccurate 
picture of reign of emperor Alexander III, but expresses 
true idea that Armenians are very frightened and hate the 
Autocracy, the centralizing and levelling all parts and all 
isolating elements of the empire. 
He finds that Armenians may pin their patriotic 
hopes only on the “liberal government”. This idea is true 
and explains why Armenians, beginning with famous 
Karakozov, just like Jews, so much incline to participa-
tion in every intrigue aimed at shaking of alteration of our 
state order. 
Moran states that in terms of the unlimited monarchy 
Armenians are unable not to be oppositional elements 
and even dangerous subjects, des sujets redoutables, 
from the political point of view and in the economic field as 
well, like the “Christian Israel”, - un Israél Chrétien. 
The mentioned writer does contradict himself 
strongly: in one place he says that Armenians only want 
“the civil equality and religious freedom” (although, as it 
can be seen in the Caucasus, they not only widely enjoy, 
but even abuse both of them with impunity), in another 
passage he acknowledges that “success gave Armeni-
ans pride, energy, passion and strength; they were bent 
before their masters, while they have been poor and 
weak, getting richer they think of resistance; many are 
dissatisfied with their situation”. The psychology of oil 
barons and bankers is described correctly here. 
Speaking further about radical contradictions be-
tween the Armenian tendencies and the Russian state 
order, calling Armenians dangerous subjects and Arme-
 134
nian church – national institution and even “Vatican”, 
Moran concludes with passionate apology to Armenians 
and strongly advises the Russian government to yield to 
their demands, drop “dishonest” (déloyale) policy and 
trust to the “Novoye Vremya” and “Moskovskiye Vedo-
mosty” initiating some fairy tales about Armenian “plots”. 
Hence, Russia has to refuse the basic principles of 
its statehood in order to give way to the autonomous 
“Christian Israel” reaching Voronezh, maybe even fur-
ther?! Well, thanks for that good advice, which, possibly, 
will be supported by some zealots of the “philosophic 
renovation of the Russian order”! 
Until that advice is not accepted, realization of the 
Armenian program consistently continues. 
Leading the rest of the Caucasian population to im-
poverishment and, so to speak, zoological discontent the 
Armenian bosses hope to turn the remaining natives into 
their conductors, who could be useful in case of the 
unlucky for Russia war. It is characteristic that the Arme-
nian wire-pullers specially hate any action, any kind word 
in favour or protection of other natives. They don’t get 
angry with those Russians, who indiscriminately scold “all 
Caucasians”, Armenians are ready to pay such Russian 
patriots, because indiscriminate statements are always 
unjust and fit well the Armenians formula “Caucasus for 
the Caucasians”. Their main feature is – photophobia, a 
fear before the incorruptible voice – this is what they 
have in common with unreliable officials standing for 
conditional “report” truth, instead of life truth. The Arme-
nian wire-pullers are especially outraged by indications 
that the Armenian hegemony ruins other Caucasian 
tribes: then they start crying about inflaming of the inter-
tribal hatred; their objections take shape of the “double-
sided denunciation”, so much liked by Armenians and 
 135
Jews – and everything in the provincial service, which is 
decayed, corrupt and interested in continuation of the 
Armenian supremacy, raises from the “censorship” point 
a view its voice against exposure of outrages and honest 
description of reality. 
The huge capitals in hands of the politically over-
dreaming people may represent serious threat not only in 
case of some complications, but ordinary time as well. 
Being a fruit of rather silly-occasional or dishonest gain 
than diligent labour and inspired knowledge, these capi-
tals in hands of obscurant or uncultured people represent 
a social threat as factor or corruption and lechery. 
Since in the modern state these treasuries can not 
be retrieved, except for the cases of legal confiscation for 
the proved riot or plot, then there should be a thought 
economical policy, there should be cultural struggle. It is 
time for the Russian entrepreneurship to apply its mate-
rial and spiritual forces to our southern outskirt. It is time 
for our creative thought to lay in fundament of our provin-
cial state programme. Strengthening of the police guard 
and improvement of the professional level of the Russian 
Caucasians are equally important, but all that are 
patches, which cannot fix the main issue. 
Absurd of the Armenian wire-pullers, probably, will 
remain absurd, because no revolutionary adventures can 
stand against the bayonet of the Russian soldier. But 
Armenian bosses in the Caucasus cause enormous eco-
nomic and spiritual damage to both the Russian popular-
state cause and the Armenian population itself. These 
bosses are terrible as lechers, as microbes of social de-
cay, as parasites. 
 136
 
 
 
11. Azerbaijani Tatars. 
 
The Caucasian Muslims can be divided into two 
strict categories for difference on their characters: first 
category would consist of Muslims lived in Turkey and 
especially Persia with its vassal khanates; the second 
one – of residents of Dagestan and other highlanders 
worshipping Islam. There are little of Turkish and Kurds 
within our borders and they represent a small dim spot 
on the colourful Caucasian carpet. Azerbaijani Tatars are 
different story: there are many of them and they consti-
tute significant and valuable, in many respects, element 
which should be looked closer. 
For centuries the eastern Transcaucasia was con-
sidered the Persian possession, but in fact it used to be 
such in some discrete cases; usually it was divided into 
small khanates (Ganja, Erivan, Talish, Sheki etc.) and ini-
tially their lords were officials appointed by the Persian 
government, who then managed to achieve transfer of 
their administrative rights by heritage and, finally, to peel 
off from Persia and reach independence becoming small 
tyrants of the oriental style. The beks, especially when 
they had kinship relations with the khan families, used to 
reach the same succession of power over smaller parts 
of territory. The mass of the Muslim population obeyed 
these rulers on the oriental-state basis, not the serfdom. 
Azerbaijanis were engaged in cultivation of land, garden-
ing and cattle breeding, hunting, war and … raids, their 
principal difference from war is still unclear to the local 
population because of the indistinct land borders and le-
gal definitions. When residents of one khanate or bek 
 137
domain attacked villages belonging to the other one with 
purpose of plunder, blood vengeance or demonstration 
of courage, then it used to be called war. Now it’s plun-
der, and by opinion of the modern Russian court, princi-
ples of that plunder are unclear to the population, and 
forms are sources for temptations generating hatred and 
new crimes. Armenians were engaged in trade, trembling 
before the khans’ whips, crawling before the beks, and 
paled in a view of a man armed with dagger. They often 
unwillingly had to share their gain with Muslim rulers.  
The Azerbaijanis are called Tatars, but that is com-
pletely wrong if we attribute Tatars to the Mongolian 
tribe. Even if the Azerbaijanis have a Tatar blood in their 
veins, then it is only result of the Mongolian raids of the 
times of Batuy, Mangu and Khulagu-khan (to the Tran-
scaucasia); similar results have left after the Arabs: in the 
eastern Transcaucasia one still can meet people of the 
Arabic type and even reminding mulattos, with very dark 
skin and curly hair. For their main genesis Azerbaijanis 
are Turks, Turanys, and blood relatives of ancient 
Oghuz, Seldjuks, and modern Turkish. Azerbaijan gave 
Persia one of its greatest dynasties and during its reign 
sciences, culture, agriculture and military had blos-
somed. The name of Alp-Arslan is not forgotten in this 
part of Asia. 
Unlike Petersburg where a tendentious requirement 
is established in the halls and meeting rooms, filled with 
cosmopolitism, not to raise an issue of anybody’s tribal 
origin, there is a custom in the Caucasus, and generally 
in all countries where people are close to nature, to pay 
attention to blood: they know that human being is psy-
cho-physical entity, not just an abstract mathematical 
calculation; spiritual organization has close connection 
with shape of skull and other body parts, actions of the 
 138
person are guided by not only present, but the past as 
well; blood of ancestors speaks through them. 
Azerbaijanis undoubtedly have noble blood; for their 
nature they are kind, courageous, gracious, talented for 
intellectual and moral development. Despite of their ap-
parent anarchism, predetermined by history, geographic 
situation of the province and communal conditions deriv-
ing from that, they undoubtedly have a concept of the 
statehood, and especially of the strong one, inspiring re-
spect to the power, traditions and order. The Azerbaijani 
man basically is spontaneous supporter of the unlimited 
power, strong and patriarchal-just. It is almost the same 
psychologically racial character available with the Russian 
people, loyalty to the Autocracy by not only mind and 
heart, but, so to say, by very nature. The more Armenians 
and Jews, for their racial instinct, are hostile by nature to 
any statehood and particularly idea of the absolute mon-
archy, the more Azerbaijanis spontaneously, organically 
compassion to it – even rebels and robbers. Of course 
there is no psychological equality with Russians in this is-
sue, since the Russian people had accepted the more ad-
vanced Byzantine religious-political culture and hadn’t 
been subjected in mass scale to such anarchical influ-
ences, which had imprinted on the character of the Azer-
baijanis; but surely there is an analogy in fundament. 
The Islam, being one of the cultural basics of this 
people, could only develop the mentioned character and 
give it ideological substantiation: one Allah, one prophet, 
one representative of the prophet, bearer of the secular 
power. Everything is filled with idea of the autocracy, this 
idea is so strong that crosses borders of the confessional 
differences – and any king, although the alien one, is 
saint as representative of the unlimited autocracy. The 
Transcaucasian Muslims have repeatedly fought against 
 139
their co-religious Turkish under banners of the White 
Tsar, bending before the grandeur of the enlightened cul-
tural autocracy. 
The people of the West, and particularly the most 
energetic part of the German tribe – Anglo-Saxons – is 
organically inclined to politics with its details, intrigues 
and everyday routine taking a bulk of the time and efforts 
in struggle for the decisive role in the power relations. 
The people of the East, and particularly Azerbaijanis, 
prefer entrusting politics with the powerful person enjoy-
ing respect and gratitude for paternal care about needs 
of the people, for peace, might and glory attained under 
his banner. This is exactly the organic difference in the 
world outlooks pregnant with political and communal 
consequences. 
There is hardly any need to prove that people with 
oriental view on the state represent valuable creative ele-
ment for such absolute monarchy like Russia; that is a 
construction material, which can be used by the state 
power, having enough of sensitivity, for self-development 
and successful realization of its historical mission. 
It is our custom to link the concept of Islam exclu-
sively and indiscriminately with definition of fanaticism. 
Once somebody speaks about Muslims the word of 
“gazavat”, i.e. holy war, is mentioned right away, they 
threaten with pan-Islamism, Turkish atrocities and so on, 
especially now under impression of the unspeakable suf-
ferings brought down on the poor population of Mace-
donia and Old Serbia oppressed by the savage Balkan 
Muslims; and here it is usual to forget about cruelty of the 
Americans towards niggers and people of Philippine, of 
the Germans towards the Chinese, of the British towards 
the Boers, hireling banker Jews towards congregations. 
Our people don’t know Islam: they know only two or 
 140
three belligerent verses from Koran, written for some 
purposes and taking provisional-dogmatic importance 
only in cases, when the Muslim population of any country 
is either outraged by the abnormal life conditions, or in-
spired by some energetic leader drawing a picture of 
bright perspectives. 
We still treat the issue of Islam in uncultured way. 
The Muslims take the first position for their number in our 
country after Russians, but we don’t have the translation 
of book “Le Coran analysé”, which is the table book for 
every French official in the Northern Africa; there is not a 
sign of at least serious and impartial independent re-
searches which could help our officials dealing with Mus-
lims to comprehend the main source of their world out-
look. Truly speaking there is nobody to write such books 
for, because officials at our Asian outskirts are captured 
by other interests. 
Loyalty to faith, the man considered the right one, 
should coincide with denial of truth of other confessions 
in full scale: as an Orthodox I can consider the Ortho-
doxy the only true faith with detriment to other religions. 
Nevertheless, it would be strange to deny that they con-
tain parts of that unique eternal truth, which completely 
constitutes the nature of the Orthodoxy; that would be 
even stranger to deny not only beneficence of influence 
of the alien religions on the people enlightened by them, 
but in some cases even the practically-subjective advan-
tage of those religions for human races standing on the 
appropriate spiritual stage and beset by special condi-
tions. For instance, that concerns Islam. From our point 
of view, it doesn’t have absolute truth, but gives elements 
of that truth to the people accepting faith in brief, com-
prehensible formulas and digestible dozes. Practically 
speaking we may conclude that the same person truly 
 141
accepting imperatives of Islam, containing big portion of 
the Christian morality, and subsequently leading the de-
cent patriarchal life, could become much worse person if 
taught although more sublime, but less comprehensible 
and compatible with his mental organization basics of the 
Christianity; misunderstanding would be accompanied by 
inactivity. The mental context would evaporate leaving 
only a dead ritual, another form of the same paganism, 
fighting which Muhammad came as real enlightener, real 
creator of the moral progress among his co-ethnics.  
Taking a closer look at the dogmas and history of 
Islam one can easily acknowledge that this religion, pro-
fessing mercy to the neighbour, care of about the weak 
and glooming, enlightening the human several times in a 
day (strictly required namaz) with reminder of the Only 
God, for its ethical sides interrelated with the military in-
tolerance and sensible materialism is a spiritual branch 
of the Christianity, which has sprung away from that 
great stream and which certainly would come back to it. 
If for example one compares an Islamized Georgian-
Adjarian with an Orthodox Gurian (almost brothers for 
their tribal origin), then the advantage would be given to 
the first one because he is more honest, gracious and 
generally higher morally. If one compares a Muslim 
Azerbaijani, even robber, but faithful Muslim with a 
“Christian” Armenian, “respectable” and endeared by the 
Caucasian authorities, having diploma of Philosophy 
Doctor in his pocket and honourable title on the visit 
card, then all moral advantages would fall to the side of 
the first one; although he is a sinner, he sincerely be-
lieves in God and hence his soul is basically Christian; 
the second one is just a cunning beast dressed in the 
English frock-coat, the Christianity for him is dead, more-
over, perverted letter. 
 142
The great cultural credit of Islam before the people 
accepting it was simplicity and clarity of its requirements 
and dogmas. That doesn’t exclude the presence of deep 
theosophical basics, logical development of which visu-
ally and immediately brings Islam closer to the Christian-
ity. Sufi sects serve the obvious prove to that, and verses 
by Omar Khayyam describing the “invigorating breathe of 
Christ” are the artificial evidences of the Christian moods 
of Islam. The complicate dogmatic work of Islam brought 
very original fruit in time of blossoming of the Arabic civi-
lization, and namely an aspiration to reconcile a faith with 
mind. Several theological schools have dedicated them-
selves to that task not without success. The idea that a 
real wisdom coincides with virtues and Divine truth, can 
often be seen in very unique forms among the Caucasian 
Muslims. For instance, the Azerbaijani man, condemning 
some cunning and far-sighted rascal, will certainly say 
shaking his bold head: “What an irrational man!”…   
Of course, there is a significant difference between 
the supreme origins of the religion and forms of its practi-
cal implementation. Speaking about Islam in the Tran-
scaucasia one should also take into account the obscu-
rantist attitude of the ignorant mass to the letter of religion 
(for instance, “shakhsey-vakhsey” with Shiites), and roam-
ing dervishes exciting people by their fantasies, dimmed 
sermons and tricks, and emissaries from the neighbouring 
countries – political actors on the religious ground. In 
practice Islam frequently takes rude, coarse forms and 
superstitions described by knyaz Dmitry Kantemir in his 
notorious “Book of Systime”, a pamphlet against the “Mu-
hamaddan religion”, and they still are not and, probably, 
won’t be consigned to legend soon. All that exists and 
must be taken into consideration, one can’t ignore those 
sides of Islam, although rarely implemented, which have 
 143
to be acknowledged as positive from point of view of the 
universal human truth and our state interests. 
It is even less affordable to ignore those natural fea-
tures of the population, which, if developed, might and 
must bring positive results from the state point of view. 
The cultural development of the Azerbaijanis this way or 
other can lead them to acquisition of the exclusively 
Russian origins, instead of western-European; the Azer-
baijanis like Tatars of all Povolzhye and population of the 
Central Asian khanates in cultural meaning gravitate to-
wards the Russian order, which is the natural stage of 
development for them. The Russian-Tatar schools per-
fectly accommodate and enjoy compassion of all popula-
tion, from top to bottom, striving to learn the Russian lan-
guage and reproach with Russians. Such phenomenon 
like the insolent fight of the Armenian priesthood and plu-
tocracy against the Russian power about the old-
fashioned schools, where the Russian was taught only 
fictitiously, has not been encountered among the Tatars 
so far. Nothing demonstrates that prejudiced hatred 
against the Russians, which is sometimes shown by the 
Armenian population instigated by its self-styled leaders. 
Naturally first colonizers of this province, our sectarians, 
initially had to taste the Tatar daggers. The ancestors of 
the modern sentimentally-crazy Dukhobors, driven to 
hysteria by count Tolstoy, regarded that issue quite really 
and had offered bloody repulse to the Tatar raiders; the 
issue reached such point that none of the armed Tatars 
dared to show at a distance of several rifle shots near the 
sectarian settlements, this is how the Dukhobors have at-
tained complete security. 
The Tatars understand and value the force guided 
by the mind. Due to the energy of the sectarians the 
Russian name was set high among the Tatar population, 
 144
and for the current Russians settlers in the Transcauca-
sia it is much easier to deal with Tatars than with any 
other neighbours. Even the co-religious Georgians fre-
quently become less comfortable than Muslims, because 
the latter are benevolent to Russians for their nature and 
lessons of history. 
The Azerbaijanis have good historical memory and 
great successive respect to the feats. The name of Kot-
lyarevsky, hero of Lankoran, who with a bunch of fighters 
kept all the Muslim Transcaucasia in obedience and fear, 
still shines in rays of glory. Of course, the chancelleries 
with their routine and dead attitude to life, poor bureauc-
racy and courts, alien for local understanding, have 
strongly damaged the Russian prestige for the past 50 
years, so the current situation of the Muslims and their 
mood can not be called normal. A sort of the present or-
der is still based upon the historical memory and deep 
faith in justice of the White Tsar. This way or other, today 
we spend in this province the dear heritage of our clever 
ancestors, while the post-reforms conditions of the pro-
vincial life, as if deliberately, have formed in a combina-
tion supporting isolation among the alien elements, artifi-
cially pushing away everybody who believed in our force 
and truth, and finally bringing the bloody conflicts. 
The Azerbaijani Tatars were not lucky under our 
reign. Even knyaz Vorontsov, creative-governor, be-
cause of his personal views had made a mistake setting 
a serfdom right in place where it had never existed, and 
trying to promote the Tatar family nobility. But even that 
mistake was not finished, and the Muslim population of 
the Transcaucasia is still doomed to the chaos in the ti-
tle-land sphere because of the unjustifiable reasons. 
A lot of things have been and are being done, as if 
deliberately, to complicate the normal life of this popula-
tion and its transfer to more cultural forms of life. The ti-
 145
tle-land commission, which had existed for several dec-
ades, was doing nothing and then abolished, its files 
were transferred to the chancellery of the supreme direc-
tor of the civil part in the Caucasus for the military-
popular administration. But nobody heard about progress 
in this direction. Meanwhile the confusion of relations is 
unspeakable: the serfdom right is abolished, but the 
obligatory links of the Muslim peasants to the beks re-
mained, and possessions have not been demarked; mis-
understandings happen everywhere, serving the source 
of income for small local authorities and provoking the 
just dissatisfaction in all classes of population. 
The lack of clarity of the title rights is also followed 
by heavy economic and communal consequences. Due 
to the number of circumstances, created by abolition of 
the serfdom and gradual endearment of life, crossing 
from the patriarchal order to the decayed-bourgeois one 
– the beks and agalars, i.e. local land owners, started re-
quiring a credit. On the other hand, since they have not 
been approved as having nobility rights, they can’t use 
credit at the nobility bank, while the peasants’ bank nec-
essary for the popular mass has not been established 
yet. In result, all classes of the local population have 
been submitted by the improvident Russian power in 
catchy hands of the Armenian usurers. Collating this fact 
with the long-standing inactivity of the title-land commis-
sion one can easily draw the logical and life-proved con-
clusion that the Armenian plutocracy, benefiting from this 
abnormal situation of things, has been supporting it 
through own ruinous influence on the local governmental 
institutions and individual dishonest actors. The Muslim 
bek, whose ancestors had held prominent positions un-
der the Georgian tsars, and then served as officers of the 
Russian service, can’t place his son in the cadet corps at 
 146
the expense of treasury because of uncertainty of his title 
rights. Representatives of the supreme class, beks and 
agalars, are talented for the military service; but even 
when they discharge the flawless and excellent service 
they are not indemnified from the tax collected from the 
Muslim population for liberty from military service. 
Due to absence of the national financial policy in the 
province the economic situation of particularly Muslims 
deteriorates year by year. The Armenian plutocracy 
represents the organized mob devaluating the labour of 
the Tatar farmers and cattle breeders, catching all mar-
kets, credit and general circulation of money. The entire 
province is divided into districts taken by more or less big 
Armenian spiders exploiting the local Tatar population. 
Some Khublarov is sitting at one place, buying mulberry 
and grape for nothing, Sogomonov at another place, 
somebody of that kind in the third place. These agricul-
tural products get spoiled very fast: if they are not sold in 
time, then a lot of labour would be lost and farmer’s fam-
ily would remain hungry. Running for city? The buyer-ups 
may block the way to market and low-ranked police will 
be on their side. One has to follow the Ukrainian saying: 
“ride as the Pan says”… 
Under the present abnormal conditions of the Cau-
casian life that would be strange even to imagine that the 
external economic force would break in the regions of the 
usurious exploitation of the Tatar population, create 
competition and raise the level of the popular income. 
The hooks or crooks, including grave crimes, are used to 
fight such attempts. The case of Khublarov or murder in 
Shelly village of Elisavetpol province caused great noise 
across the Caucasus. The Russian entrepreneur decided 
to establish the liqueur factory in district caught by the 
Armenian monopolist Khublarov. People tried to con-
 147
vince and even prevented him from that project. He sent 
several of his clerks to the Agdam district of Shusha 
uyezd with the task of designing the factory, who got 
killed; their bodies remained unburied for several days 
because the court investigator – Armenian – was dis-
tracted from his duties by some family celebrities. He 
started investigation with an enthusiasm, described as 
“face of female going to work”, and despite his efforts for 
acquisition of evidences acquitting the monopolist 
Khublarov the latter had to be subjected to preliminary 
detention in prison due to very substantial evidences, 
what strongly infuriated the Armenian financial plutoc-
racy. The especially aggravating evidences were discov-
ered not by the preliminary investigation, but by the po-
lice interrogation. So began the attacks against all per-
sons sincerely trying to reveal culprits of that savage 
murder. They brought up to light cases compromising the 
chief of uyezd and district marshal; those cases were 
made up long before that and then shelved, and the criti-
cal moment they have been brought up to daylight with 
the only purpose of undermining testimonies of those of-
ficials and their exclusion from the official circulation. Si-
multaneously they composed an outrageous tale about 
Tatar Djafar bek Vezirov, the landlord in Shusha, guilty of 
showing interest to the investigation since one of the vic-
tims was his relative. They composed and, in order to 
prepare the public opinion to the beforehand conceived 
trick, dared to speak the transparent hints publicly in lay-
ers’ society that Djafar bek Vezirov, as an influential per-
son in his district, brings people to the mosque and 
forces them to take the oath of loyalty (!) to himself. Si-
multaneously with the news about transfer of Khublarov’s 
case, by decree of the Caucasian administration, from 
civil court to the military one, and dismissal of the po-
 148
licemen unpleasant to Mr. Khublarov from service, Tiflis 
became filled with gossip that defence of Khublarov is 
organized in a very specific way: one local rascal from 
the Caucasian natives, who had contacts in different 
spheres of Tiflis and disgraced his Russian name long 
ago by cynical service to various Armenian intrigues, en-
gaged himself to “conduct” it. He had to “conduct” the 
case staying in shadow personally: the sum of money 
assigned for these innocent expenditures varied in tongs 
of narrators from 40 up to 100 thousands.  The Armenian 
press reached the extreme lyrics defending Khublarov, 
while it was rather more than difficult to write against the 
latter because of the local censorship situation. 
The session of the military-district court under chair-
manship of the military judge Ivanenko has arrived to 
Shusha. The course of the process, i.e. new preliminary 
and forensic investigation, could be revealed by the im-
partial reviser, but unfortunately he wasn’t sent there. 
There are only three undoubted facts: assistant of prose-
cutor instead of the charging speech delivered something 
like the acquitting one, which was published in the Arme-
nianized “Novoye Obozreniye” newspaper as is; two 
days before the announcement of the verdict, which 
seemingly could not be known to anybody in advance, 
the entire Shusha has been preparing for the Lucullus 
style Asian feast and later all members of the assizes, 
except for one lieutenant-colonel from the Erivan regi-
ment, had participated in the Khublarov’s feast after Mr. 
Ivanenko had concluded his justifying verdict with lyrical 
greeting to the successful Mr. Khublarov. Unexpectedly 
for the province Djafar bek Vezirov was arrested and 
subjected to the preliminary detention. They have kept 
him there for quite long time and then released old ill 
man saying “pardon, monsieur!” 
 149
Then … everything is fine. None of the new entre-
preneurs engaged in competition with the Armenian in-
dustrial feuds, which are “invincible”. The honest people 
in the Caucasus, especially representatives of our valiant 
army, were outraged, crying, speaking, and then this 
dirty case gave space to other dirty cases, and their 
name is legion. 
The mentioned case, just like many other judicial 
dramas played in the Caucasus, had the same although 
unpleasant, but characteristic for the Tatar population, 
details connected with presence of the assassins and 
remarkable inclination of the Tatars to the perjury. Rea-
sons for both phenomena are complicate and can’t be at-
tributed exclusively to the fault of the Azerbaijani race. 
The issue of assassins can be conveniently regarded in 
connection with issue of plunders, which shall be high-
lighted further and which is the Achilles’ heel for all ad-
ministrators of the province, obviously breaking the har-
mony of the reported wellbeing in the Caucasus. 
The perjury is sad and almost general phenomena, 
meanwhile rooted rather in external circumstances, than 
in character of the Muslim population. The Azerbaijani 
Tatar is religious and truthful in common life; he is reli-
able in friendship, keeps his word, values good name. 
But he will definitely lie in the court. On one hand, he 
doesn’t understand the principles of out court, on the 
other hand – our court process makes harmful effect on 
his nerves. For his nature he is passionately-sportive 
man; the competitive process for him is not a method for 
establishment of truth, but struggle, where victor is the 
only right. In addition, the court, disregarding local cus-
toms and definitions and frequently offending the truth of 
life, doesn’t inspire the Muslim with that trust and re-
spect, when the tongue can hardly move to lie. The ad-
 150
vocates both the underground and the “jury”, ironically 
called so, engaging to defend whomsoever and whatso-
ever, push criminals and witnesses to the path of lie and 
contempt over the law. It would be easy to understand, 
and to some extent to justify, the negative attitude of the 
Muslim Azerbaijanis and all other Caucasian population 
to our court, if to complement the picture with those low-
ering the moral stance hard material and communal cir-
cumstances, which our officials, including the judicial in-
stitutions, have to live in at the Caucasus. 
The business is strongly affected because the na-
tives lack knowledge of the state language, which is the 
language of the court process, and judicial officials lack 
knowledge of local languages; hence the wide and to 
some degree decisive part is played by the less reliable 
interpreters. The natives know what the latter is worth of, 
and that gives them additional reason to treat the Rus-
sian court with scepticism. There is another reason for 
that in psychology of the Azerbaijani Tatars. For centu-
ries they got used to immediate application of the strict 
decisions of their khans and agalars, i.e. the culprit used 
to be subjected to hanging on the nearest plane-tree or 
immediate confiscation of property. The concept of crimi-
nal offence was not so distinct from the civil offence, and 
in some occasions its interpretation was life-supported. 
For instance, if the baker quoting too high price for the 
bread was causing discontent of population, then khan or 
judge used to nail his ear to the door and kept him in this 
position until he refused from the usurious prices for the 
essentially necessary product. This practice is still con-
tinued in Persia. That is too cruel for the nerves of the 
modern law-makers, but from the point of view of local 
customs it is more rational than our long paper court 
process with all appellations, cassations, bailing and ex-
 151
ile, where the courageous man can easily escape from. 
Bearing in mind the last two conditions the witnesses are 
afraid to tell truth, perfectly knowing that the criminal will 
definitely revenge them by arson or murder. Such rea-
sonable fear strongly complicates the cause of justice 
across not only the Transcaucasia, but the rest of Russia 
as well; so that would be unjust to attribute it to the lack 
of culture at Muslims only. 
Clearly, the Transcaucasian natives, and particu-
larly Muslims, need a different, more thoroughly thought 
court and process, along with appropriate regulation of 
stable state functions in the province, which activity of 
the judicial power is tightly linked with. By the way, the 
school is required to be as wide as possible and influ-
ence the mass of population. Unlike the Armenian and 
partially Georgian patriots, the Muslim influential circles 
do not object to introduction of the Russian schools, but 
the Caucasian authority stints money for that, to great joy 
of the Armenian wire-pullers, tradesmen and provincial 
officials, who are interested in keeping the Muslim popu-
lation, knowing neither the state language, nor the laws, 
as victim of various exploitation as long as possible. The 
Armenians also benefit from forming of the negative 
opinion within the Russian society about Muslims as un-
cultured, wild and absolutely unreliable element. The 
Armenian press really celebrates when it has an oppor-
tunity to write about the Tatars’ plunders, contrasting the 
ostensibly peaceful mood of the “Christians”, i.e. Armeni-
ans, and undermining the trust to the Russian power in 
the province. 
 152
 
Contents 
 
 
1. Introduction ………………………………………………4 
2. The character of the past ……………………………….8 
3. Brotherly Georgians ………………………….………..30 
4. Russian-Georgian relations ……………….…….…….54 
5. Armenians …………………………………….………...69 
6. Historical background ……………….…………………72 
7. Crossing to the theocracy and monophysitism ……..85 
8. The tribal isolation and economic supremacy ………93 
9. Truth of the Turkish atrocities …………………….…110 
10. Political role of the church and Armenian  
programme  ……………………………………….…115 
11. Azerbaijani Tatars ………………………….…….…136 
 153
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Translator: 
 
Ùèêìåò  ÐÇÀÉÅÂ 
 
 
 
 
Ýðàïùèúñ àíä äåñèýí: 
 
Æåéùóí  ÌÀÙÌÓÄÎÂ 
Àðàç ÀÑÙÓÐÎÂ 
 
 154
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
«Âàòàí» publishing  2007. 
 
