                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    1
                     Ramiz Gasimov 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Christopher Columbus, 
Nasiraddin Tusi  
and real discovery of 
America  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 Baku -2014 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    2
Reviewer – Professor Allahverdiyev Nizameddin             
     Scientific editor – the Associate Member of ANAS,   
                                        Professor Eybali Mehraliyev 
Corrector – Hokume Hebibova   
Computer design – Sinay 
Computer designer - Sevinj                               
Translator - Hokume Hebibova   
 
     Ramiz Daniz “Christopher Columbus, Nasiraddin Tusi and 
real discovery of America”. “MM-S”, 2014, 209 p 
  
ISBN 978-9952-8230-5-9 
 
Though America was discovered by Christopher Columbus 510 
years ago, that discovery has a lot of obscurities, which make 
people to think. According to most scientific works, Ch. Columbus 
thought that, he had discovered East Asia. I tried to prove that, the 
Genoese seaman had got acquainted with the map of Nasiraddin 
Tusi when he was in Spain before his travel to the western part of 
the Atlantic Ocean and was aware of the existence of unknown 
territory there. Yes, N. Tusi had described America in his map 
together with its coordinates 220 years before Ch. Columbus’s 
transatlantic travel. It is one of the most phenomenal discoveries of 
the world and Ch. Columbus is the author of this discovery.   
 
D  4702060103                                      © R.Daniz 2014 
     M 087-2014 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    3
 
 
 
 
           I’m grateful to leaders of the  
State Oil Company of Azerbaijan Republic  
  for their material and moral supports  
          for publication of the work  
 
 
 
         The book has been published  
     in accordance with the order of the 
“Partner” Science Development Support   
     Social Union with the grant of the  
State Oil Company of Azerbaijan Republic 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    4
 
 
 
Christopher Columbus, 
Nasiraddin Tusi  
and real discovery of 
America  
 
 
 
Though the structure of the Earth, 
which is full of contrasts, was enigmatic 
for people of the middle ages, they sought 
to organize geographical discoveries in 
order to understand reality. Columbus 
could open the firm door consisting of 
ocean for discovery of the forth 
continent. But the key of the door was 
made by the Azerbaijani scientist 
Nasiraddin Tusi.  
Author 
 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    5
Preface 
  
The book is about obscurities of the history of scientific 
investigations and geographical discoveries including 
actual issues, which haven’t been discovered and analyzed 
enough.  
The author of the book Ramiz Gasimov Ali is a veteran 
of Karabakh war and works in the Oil Refining Factory of 
SOCAR as a worker. He has graduated from secondary 
school only. He has started his literary activity owing to his 
passion and diligence. R. Gasimov’s life and activity is 
very interesting. His trilogy consisting of “Tragic death of 
conquistadors on coasts of the Central Chile”, “Sacred 
mission” and “People going to heaven go to hell” was 
published during last two years. Those historical adventure 
books could attract attention of Chingiz Abdullayev, Nusret 
Kesemenli, Natig Resulzadeh and other remarkable writers 
and poets. The secretary of the Union of Azerbaijani 
Writers Chingiz Abdullayev called Ramiz Gasimov a 
writer-innovator.  
Though America was discovered 500 years ago, that 
discovery is still interesting for most experts as it is very 
enigmatic. Ramiz Gasimov could explain most details 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    6
about discovery of America. This book includes answers of 
most questions, which were enigmatic during centuries. 
Following questions are interesting for every student, 
historian, geographer and other experts: 
- Why coasts of the New World were named America in 
honor of Amerigo Vespucci, but not in honor of the well-
known sea traveler Christopher Columbus? 
- How could the professional navigator and sea traveler 
Columbus write 400 instead of 220 when determined 
geographic latitude, where Cuba was situated.  
- Why Columbus sailed at 200-250 northern latitude 
towards the south-west, instead of 350-400 northern latitude 
towards the west in order to reach Japan, Chine and India.  
The author answered these questions in this book. 
Investigation of results of Columbus’s travels towards 
coasts of the New World was very interesting for scientists 
of Azerbaijan besides experts of America and Europe. One 
of such experts is Ramiz Gasimov. He has proved that, the 
well-known sea traveler Ch. Columbus hadn’t discovered 
America by accident. Besides it, the author wrote that, 
Columbus had discovered America according to the map 
made by the remarkable Azerbaijani scientist Nasiraddin 
Tusi in Maragha observatory. R. Gasimov proved this truth 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    7
by means of several facts. He solved this problem, which 
was urgent for a lot of scientists, independently.  
The world community should know that, besides Italy 
and Spain (Columbus was an Italian, but his expedition was 
organized by Spain), Azerbaijan also had a great role in 
discovery of America made in 1492 owing to Nasiraddin 
Tusi. Everyone, who doesn’t believe it, should read the 
book written by Ramiz Gasimov.  
I want to note that, the author has made a lot of 
investigations and researches in order to find answers of 
above mentioned questions in spite of difficulties of the 
transitional period.  
The author has analyzed a lot of materials about 
Columbus’s travels including trade and economic relations 
of the corresponding period. He came to the conclusion in 
accordance with gathered facts, information, made 
comparisons and logical judgments.  
R. Gasimov wrote that, Ch. Columbus had analyzed N. 
Tusi’s scientific heritage and he deceived Spanish 
monarchs Ferdinand and Isabella when declared that, wants 
to find ways to Chine, Japan and Chine and so, could make 
them to organize an expedition. The well-known sea 
traveler knew that, he should sail towards unknown 
territories located in the west of Europe. He kept it secret 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    8
for his own purposes. Organizers of the expedition – 
Spanish monarchs also thought that, they had deceived 
Columbus. They planned not to give him corresponding 
privileges after the expedition would be completed 
successfully.  
Columbus started his travel very decidedly and it didn’t 
happen by the accident. He had learned a lot of things after 
analyzing scientific works of Nasiraddin Tusi including his 
map. N. Tusi wrote that, there was a very large land area in 
the west of the Old World, on the other side of the ocean. 
The scientist’s map included outlines of that territory, the 
distance between it and Europe and directions of currents, 
which could be used in order to sail there. So, Columbus 
knew when he would reach unknown territory. The 
rebellion of seamen occurred near coasts of the New World 
proved it as the commander of the expedition asked for 
only there days in addition. Guanahani Island of Bahamas 
was discovered twenty six hours after added period, on 
October 12, 1492. 
Ramiz Gasimov Ali has written very interesting work 
about history of science in Azerbaijan and activity of the 
founder of Maragha observatory Nasiraddin Tusi. This 
work may be considered fundamental historical and 
geographical research work. Injustices of the world have 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    9
been analyzed in the work by describing activities of 
Columbus and Tusi. The author wants to correct mistakes 
made many years ago.  
The work written with great troubles and senses of 
patriotism may be used by pupils, students, statesmen, 
scientists, experts of history of science, history and 
geography. The book includes main problems of that time, 
activities of Columbus and Tusi, political situation of Spain 
and Portugal, names of the most well-known scientists, sea 
travelers, researchers, religious figures and monarchs, most 
interesting travels and Columbus’s real purpose during his 
travel. The work, which was written in the first year of XXI 
century, is a great present for people, who are interested in 
Columbus’s activity, in Spain, Italy and USA and I’m sure 
that, it’ll cause great resonance in the world and bring great 
fame to his author and our motherland.  
 
                                Professor of the department of  
                           Economical Geography and                         
                     Geographical Studies of Azerbaijan  
                             State Pedagogical University     
                        Allahverdiyev Nizameddin   
 
 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    10
       Christopher Columbus born in Genoa and  
                      his travel to Portugal  
 
People tried to appropriate territories situated on the 
other side of the ocean since ancient times. But it was 
necessary to produce durable vessels in order to achieve it. 
Though Christopher Columbus was a genius sea traveler, 
his life was full of mysteries. It isn’t difficult to understand 
his purposes, but nobody knows which secrets he took to 
the other world. I think, I could find out most of his secrets. 
I’ll explain all of those secrets gradually. But first of all, I 
want to describe the traveler’s childhood and youth.  
Birthplaces of most genius people are usually arguable 
as there is different information about them. Columbus is 
also among such persons. As it is known, the well-known 
sea traveler was born in 1451 in Genoa located on the coast 
of Liguria, in the north-west of Italy. But 26 candidates (14 
Italian cities and 12 nations) pretended to be native for 
Columbus.  
Genoa was accepted as Columbus’s motherland fifty 
years ago. But still false assumptions occur about 
motherland and nationality of Columbus. There wasn’t any 
doubt about his birthplace before 1571. He had repeatedly 
mentioned that he was from Genoa. For the first time 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    11
Ferdinand Colon wrote that Columbus wasn’t from Genoa. 
He wanted to keep the traveler’s social situation secret by 
doing it. Genoa wasn’t convenient for it, as the traveler’s 
surname wasn’t even in the list of plebe families of this 
city. That’s why the author wrote that, Columbus’s 
grandparents were from Piacenza and well-known 
representatives of his family lived there in XIV and XV 
centuries. This action of Ferdinand Colon made other 
historians to write similar assumptions too. They described 
other Italian cities as Columbus’s motherland. Of course, 
those assumptions were groundless.  
Christopher’s grandfather worked as a weaver in 
Macanese located near Chiavara (at 30 km east of Genoa). 
Columbus’s father Domenico learned that profession with 
the help of the weaver, who was from Brabant, but lived in 
Quinto. He lived near Porta-del-Olivella, in the east of 
Genoa after 1440 and married the weaver by name Susanna 
Fontanaroze five years later. Christopher was born in 1451 
in Porta-del-Olivella. According to most historians, 
Christopher’s elder brothers and sisters died when they 
were little at the result of different sicknesses. Christopher 
was considered the eldest child of the family. Bartolommeo 
was two years and Diego was seventeen years younger than 
Christopher.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    12
Christopher’s father moved to Savona when he was 19 
(1470) and sold wine besides working as a weaver. 
 
      
              Christopher Columbus (1451-1506) 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    13
I want to describe one event which proves that, 
Domenico Colombo was rich and honest. Columbus’s 
brother-in-law asked Domenico to give dowry which he 
promised in the wedding of Christopher’s sister 
Biankinetta. He said that, he would keep his promise as 
soon as it would be possible. Notary documents prove that, 
really, welfare of Columbus’s family wasn’t good then. 
They had problems with creditors for their house four years 
after Columbus’s birth. So, Columbus’s father was obliged 
to sell the house in 1473 and Columbus also participated in 
that process. 
But Columbus had his own world. Ports, where 
representatives of different nations and different vessels 
gathered, were very interesting for them. He was a 
controller at first. But as soon as he was 14, he began to sail 
to Portofino and Corsica. Barter of different goods had 
spread widely on coasts of Liguria then. Domenico also 
participated in that business and his son helped him besides 
working in the small vessel. They took clothes to trade 
centers and brought cheese and wine.  
According to most sources, Columbus worked in the 
wool factory as his father before 1472. There isn’t any 
exact information about the traveler’s education level. But 
it is known that, he could read in four languages – Italian, 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    14
Portugal, Spanish and Latin. He read every book 
attentively. Besides it, according to documents, he had 
participated in commercial expeditions of Genoese seamen 
and sailed to Khios Island located on the Aegean Sea. He 
worked for rich merchants’ families – Spinolas and di 
Negros in Genoa and sailed to Khios Island in their vessels. 
Though Columbus was a weaver, he had learned navigation 
during travels. He understood that, one had to have a large 
vessel in order to be rich merchant. Spinolas, di 
Chenturionis and di Negros were such people.  
Spinolas and di Negros sent their vessels full of mastix 
from Khios Island to Flandreau in 1476. One of seamen 
was Columbus. Vessels started their travel from the port of 
Noli located near Genoa on May 31 and one of them sailed 
with the flag of the Herzog from Bourgogne and Graf from 
Flandreau, who were enemies of the French Kingdom. The 
French squadron attacked them near Luz on the western 
coast of Portugal on August 13. As seamen had weapons, 
they began to fight. Columbus was wounded and he could 
go on the shore with only one pole. He was treated in Luz 
and returned to Lisbon. After this accident, islands located 
on coasts of the Iberian Peninsula entered the Genoese 
weaver’s life.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    15
But Columbus didn’t plan to stay in Pyrenean Peninsula. 
He wanted to leave coasts of Portugal as soon as possible. 
He could get such opportunity soon. The small navy, which 
sailed from Genoa to England on first days of 1477, was 
obliged to stop in Lisbon. Probably, Columbus worked in 
that navy and went to England. He went from Bristol to the 
port of Holuey of Ireland. After it, he went to coasts of 
Island. Columbus had described these travels in his diary. 
Thus, the future admiral could visit important 
geographic places located in the north-western part of 
Europe. He became professional seaman. When Columbus 
reached coasts of Island, he learned that, seamen used to 
sail from England to Island by means of fishermen’s ships. 
He couldn’t see large vessels in England, Ireland and 
Island. But large vessels were important for great travels. 
Commercial activities of England and Portugal were 
different. Portugal, which desired to sail to coasts of India, 
broadened its borders by occupying western coasts of 
Africa. Vessels of Portugal carried pepper, ivories, gold and 
black slaves from coasts of Guinea. Heinrich, who 
preferred geographical discoveries, was dead twenty years 
ago, but other kings continued his works.  
Columbus came to Portugal in spring of 1478 and 
decided to stay there. His brother Bartolommeo waited him 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    16
in Lisbon. Bartolommeo was one of educated men of that 
time. He had got education near talented cartographers in 
Genoa and worked on preparation of maps. The school of 
cartography of Genoa was one of the most advanced 
schools of Portugal. They fixed every discovery made by 
Portuguese sea travelers on their maps and sold those maps 
to geographers, navigators and captains very expensively. 
Columbus wanted to take part in a travel and Bartolommeo 
had to give him a map for it. I think Columbus planned to 
organize very important travel as he trusted his brother. He 
had to get acquainted with families of well-known sea 
travelers of Portugal and gather necessary information. 
Though Columbus was very young, he had become 
professional seaman and Paolo di Negro trusted him. That 
Genoese merchant asked him to buy sugar in Madeira and 
bring it to Lisbon.   
Columbus met with his future wife Felipa de Perestrella 
there and married her in 1479. This marriage was windfall 
for Columbus. Owners of home where he had entered had 
been participants of expeditions organized by Enrique and 
other kings. Father of Felipa was from Lombardy and died 
twenty years ago. He had become nobleman of Enrique for 
his services in sea travels of Portugal and had been 
appointed governor of Porto Santo Island. According to 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    17
information given by the merchant and sea traveler of 
Venice Alvise Cadamosto, father-in-law of Columbus was 
well-known colonialist. Columbus could find several 
documents about different travels of Portuguese in the 
Atlantic Ocean. Those documents helped him in 
preparation of the project about the discovery of the 
western part of the mentioned ocean.  
As Columbus’s brother-in-law was a governor of Porto 
Santo, he and his wife lived there after being married and 
their only child – future vice-king of Spaniards’ America 
Diego was born there. After it, they moved to the capital of 
Madeira – Funchal.  
Columbus started to learn practical navigation in Porto 
Santo and after travelling to Azores enlarged knowledge in 
expeditions to Guinea realized in 1482 and 1483.  
According to sources, Columbus was appointed 
commander of two vessels in accordance with representa-
tion sent by his brother-in-law to the king of Portugal when 
sailed towards Guinea and he could reach San Jorge da 
Mina port built by Diego Azanbuj on coasts of Guinea.  
Great geographical discoveries have successfully been 
used in ship building, navigation and improvement of 
geographical knowledge. Portuguese and Spaniards learned 
to make improved vessels, which could sail against the 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    18
wind. Use of compass and development of cartography 
allowed sailing on an open ocean. As the Earth was 
considered spherical, people hoped that they would find 
eastern countries by sailing towards the west. 1  
Columbus learned geography, mathematics and astro-
nomy in order to realize his purposes. He didn’t keep this 
fact secret.  
According to most scientific sources, Columbus had got 
acquainted with “Book” of Marco Polo, who was one of 
the most well-known travelers of the world, in Portugal and 
this book had a great role in his life. This book included a 
lot of historical facts, coordinates of geographic points, 
information about traditions of people, who lived around 
Chine and a lot of fantastic thoughts. Information about 
golden decorations of palaces in Japan, grandiose palace of 
Khubilay khan and motherland of spices – India impressed 
Columbus very much. As if, after reading this book, he 
decided to visit those countries. 
As ways of India and Chine were under the control of 
the Ottoman Empire, he had to go there by the sea. The 
traveler had to go round Africa. Portuguese sea travelers 
tried to do it, but failed. According to most scientists, 
                                                 
      1 М. Л. Абрамсон, А. А. Кириллова, Н. Ф. Колесницкий и др.; 
Под ред. Н. Ф. Колесницкого. История средних веков: 2-е изд. испр. 
и доп. Москва, «Просвещение», 1986. стр. 391 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    19
Columbus was sure that the Earth was spherical, but he 
thought that it was smaller. So, he thought that, Japan 
wasn’t far from Azores. So, it should be possible to go to 
those countries by sailing in the west of the Atlantic Ocean 
and going round Africa.  
I can disprove this thought, but let’s look through the 
chronology first.  
Columbus prepared his project for travelling to India 
through the western way when he was in Portugal and 
presented it to the king of Portugal Juan II in 1484. His idea 
was very simple and consisted of true and false parts. First 
(true): the earth is round. Second (false): the largest part of 
the Earth is land – Europe, Africa and Asia. So, the 
distance between the western coast of Europe and eastern 
coast of Asia is small: it is possible to reach India, Chine 
and Japan in the shortest time by passing the Atlantic 
Ocean through the west. But, seamen had to sail about 
10000 km (to Japan) between Europe and Asia.1 It was very 
difficult without having any stopping-place. 
The Italian scientist, cosmographer and astronomer 
Paolo dal Pozzo Toscanelli (1397 Florentine – 1482), who 
lived in XV century, and humanist Pietro Martire also 
                                                 
        1
 И. П. Магидович, В. И. Магидович. Очерки по истории географи-
ческих открытий. II том. Москва, «Просвещение», 1982. стр.14  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    20
thought like this. Genius scientists as Aristotle, Eudoxus of 
Cnidus, Posidoni, Eratosthenes, Pifey, Pliny the Elder, 
Pompony Mela, Strabo and Plutarch also thought that, such 
travel was possible. The idea of Common Ocean was 
accepted by the church in the middle ages. Such theory was 
affirmed by the Islamic world including well-known 
Muslim scientists – Ali Al-Masudi, Muhammad Al-
Khwarizmi, Battani, Abu Raihan Al-Biruni, Mahmud Al-
Khojandi, Idrisi and Nasiraddin Tusi.  
Columbus could be considered lucky person. He 
presented his transatlantic project to the king Juan II at the 
beginning of 1484 when lived in Portugal. But that time 
wasn’t convenient for the monarch of Portugal. Then the 
king was busy with suppressing revolt raised in the country 
by magnates. Besides it, he was interested in expeditions 
towards western coasts of Africa. It is known that, 
Columbus had asked the king to give him many privileges 
for his services after the expedition completed successfully. 
To ask such privileges was insolence. Nobody, even well-
known noblemen hadn’t asked such privileges before 
Columbus. What were demands of the Genoese seaman? 
He had demanded to be admiral of the Atlantic Ocean, title 
of nobleman, to be vise-king of lands, which had to be 
discovered, one tenth of incomes of those lands, eight 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    21
percent of money, which would be earned at the result of 
the trade, which would be carried out in new lands and gold 
spurs. Juan II, who kept his noblemen under the strict 
surveillance, couldn’t give mentioned privileges to 
anybody. 
 
       
             King of Portugal Juan II (1455-1495) 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    22
Afterwards Columbus asked Spanish monarch Isabella 
to give him same privileges as well. But a question appears: 
If Juan II was very strict and harsh monarch, why he didn’t 
reject Columbus directly? Before, Genoese seamen had 
made a lot of geographical discoveries. Manuel Pessanha 
and other travelers were admirals of Portugal. Navies of the 
kingdom had played an important role in discovery of 
Madeira Island, Canaries and Azores under their leadership. 
The admiral Niccoloso da Recco, who leaded the 
expedition towards Canaries in 1341 and admiral Antonio 
da Noli, who had discovered Green Cape Islands, had great 
roles in conquest of Portugal. The king Juan II was a wise 
ruler and didn’t want to make a mistake. He couldn’t make 
decision by himself.  
The project was presented to “Mathematical Union” of 
Lisbon where the most talented and skilful scientists and 
mathematicians of Portugal worked under the leadership of 
the archbishop of Сeuta Diego Ortiz de Villegas. Some of 
members of that organization were Jewish scientists. 
Rodrigo, who had improved astrolabe and sextant, and 
expert of the navigation astronomy Hose Vitsingo were 
among those scientists. Mentioned persons thought that, 
measures and distances hadn’t been fixed correctly in the 
project. Though those scientists also didn’t know exact 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    23
sizes of the Earth, they were sure that, calculations of 
Columbus were wrong.  
It is not known which decision was made by that 
council, but it is known that, decision made in 1485 wasn’t 
in favour of Columbus. The Genoese seaman’s wife died in 
the same year and he decided to go to Spain.  
      
 
 
 
 
         Christopher Columbus’s travel to Spain  
 
As Columbus lost his hopes in Portugal, he decided to 
go to Castilia in 1485. He took his seven-years-old on 
Diego to Palos and wanted to leave him in Huelva, near 
relatives of his wife. Besides it, he sent his brother 
Bartolommeo to England and asked him to take plan of the 
western way to India to Heinrich VII. Columbus hoped 
that, the king of England will be interested in the plan.  
As Columbus was very tired, he entered Rabid 
monastery in order to rest. He talked to the owner of the 
monastery Antonio de Marchena (he was interested in 
geography and cosmography) about his secret. Antonio got 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    24
excited when heard Columbus’s thoughts. As he had 
relations with the kingdom palace, he sent traveler to 
authoritative persons and introduced him to the Herzog 
Medina Sidonia. Herzog promised Columbus to support his 
plan, but didn’t keep his promise.  
 
           
         Columbus discusses his transatlantic project 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    25
 
Columbus was very happy as was met sincerely in the 
monastery. He went to Cordova afterwards. Then 
Ferdinand from Aragon and Isabella from Castilia lived in 
Cordova.  
But Cristobal Colon (Christopher Columbus was called 
Cristobal Colon in Spain) was disappointed in Spain. 
Consultants of the king declared his plan unreal.  
Of course, there wasn’t any need to explain the reason. 
Monarchs were busy with the war against Granada – the 
small country of Arabs located in Spain. Columbus knew 
that rulers of Spain wouldn’t be interested in his plan until 
Arabs would be defeated. So, he took his project to 
England and Portugal. But both of these countries rejected 
his project.  
Antonio de Marchena introduced Columbus to Herzog 
von Medinaceli, who was respected by Spanish monarchs 
and had several vessels in the port Puerto-Santa-Maria and 
don Luis de la Cerda. Herzog was interested in the project. 
He promised to help the traveler. But such presentations 
were harmful for Columbus’s plan. Herzog asked Isabella 
to allow organization of corresponding expedition. The 
queen hesitated. The expedition’s success may help large 
feudalists – her enemies to be stronger. She had to spend a 
lot of money for organization of the expedition. And there 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    26
wasn’t any guarantee for success of the expedition. If it 
would fail, the queen would lose a lot of money, but if it 
would succeed, the kingdom would become richer and 
stronger. So, the queen invited Columbus to her palace in 
Cordova on May 1, 1486 and after a short discussion, 
presented his project to the commission.  
The queen Isabella was clever, haughty and decisive 
ruler. She liked Columbus’s presentation and promised that, 
would help him. Columbus was sure that, he would travel 
to the west of the ocean soon. 
The commission consisting of monarchs and noblemen 
made negative decision after four years under the 
leadership of Isabella’s godfather Fernando Talavera. The 
commission gathered twice in Cordova and Salamanca. 
One of meetings was leaded by Diego de Deza, who was 
future archbishop of Seville and owner of the Dominican 
Order. Diego de Deza tried to prove that, Columbus’s 
calculations were wrong. 
Original copy of the commission’s decision hasn’t 
remained until today. But it is known that, members of the 
commission explained their decisions by means of different 
reasons. They didn’t mention that, the Earth wasn’t 
spherical. Though their decision was negative, they 
couldn’t explain their thoughts completely. Though the 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    27
commission’s decision was negative, Columbus got salary 
of the kingdom in 1487-1488. But he couldn’t achieve any 
success during this time. 
 
     
        Spanish monarchs Isabella from Castilia and Ferdinand  
                                       from Aragon  
 
Columbus went to the kingdom camp located in Malaga 
with the invitation of Spanish monarchs in August and 
September of 1487. Malaga had been occupied on August 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    28
18, 1487 after a long blockade. Columbus thought that, 
Isabella will agree to organize an expedition. But the queen 
mentioned that, any expedition couldn’t be organized until 
the Iberian Peninsula would be freed of Arabs. 
So, Columbus readdressed to Portugal in 1488, but was 
rejected. As you know, Bartolommeo Columbus was sent 
to London, to Heinrich VII by his brother. He asked the 
king to support Columbus’s ideas and organize an 
expedition. But the king’s consultants didn’t accept his 
idea. They appealed to France too, but couldn’t succeed. 
Then Bartolommeo stayed in Fontainebleau and worked as 
a cartographer.  
Herzog Medinaceli wanted to organize Columbus’s 
expedition, but rulers’ permission was necessary for it. 
Herzog respected the Genoese sea traveler and Columbus 
stayed in Medinaceli’s house until the commission’s 
decision was made. But sometimes he visited Cordova and 
there he got acquainted with the young girl by name Beatriz 
de Arana, who was for 15 years younger than he. Their son 
Ferdinand (future biographer of the traveler) was born 
there. Ferdinand was traveler’s illegitimate child, as 
Columbus and his mother weren’t married. Their marriage 
could prevent Columbus’s success. But he respected his 
family. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    29
According to historical sources, Columbus had ordered 
his son Diego to send 10000 maravedis rente to Beatriz 
annually since 1502. Diego had to support welfare of 
Beatriz after 1506 too. The traveler was very kind to 
Beatriz and her family. Her brother Pedro de Arana leaded 
one of caravels of the expedition during the traveler’s third 
travel and cousin participated in the first travel.  
 
       
       Columbus presents his project to Isabella from Castilia  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    30
The vice-king of America Diego always sent Beatrice’s 
annual rente and fixed it in his will. After his death, his 
wife continued sending that rente (Diego’s wife was the 
daughter of the Spanish nobleman) to the family of Arana.  
Columbus was a sagacious person and understood that, 
Spanish rulers wouldn’t help him until they would achieve 
their goals. He waited for the end of the war between Arabs 
and Spain. He began to be close to Spanish financers and it 
helped him on his way to the victory. Columbus returned to 
Rabid monastery in 1491 and got acquainted with the well-
known shipbuilder Martin Alonso Pinson with the help of 
Antonio de Marchena. Besides it, he developed relations 
with the king’s financial counselor, merchants and bankers 
of Seville.  
Some skeptics and scientists mention that, Columbus 
discovered America by accident. So, that discovery could 
be made by any captain. Of course, I don’t agree with this 
assumption.  
Columbus didn’t lose his courage and read a lot of 
scientific books in order to prepare for the expedition. He 
mainly read books on geography and cosmography. 
Especially, he read Marco Polo’s books and made a lot of 
notes about them. He was sure that, his considerations were 
correct. Besides it, he had Pliny’s “Natural history” in an 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    31
Italian translation published in 1489, works of Plutarch and 
Ptolemy. He made notes on several books as Pierre de 
Ailly’s “Imaqo Mundi” (“World Map”) and Enea Silvia 
Piccolomini’s (is known as the Pope Pius II) “Historia 
rerum ubique Mundi” besides Marco Polo’s book written 
in Latin, which is still kept in the Columbia Library of 
Seville. There are about 2125 notes made by him.1  
Pierre de Ailly wrote a tractate on general geography in 
1410. He supported ideas of Marinus of Tyre, who thought 
that, Asia extended towards the east and there was only a 
narrow ocean between Asia and Europe. The French 
cosmographer even wrote that, it was possible to pass that 
ocean in several days when the weather was fine. The 
Genoese seaman underlined this sentence and made 
detailed note about it. He made notes about the sentence, 
where the author of “Imaqo Mundi” wrote that, Spain 
isn’t very far from India and the east starts near the west. 
Chapters about India and Asia are full of notes. It seems 
that, pictures of valuable stones and metals, elephants and 
different terrible animals amazed Columbus. He fixed 
places, which were full of pearls. Besides it, he described 
narrow places of the ocean with different color in his map.  
                                                 
         1
 Ч. Верлинден. Покорители Америки. Ростов-на-Дону, «Феникс», 
1997. стр. 32 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    32
He underlined one of paragraphs in Enea Silvia 
Piccolomini’s “Historia rerum”, where the author wrote 
that, Asia extended towards the latitude of Spain. He noted 
on other paragraph, where the author described Chinese as 
peaceful creatures, that, Chine is situated near India, on the 
other side of Spain and Ireland.  
J. Baker wrote that, Columbus’s cosmographical ideas 
were founded in the middle ages. He used the book of 
Pierre de Ailli – “Tractatus de imagine mundi” (Tractate 
about the description of the Earth), which included 
thoughts of Roger Bacon described in “Opus Magus” at 
the end of XIII century. So, Columbus hadn’t any new 
ideas. 1  
Columbus was interested in the Mongol emperor of 
Chine, who was the leader in 18 places, but Enea Silvio 
described Khubilay khan in his work. All these facts prove 
that, the traveler was interested in the western way to Asia. 
Thus, it is obvious that, Columbus spent his free time in 
reading scientific books and tried to learn different science 
branches. Even captains and navigators couldn’t overcome 
the work carried out by Columbus. He was a passionate 
researcher, could plan the future, learn navigation, use 
                                                 
       
1 
Дж. Бейкер. История географических открытий и исследований. 
Пер. с англ.М., «Иностранной литература», 1950. IV глава. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    33
Passats, learn climate changes in the east of the Atlantic 
Ocean, use the Sun, Moon and Venus for determination of 
geographic coordinates, treat people kindly and lead 
dialogues. Probably, coasts of the New World could be 
discovered in 100-150 years. It’s a reality. Several seamen 
tried to cross the ocean in the west before Columbus. But 
their expeditions failed. These facts can be proved.  
After Columbus’s project was rejected by the 
“Mathematical Union” under the leadership of Diego Ortiz 
de Villegas, the king Juan II decided to send an expedition 
to the west of the Atlantic Ocean in order to check his 
project. The king and his advisers made this decision by 
common consent. At that time the “Island of Seven Cities”, 
Haldat and Anthelia Islands located in the west of the 
Atlantic Ocean were discussed in the Pyrenean peninsula 
and most countries of Europe. The king Juan II entrusted 
the Frenchman by name Ferdinand van Olmen known in 
Portugal as Fernando de Ulmo with realization of this 
work, he didn’t choose Columbus for this purpose. 
Ferdinand van Olmen’s fellow-countrymen had worked as 
governor in one of Azores. He also was governor of one 
island before the travel. At that time, most seamen, 
financers and merchants serving Portugal used to organize 
expeditions with their own capitals, for example, Corte-real 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    34
brothers had organized such expeditions in 1500, 1502 and 
1506. S. Morison, Ch. Verlaine, Vadim Magidovich and 
Iosif Magidovich noted in their works: “Van Olmen united 
with a colonialist by name Estreito from Madeira when he 
organized his expedition. According to words of van 
Olmen, he wanted to discover several islands located in the 
west of the Atlantic Ocean or coast of the continent. He 
called the country he had to discover the “Island of Seven 
Cities” as didn’t know its name”.  
Ruling committees of Portugal didn’t pay enough 
attention to unknown western part of the Atlantic Ocean 
before Paolo Toscanelli’s well-known map was made. 
Everybody wandered if there were unknown islands in the 
west of Canaries, Madeira Islands, Azores and Green Cape 
Islands. Portuguese organized travels towards the west of 
mentioned islands in the middle of XV century. In 1462, 
the king Alfonso V gave great privileges to the person by 
name Vogado for appropriating about two islands located 
in the west. The seaman by name Telles searched for 
Anthelia and the “Island of Seven Cities”. Many seamen 
travelled after him, but nobody achieved any success. At 
that time following rumour had spread in Portugal: Islands, 
which can’t be discovered, are seen from a distance. Of 
course, it is impossible to believe in such unserious 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    35
thought. If islands were seen in the ocean, then the king 
Alfonso V could send there at least one expedition in order 
to explore those islands. There wasn’t any doubt that, there 
were islands in the western part of the Atlantic Ocean (near 
mentioned islands). Columbus also agreed with this 
thought. But he believed that, there were mythic Anthelia 
and other islands on the middle of the ocean. The Genoese 
seaman thought like that because of the letter of Toscanelli. 
It was possible to use those islands as stopping-places in 
the ocean passage on the way to Asia.  
Van Olmen knew results of travels of Vogado and Telles 
and knew that, it was impossible to use any island as the 
stopping-place on his way to India through the west, so his 
expedition would meet with great difficulties. That’s why 
though Juan II gave permission for organization of the 
expedition he had doubts about its success. Otherwise he 
could organize the expedition with his own capital.  
The king would give many privileges to van Olmen in 
1486 if the expedition completed successfully as he had 
organized the travel on his own account. “Mathematical 
Union” told the king that, Columbus had prepared his 
project owing to Paolo Toscanelli’s calculations. That’s 
why Olmen had to explore the Atlantic Ocean in 
accordance with those calculations. May be, the project of 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    36
the Genoese seaman had been copied when it was in 
“Mathematical Union” and that copy had been given to 
van Olmen.  
Van Olmen started his travel with two caravels in spring 
of 1487. He planned to pass the Atlantic Ocean in 40 days. 
I want to mention that, in 1492, Columbus had overcome 
the distance between Canaries and Bahamas in 36 days. 
When the Professor Charles Verlinden read the declaration 
of the French seaman, he noted with surprise that, 
Portuguese seamen had sent secret expeditions to the west 
of the Atlantic Ocean before 1486, they knew which islands 
were on the other side of the ocean and where the unknown 
continent was situated.1  
I don’t agree with this thought of Ch. Verlinden. If van 
Olmen knew the place where unknown islands and large 
land area were situated, he could easily discover those 
territories. Besides it, if Portuguese seamen knew the east 
coast line of the New World, Portuguese could choose the 
meridian, through which the demarcation line had to pass, 
when the Pope divided the Earth between two kingdoms in 
accordance his bull in 1493. But it didn’t happen. As it is 
known, Portuguese achieved their goals only when 
                                                 
     
1 
Ч. Верлинден, Покорители Америки: Христофор Колумб. 
“Феникс”, Ростов-на-Дону. 1997 г., стр.23. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    37
Tordesillas was concluded in 1494. If above mentioned 
assumptions were true, representatives of Juan II might 
demand to move the demarcation line for 470 liq towards 
Anthill Mountains discovered by Columbus, but not for 370 
liq towards the west from Green Cape Islands. Thus, 
Portuguese didn’t know that, there was any other island or 
large land area in the Atlantic Ocean in the west of 
Canaries, Madeira Islands, Azores and Green Cape Islands. 
Then how could van Olmen pass the ocean in 40 days? It is 
obvious that, he reason is different from above mentioned 
factors. 
In Portugal Columbus said that, he will pass the Atlantic 
Ocean in about 30 days in order to reach the eastern coast 
of Asia. Van Olmen shared this thought with Juan II after 
he looked through the Genoese seaman’s project. It means 
that, the French seaman’s expedition travelled in 
accordance with the transatlantic project prepared by 
Columbus besides the map made by Paolo Toscanelli. May 
be, most experts will not agree with my assumption. But all 
investigations prove that, van Olmen could trust Colum-
bus’s calculations more than Toscanelli’s. The Florentine 
cosmographer had made his calculations and well-known 
map in 1474. But Columbus had participated in a lot of 
expeditions, gathered great experiences and he knew 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    38
directions of currents and secrets of navigation. So, it 
means that, van Olmen travelled to the west of the Atlantic 
Ocean in accordance with the project presented by 
Columbus to the king Juan II.  
The French sea traveler, who had seriously prepared for 
mentioned travel, planned to return to coasts of Portugal 
after six months. But he couldn’t achieve any success. The 
reason of the failure of van Olmen and Estreito may be as 
following: they started their travel in inconvenient period of 
the year and didn’t use Passats properly. Bartolome de las 
Casas – one of annalists, who had described in his writings 
occupation of New World coasts by conquistadors, – wrote 
about the travel of Ernan de Olmos (Probably he considered 
Ferdinand van Olmen) in one of his stories. He wrote: 
“That travel took him to the western coasts of Ireland, to 
the north of the route determined by Columbus”.  
Unfortunately, van Olmen couldn’t return from that 
travel. Ch. Verlinden wrote: “In spite of all these, the 
French seaman, who worked for Portugal, might discover 
America before the Genoese seaman, who worked for 
Castilia. Then, history of the west would be different. If 
Olmen could achieve his goal, language of Brazil and other 
17 countries of Latin America might be Portuguese. 
Sometimes fortune of the history depends on the fortune of 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    39
one person!” If Juan II accepted Columbus’s offer, 
language of former colonies located in the western part of 
the Atlantic Ocean might be Portuguese.1 
After analyzing both expeditions, I can decisively note 
that, Columbus had prepared for the travel more seriously 
than the French seaman and could achieve his goal owing 
to his efforts. Members of the “Mathematical Union” 
couldn’t forgive themselves for their mistake after 
Columbus’s expedition achieved success.  
In spite of occurred discontents, there were good 
relations between the king of Portugal and Columbus. In 
ten years after van Olmen’s travel, the Genoese traveler 
again asked Juan II to support his project. He was ready to 
return to Lisbon. He asked king’s guaranty for preparation 
of expedition. It seems that, he was afraid of something. 
May be, he thought that, his project might be stolen, or he 
had debts. The king answered that, Columbus was his 
friend and he was very talented person. And he promised 
that, the traveler wouldn’t be arrested in Lisbon.  
Why did Columbus write this letter in 1488 – while he 
negotiated with monarchs of Spain? Van Olmen hadn’t 
returned from the travel though ten year had passed. The 
                                                 
        
1
 Ч. Верлинден, Покорители Америки: Христофор Колумб. 
“Феникс”, Ростов-на-Дону. 1997. стр.24. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    40
Genoese knew it when he was in Seville as there were 
relations between Lisbon and Seville. So, Columbus 
decided to recheck the king’s opinion. He presented his 
project to Spain and Portugal at the same time. Columbus 
thought that, in that case he would get opportunity for 
realization of his project.  
Why did the king of Portugal invited Columbus to his 
country though had rejected him before? II Juan thought 
that, he had caused annihilation of the first expedition and 
was obliged to do it. He thought that, Columbus knew 
something important for the success of the expedition. 
Spain could appropriate territories located on the other side 
of the Atlantic Ocean, if its rulers would accept 
Columbus’s project and he would succeed.  
But Columbus went to Portugal in December of 1488. 
Then, Bartolommeo Dias had returned to Lisbon after 
discovery of the Cape of Good Hope. So, Columbus lost his 
chance. As the eastern way to India was open already, Juan 
II thought that, there was no need for the western way and 
he rejected Columbus. When the western way became 
necessary for Portugal, Columbus discovered coasts of the 
New World under the flag of Spain.  
 
 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    41
Rich financers, who defended Columbus’s  
                           project 
 
Columbus’s project was presented to the commission 
again at the end of the 1491. Besides confessors and 
cosmographers, well-known lawyers also participated in the 
commission. Columbus didn’t change his demands. As he 
wanted very great privileges, he was rejected again and 
Isabella and Ferdinand also accepted this decision. So, the 
Genoese seaman decided to go to France. 1 
But a great change happened in Columbus’s life on that 
day. Herzog Luis de Santangel, who was the financial 
counselor of Ferdinand from Aragon, convinced everybody 
that, Spain would repent for allowing Columbus to go. He 
mentioned that, other monarchs, especially their enemies 
would use Columbus’s project and it was very dangerous 
for Spain. The financial counselor knew that Isabella was 
fanatical catholic and said that, the queen will be cursed as 
she didn’t try to spread her religion in new territories.2 
                                                 
       
1 
Ф. Дж. Купер. Мерседес из Кастилии или путешествие в Катай. 
Одесса, «Маяк», 1985. стр. 91 
         2 
Ф. Дж. Купер. Мерседес из Кастилии или путешествие в Катай. 
Одесса, «Маяк», 1985. стр. 91 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    42
Besides it, he promised to finance the expedition with 
his own capital. After this proposal, Isabella sent herald in 
order to stop the traveler.  
The kingdom’s herald came up with the seaman at 6 km 
away from Granada and made him to return back to 
monarchs’ camp near the Santa-Fe tower.  
Isabella began to discuss the project with him. They say 
that, Columbus may be considered lucky person. His 
project couldn’t be realized if Luis Santangel wasn’t there.  
Besides it, there is another “skeptic” conception too 
(since the middle of XVI century). According to this 
conception, Columbus knew that there was a land area in 
the west of the Atlantic Ocean before he started his travel 
on August 3, 1492. A. Vinio of America, Romulo Carbia of 
Argentine, M. Endre of France and R. Ballester Escalas of 
Spain supported this conception in XX century. 1  
But why did the financer support Columbus’s project? 
C. Verlinden wrote in his work “Christopher Columbus”: 
“Santangel wanted to realize Columbus’s project as he 
believed that, it was important for his own future. Besides 
it, he believed that, new territories would be discovered and 
he would get a lot of wealth… Santangel had close 
                                                 
        1
 В. Л. Афанасьев. Текст воспроизведен по изданию: Бартоломе де 
Лас Касас. История Индии. Ленинград, «Наука», 1968. стр. 18 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    43
relations with businessmen of Genoa. One of them was 
Francesco Pinelli, who was in the palace administration. 
Pinelli and Santangel controlled treasure of saint Ermanda. 
They decided to spend 1400000 maravedis for realization 
of Columbus’s project. Other Genoese men, who were 
informed by Pinelli, provided 150000 maravedis for the 
traveler. But as he needed 2000000 maravedis, 350000 
maravedis had to be gained too. Santangel took this money 
as an advance for the future admiral. Of course, financers 
would get profits after the expedition would be completed 
successfully in accordance with the agreement made 
between them and Columbus… Pinelli could get enough 
profits at the result of Columbus’s expeditions and he was 
one of the first organizers of the Chamber of Commerce 
(“Casa de Contratacion”) of Spain managing India in 
1503”.1  
But Santangel and Pinelli didn’t help Columbus only for 
their own interests. They organized his expedition as 
wanted Columbus to discover seaway between Portugal and 
India. 
Really, Santangel was sagacious and liked risks very 
much. Portugal could discover the seaway to India and take 
                                                 
          1
 Ч. Верлинден. Покорители Америки. Ростов-на-Дону, «Феникс», 
1997. стр. 38 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    44
monopoly on spices brought from East Asia as 
Bartolommeo Dias had discovered the Cape of Good Hope. 
Rulers and financers of Spain had to prevent it and to 
establish relations with India first of all. But there was 
difference of opinions between them: 
1. The queen Isabella promised to support organization 
of the expedition, but mentioned that, it could be done after 
the Reconquista would end in Spain. Columbus understood 
it after Malaga was occupied.  
2. The king Ferdinand also mentioned that, he would do 
his best for organization of the expedition, but said that, it 
could be done after the Reconquista would end in Spain. 
Besides it, some of noblemen didn’t trust Columbus and 
tried to convince the ruler of the possibility of failure by 
taking van Olmen’s travel as an example. 
3. Both rulers mentioned that, as they needed a lot of 
money for the war against Arabs, they could spend their 
wealth for any expedition. So, individuals could get an 
opportunity to finance expeditions in Spain as well as in 
Portugal. But monarchs of Spain tried to finance the project 
partly unlike Juan II. Columbus got the salary determined 
by Isabella during several years.  
4. Santangel and Pinelli mentioned that, they would pay 
main part of the money needed for the expedition and asked 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    45
their permission for its organization. They had a great 
impact in the commission’s decision.  
Monarchs of Spain Isabella and Ferdinand signed 
written consent for realization of Christopher Columbus’s 
project on April 17, 1492. Columbus got the title of “don” 
on April 30 and this title would be passed to his children 
and grandchildren. Most noblemen were dissatisfied as 
Columbus was a foreigner. Columbus could pass ahead of 
most noblemen if his expedition would be complemented 
successfully. But Isabella and Ferdinand were sure that, he 
wouldn’t get other titles. They knew that, the traveler 
wouldn’t appropriate territories of independent countries. 
Columbus also understood it.  
Most materials about discovery of coasts of the New 
World are kept in archives of Spain and Portugal as secret 
materials and so, people can’t learn the truth. But some 
scientists try to find out the truth by means of 
investigations. I have also investigated activity of 
Christopher Columbus. His discovery was as enigmatic as 
his personality and purposes. Of course, my information 
will be surprising for most people. This information is 
enough sensational. 
Columbus had found the map made by the Florentine 
scientist and humanist Paolo dal Pozzo Toscanelli when he 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    46
prepared his project. The original copy of the map hasn’t 
remained until today. The map made in 1474 has been 
reconstructed. Today’s map is an identical copy of the map 
made in 1474. Columbus, Juan II, Isabella and Ferdinand 
had got acquainted with that map and knew where Cipango 
and Chine were situated and they knew the distance 
between the western coasts of Europe and eastern coasts of 
Asia. But there is a very important detail, which shouldn’t 
be forgotten. Columbus had been in Guinea, Azores, 
Madeira Island, Iceland, Ireland and British Isles and knew 
currents existing in the eastern part of the Atlantic Ocean. 
He had a great experience in this field and knew speeds and 
directions of currents. Columbus had a diary about all these 
facts. So, the traveler was ready for passing the Atlantic 
Ocean. Only Columbus could overcome an expedition sent 
to India through the western way. Spanish monarchs could 
understand it unlike Juan II and Heinrich VII and they 
didn’t want to let him to leave their country. Spain wanted 
to use Christopher Columbus in a right moment.  
 
 
 
 
 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    47
     Calculations of the Florentine cosmographer     
    Paolo Toscanelli brought about a fundamental  
                        change in Columbus’s life 
 
There were experienced captains, cosmographers, 
navigators, boatswain and seamen in Portugal and seamen 
became skilful experts in expeditions. But there was a great 
need for professional seamen in Spain and so, most 
navigation leaders didn’t want to lose skilful travelers as 
Columbus. And the traveler mentioned that, Spain would 
use his skill and experience one day. 
Columbus corresponded with the Florentine scientist 
Paolo Toscanelli before traveling to coasts of Guinea. Two 
letters sent by the scientist to the Genoese seaman were 
very important for him.  
According to most historical sources, Ch. Columbus 
asked Paolo Toscanelli’s advice in 1474. This advice was 
about the short seaway to India. The Florentine scientist 
was known as a great expert of cosmography in Italy and 
Portugal then. He corresponded with most colleagues, who 
lived in other cities, about his works.  
Every innovation made in the middle ages was 
investigated by progressive minded people. Especially, 
geographical discoveries were very interesting for people. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    48
After the Venetian merchant Marco Polo traveled to Chine, 
sea travelers of Portugal began to investigate unknown 
places located in the east of the Atlantic Ocean and some 
changes of the Earth began to be discovered. Most 
cartographers began to describe new territories on their 
maps and presented it to the world community. It was very 
profitable business. Such experts had relations with sea 
travelers and geographers. Changes of the Earth’s structure 
were interesting for churchmen too. The canonic of a 
temple located in Lisbon by name Fernan Martins was a 
plenipotentiary agent of the king of Portugal Alfonso V in 
Rome and there he had got acquainted with Paolo 
Toscanelli. He asked questions about the Earth’s 
measurements and distance between the western coast of 
Europe and eastern coast of Asia.  
P. Toscanelli used measurements of Marco Polo rather 
than measurements of the well-known Greek scientist 
Claudio Ptolemy when he prepared the project about the 
Earth’s measurement. But other scientists – most 
geographers and cosmographers used measurements of the 
well-known Greek scientist. Marco Polo had described 
coasts of Asia at 300 towards the east unlike the Greek 
scientist.  
 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    49
              
              Paolo dal Pozzo Toscanelli (1397-1482) 
 
Measurements determined by Toscanelli were 
interesting for the king of Portugal Alfonso V too. Fernan 
Martins corresponded with the Florentine scientist after he 
returned to Lisbon in accordance with the king’s order. 
Columbus also corresponded with his fellow countryman. 
The Florentine cosmographer had sent the copy of the letter 
written to F. Martins to Columbus either. He wrote that, 
there was a shorter way by passing the Atlantic Ocean in 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    50
the west besides the way to Spice Islands (Moluccas). “I 
know that it is possible to prove existence of this way if the 
Earth will be considered spherical. I send my map in order 
to simplify your work. Route of sailing to the west, 
necessary islands and coasts and point of destination have 
been described on that map. Distances from equator and 
pole have also been written. I have described countries of 
spices and valuable stones in the west though they are 
usually described in the east. Those places can be reached 
in the east by going on the land…” 
Columbus was interested in navigation since his early 
years. He thought a lot before working on important issues. 
He always desired to participate in great expeditions. 
Probably Columbus informed Toscanelli about his project. 
He wrote to the Genoese sea traveler: “I congratulate you 
for your decision to sail to the east from the west. I am glad 
that, you have understood me”. 
I think that, Ch. Columbus couldn’t agree with thoughts 
of the Florentine cosmographer. First of all, well-known 
sea traveler couldn’t agree with length of the Earth’s 
outline. It means that, Asia isn’t situated in the Atlantic 
Ocean at 10000-12000 km away from Canaries in the west 
as Paolo Toscanelli thought. Columbus had determined 
that, land area located in the west of the Atlantic Ocean was 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    51
at 4500-5000 km away from Europe. It means that, the 
mentioned land was other land, which was unknown for the 
Old World.  
I think, he agreed with ideas of the Azerbaijani scientist 
after getting acquainted with N. Tusi’s “Zij-i Ilkhani” and 
his map and was sure that, the land area located in the west 
of the Atlantic Ocean was at 5000-5500 km away from 
Europe. That distance could be overcome in 30-35 days.  
Toscanelli was a defender and leader of the public 
library founded by the humanist Niccolo Niccolini. He 
defended ideas mentioning that, the Earth is spherical and 
planned to go to India through the western way. The 
astronomer had edited “Table of Alfonso” (XIII century). 
Though Toscanelli had read scientific works of most 
scientists, he had lessened measurements of the Earth for 
unknown results.  
Experts can’t justify Toscanelli for such rude mistake. 
He had made elementary mistakes when made his map in 
1474. But he had opportunities for preventing those 
mistakes. The Greek scientist Eratosthenes lived in 
Alexandria. According to his calculations, the length of the 
Earth’s outline was 43625 km and its radius was 6943 km.1 
                                                 
       1
 R. Qasımov. Konkistadorların Mərkəzi Çili sahillərində faciəli ölümü. 
Bakı, “Çaşıoğlu”, 1999. səh 247 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    52
There is no doubt that, Columbus knew this fact. As he was 
interested in astronomy, he had taken into account 
calculations of Eratosthenes, Poseidon, Al-Khwarizmi, Al-
Biruni, Tusi and Toscanelli before starting his travel. 
  
     
                     Eratosthenes (276-194 BC)     
 
Usually cupolas of temples were used as part of sun 
watches. The most popular example is the cupola of Santa 
Maria del Fiore located in Florentine. P. Toscanelli 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    53
installed his popular gnomon in the temple in 1474 and 
could determine afternoon moment by means of it with 
exactness of half a second.  
He attached a bronze plate with a hole in the middle of it 
on the window located on 90 m and made a ruler on the 
floor in the left of the main church. Rays of the Sun passed 
through the hole of the disk and reached the floor in two 
months – between the end of May and end of June. The 
device had remained until the end of XIX century and then 
was destroyed by restorers by mistake.  
At the result of inexactness of measurements, Toscanelli 
lessened measurements of the Earth and determined that, 
the distance between Spain and India was 6 thousand miles 
– this measurement was two times less than the real 
measurement. 
The French physician Jan Fernell (1497-1558), who was 
interested in astronomy, wrote that, the length of the 
Earth’s outline was 39816 km and its radius was 6337 km.1 
It means that, Toscanelli had made a mistake. According to 
his calculations, the length of the Earth’s outline was 29000 
km. So, Columbus didn’t accept report of the Florentine 
scientist and took into account measurements determined 
                                                 
        1
 О. Коротцев. Глобус, как измеряли землю. Ленинград, «Д.Л», 
1980. стр. 312  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    54
by the Greek scientist Eratosthenes and geographic 
coordinates determined by N. Tusi.  
 
 
           Description of the world according to Eratosthenes 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    55
Of course, my hypothesis is serious enough. As N. 
Tusi’s map was kept in the library of Florentine, “Zij-i 
Ilkhani” also might be kept there. How could Columbus 
find that work then?  
It means that, Columbus got acquainted with Paolo 
Toscanelli when he was in Portugal. But he knew the 
Florentine scientist when he was in Italy. They say that, 
Columbus met Toscanelli in Italy and discussed interesting 
issues with him… The Genoese traveler was interested in 
the scientist’s works and liked to look through his maps. 
Toscanelli liked to share his ideas with his friends unlike 
other scientists. But he kept his sources secret as didn’t 
want other scientists to steel his discoveries. I want to look 
through a brief historical chronology before analyzing this 
issue. It concerns Toscanelli’s activity.  
Nobody knew how lands and oceans joined each-others 
in the Earth. Though Toscanelli was a scientist, he 
described Asia for two times larger and ocean between 
South Europe and Chine narrower. According to his 
calculations, the distance between Europe and Chine was 
2000 liq (12000 km). Cipango (Japan) was situated at about 
333 liq (1998-2000) in the east of Chine. Azores, Canaries 
and Anthelia could be used as stopping places during the 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    56
passage. Columbus made his calculations  in accordance  
with books  
  
        The world map made by Paolo Toscanelli in 1474   
                                  (reconstruction) 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    57
of astronomy and geography. He thought that, it was 
necessary to travel for 800 liq (4.5-5 thousand km) in the 
west from Canaries to East Asia in order to go to Cipango. 
This was a phenomenal idea. The French geographer of 
XVIII century Jan Anvil wrote about it: “This was a 
mistake and it resulted in great discovery”.  
Did Columbus make the greatest discovery of the world 
owing to this mistake? Isn’t it a miracle? It may mean that: 
America was discovered in 1492 by the expedition of 
Christopher Columbus by accident. But this assumption 
can’t be accepted. The discovery of the global importance 
can’t be made by accident.  
According to books of history and geography, 
Christopher Columbus thought until the end of his life that, 
he had discovered East Asia. It was mentioned in our 
textbooks too. Only pessimist people can believe it. Most 
people don’t believe this assumption. But they don’t 
investigate facts and only mention that it is an arguable 
problem. I also can’t accept this assumption and so, began 
to investigate corresponding events. Of course, it is difficult 
to believe that, the experienced admiral and professional 
traveler as Christopher Columbus didn’t understand that, he 
had discover coasts of the New World though he had 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    58
traveled there for four times. But most experts write that it 
is a truth.  
Columbus got acquainted with the map made by the 
Florentine scientist Toscanelli in 1474 when he was in 
Italy. I want to mention that, the distance between Canaries 
and Bahamas is about 950 liq. According to Columbus’s 
calculations, the most convenient way to Cipango (Japan) 
was 800 liq towards East Asia in the west of Canaries. It 
seems that, Columbus didn’t take Toscanelli’s map into 
consideration after he made his own calculations. He didn’t 
need the Florentine scientist’s calculations.  
There was another unknown map besides Toscanelli’s 
map. I think, the Genoese admiral made his own map by 
means of most scientists’ calculations and that unknown 
map and used it during his travel. He had enough 
information when reached coasts of the New World by 
means of the Canary current and Passats, so, he couldn’t 
think that, those lands were Asia. As it was mentioned 
above, he had prepared seriously for the expedition towards 
Spain and hadn’t shared his ideas with anybody besides his 
brother. He knew that, there weren’t unknown eastern 
coasts of Asia on the other side of the Atlantic Ocean.  
 
 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    59
        The well-known astronomer of Azerbaijan   
        Nasiraddin Tusi and his scientific services   
  
After some investigations, Columbus had made his own 
map. He had used the map made by the genius Azerbaijani 
astronomer and mathematician of XIII century Nasiraddin 
Tusi for preparation of that map. But some Azerbaijani 
scientists mention that, Paolo Toscanelli had made his map 
in 1474 in accordance with Nasiraddin Tusi’s map made in 
XIII century. Let’s look through Nasiraddin Tusi’s life and 
activity first of all.  
Azerbaijani scientist, Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn 
Hasan Nasiraddin Tusi (1201-1274), who was remarkable 
philosopher, astronomer, mathematician, historian, 
geographer, financer and lawyer of XIII century, founded 
an observatory in accordance with his own project in 
Maragha located at the center of Azerbaijan. His first 
teacher was his father, but then he got lessons of teachers of 
Bahmanyar’s and Abu Ali ibn Sina’s schools. The scientist 
could become popular owing to his comprehensive and 
broad knowledge in a very short time. 
According to historical sources, he could attract attention 
of most rulers even when he was young. The leader of 
Kuhistan Nasiraddin Mohtasham invited him to his palace 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    60
as the honorary guest and asked to write a book about 
ethics. So, N. Tusi wrote “Akhlagi Nasiri”, which became 
very popular in the world and was translated into several 
languages. But the ruler didn’t approve the book and Tusi 
was sent to the Alamut (“The eagle’s nest”) castle after 
being arrested. N. Tusi was in prison at the Alamut castle. 
Though the scientist’s moral situation was unbearable 
during more than 20 years spent in prison, he could write 
several scientific works there. N. Tusi wrote following 
thoughts at the end of “Sherhul-Isharet” (Commentaries 
on the philosophical treatise of Abu Ali ibn Sina 
“Isharet”), which was completed by him in 1242: “I have 
written most chapters of this book under very hard 
conditions. I was in a very difficult situation. I have written 
this book in front of the hell”.  
It should be noted that, if N. Tusi could achieve fame in 
the world owing to “Zij-i Ilkhani” and Maragha 
observatory, he was famous among eastern nations after 
“Akhlagi Nasiri” was written. This work was significant 
for its content’s public, economical, political, moral, 
philosophical and educational essence. So the work became 
popular as the textbook of moral in schools of the Middle 
and Near East during more than 700 years. Many copies of  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    61
 
             Muhammad Nasiraddin Tusi (1201-1274) 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    62
the work were spread  among  people. “Akhlagi Nasiri” is 
a summary of moral, philosophical and pedagogical 
thoughts existing in the Near and Middle East. According 
to researches, any other work as “Akhlagi Nasiri” hasn’t 
been written in Persian during recent 700 years.  
The scientist had proved himself as a skilful teacher and 
remarkable educator with this work. He had described 
talents of people, influence of the environment and 
conditions on people and emphasized role of the education 
in human life.1 
In 1253, the grandson of Genghis khan – Hulegu khan 
began his march towards the Near East. He could conquer 
the Alamut castle and N. Tusi was freed together with other 
scientists. After it, the ruler appointed the genius scientist 
N. Tusi his advisor. Hulegu khan had to occupy the capital 
of Abbasids – Baghdad. His attack on Baghdad could bring 
him either success or defeat. Tusi’s advices helped him in 
this business. The ruler, who couldn’t dare to attack the 
holy city of Muslims – Baghdad, could do it after Tusi’s 
advices. 
                                                 
     
1
 Azərbaycan Beynəlxalq Universiteti. Nəsirəddin Tusinin 800 illik 
yubileyinə həsr edilmiş Respublika konfransının materialları. Bakı, 2001. 
Professor  H.M. Əhmədovun məruzəsi, səh. 3 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    63
Hulegu khan founded his mighty state in Azerbaijan in 
1260 after Baghdad was occupied. Elkhans were rulers of 
the new state called Ilkhanids.  
The scientist had made very interesting discoveries, 
which bewildered everybody. He is the author of hundreds 
of scientific works on astronomy, mathematics, physics, 
geography, history, philosophy, medicine, ethics, logic, 
musicology, geology and other fields of the science. But 
astronomy and mathematics are especially significant in N. 
Tusi’s activity. He is the author of more than twenty 
investigations carried out in this field. Scientific researches 
and investigations carried out by the scientist were very 
large-scale and passed ahead of all previous scientists’ 
works. His works on mathematics were in Arabic, but 
investigations on astronomy were in Arabic and Persian. N. 
Tusi could become famous in the Near East as his works 
were in several languages.  
The most well-known works of the scientist are 
“Shaklul-qita” (“Treaties about the perfect four-side”), 
“Jame ul-hesab” (“Collection of Counts”), “Measure of 
Circle”, “Tahriru Uglidis” (“Recension of Euclid’s 
Elements”).  
“Zij-i Ilkhani” (“Astronomical tables of Ilkhanids”), 
which consists of four parts, made the scientist popular all 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    64
over the world. Nasiraddin Tusi completed most of his 
scientific works after the observatory was built. It proves 
that, the scientist hadn’t wasted his time in vain when 
learned several branches. N. Tusi distinguished himself for 
his reasonable advises. The ruler trusted him even in the 
hardest situations.  
I want to emphasize two paragraphs of the chapter 
“Muhammad Nasiraddin Tusi” of the book “Remarkable 
personalities of Azerbaijan” written by Chingiz Gajar: 
“Most modern researchers think that, Nasiraddin Tusi was 
only a mathematician. His works have played a significant 
role in development of geometry and trigonometry in the 
East and Europe. Euclid’s “Tahriru Uglidis” published in 
Rome in 1594 in Arabic and Latin had an important role in 
spreading Tusi’s ideas in Europe. “Treatise on complete 
quadrilateral”, which consists of five books, is known for 
its significance in development of trigonometry in Europe. 
Trigonometry is analyzed as an independent science branch 
in this work. The treatise has been translated into English, 
Russian and French. The method of finding root of all 
degrees and Binomial formula are the most known 
discoveries of Nasiraddin Tusi made in the field of algebra. 
Besides it, scientist’s works on history, mineralogy, 
physics, music and astronomy are also noteworthy. Among 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    65
them are “History of Baghdad”, “Treatise on reflection 
and refraction of the light”, “Euclid’s optics”, “Treatise 
on investigation of the rainbow”, “Book about precious 
stones”, “Treatise on public finance”, “Selection of 
lucky days” (astrology) and others.  
Most works of Nasiraddin Tusi are still waiting their 
researchers. They may be met in museums and libraries of 
Baku, Paris, Florence, Cairo, Istanbul, Moscow, St. 
Petersburg and Kazan.1 
A number of the scientist’s works haven’t been 
discovered yet and are kept in state and personal libraries 
and manuscripts funds of the world.  
Nasiraddin Tusi used to think about development of 
astronomy in Azerbaijan and building of the observatory 
since his early years. He got Hulegu khan’s permission and 
started works on the observatory as soon as Baghdad was 
occupied. He found place for the building, prepared 
astronomical equipments, brought valuable books for the 
library of the observatory from different cities and invited 
scientists from different countries of the world for carrying 
out investigations in the observatory for a period of less 
than a year. Nasiraddin Tusi wrote about it in “Zij-i 
                                                 
        
1
 Ç. Qacar. Qədim və orta əsrlər Azərbaycanın görkəmli şəxsiyyətləri. 
Bakı, “Nicat”, 1997. səh. 124 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    66
Ilkhani”: “Hulegu khan demanded to invite scientists for 
carrying out astronomical observations: Muayyidaddin 
Ordy from Damascus, Fakhraddin Maraghai from Mosul, 
Fakhraddin Ikhlatini from Tiflis and Najmaddin Dabirani 
from Qazvin”. 
According to other sources, well-known scientists 
Gutbaddin Shirazi, Shamsaddin Shirvani, Jamaluddin iz-
Zeydi Bukhari, Fao Mun-Chi and others also worked in 
Maragha observatory. They improved their knowledge by 
means of N. Tusi besides working in Maragha observatory. 
Every employee of the observatory could work 
independently as the most skilful and experienced scientist 
after leaving the observatory, which resembled an 
education center, and returning their countries.  
According to the remarkable politician and historian of 
Azerbaijan Rashidaddin, Jamaluddin also had to found an 
observatory in Peking. But he wasn’t able to fulfil this task. 
He could complete the task after coming to Maragha 
together with the Chinese scientist Fao Mun-Chi, taking 
Tusi’s advises and obtaining sketches of equipments, which 
were necessary for the observatory.  
Chingiz Gajar wrote about it: “One of the most 
remarkable scientists of Azerbaijan Nasiraddin Tusi was 
appointed advisor of Hulegu khan. Nasiraddin’s fame had 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    67
reached Peking even before this event and he was invited to 
the capital of the empire for construction of the 
observatory, which was planned as a perfect education 
center. But Tusi had rejected that invitation and convinced 
Hulegu khan of the importance of construction of the 
observatory in the capital of Ilkhanids – Maragha”.1 
N. Tusi played a role of professional diplomatist in this 
business. Though the ruler of the great empire (Yuan) – 
Khubilay khan wanted to found an observatory in Chine, it 
was built in Azerbaijan. 
Khubilay khan knew that, skilful experts would be 
prepared in Maragha observatory for development of 
astronomy, mathematics, geometry and geography. So, 
experts invited from Azerbaijan would carry out main part 
of works, which had to be carried out in the observatory of 
Chine. Surely, graduators of Nasiraddin Tusi’s school were 
able to work in any part of the world. The observatory of 
Azerbaijan was considered an institute for preparation of 
experts of astronomy, geography and mathematics.  
Several valuable works were written about different 
science branches under the leadership of N. Tusi. Main 
elements of geocentric orbits of planets and their daily 
                                                 
        
  
 1
 Ç. Qacar. Qədim və orta əslər Azərbaycanın görkəmli şəxsiyyətləri. 
Bakı, “Nicat”, 1997. səh. 129 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    68
movements were described in “Zij-i Ilkhani”. “Zij-i 
Ilkhani” was considered unique work in the field of 
astronomy for several centuries. Unfortunately, the work 
wasn’t translated and spread in the world then. But some 
scientists, who were interested in the book, could read it 
with the help of translators. Persian and Arabian scientists 
analyzed Tusi’s works and explained them to their students 
after the scientist’s death.  
 
 
 
 
   Calculations of Nasiraddin Tusi and  
        Paolo Toscanelli’s popular map 
 
As it was mentioned above, some scientists write that, 
Paolo Toscanelli had used N. Tusi’s table of geographic 
coordinates and his map when he made his well-known 
map in 1474. The Florentine cosmographer had noted on 
his map that, it was possible to go to India from Europe by 
crossing the Atlantic Ocean in the West. It proves that, 
progressive-minded people of that time believed that, the 
Earth was spherical and they noted this fact in their 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    69
materials, maps and investigation works though there were 
a lot of people, who tried to impede them.  
N. Tusi could prepare broad and pithy reports on stars. 
The scientist mentioned in those reports that, the prime 
meridian was situated at 340 west of today’s Greenwich 
Meridian. It is a proof of existence of unknown territory. I 
think that, Christopher Columbus had seen Tusi’s reports 
and maps, but kept it secret.  
But how could Paolo Toscanelli or Christopher 
Columbus see reports and maps of the Azerbaijani 
scientist? It’s known that, Nasiraddin Tusi was in 
Azerbaijan or Iraq, Toscanelli was in Italy and Columbus 
was in Italy, Portugal and Spain.  
It is known that, Iran and Transcaucasia began to be free 
of Arabs since 20th years of XIII century by means of 
Mongols and Tatars. Hulegu khan occupied all regions of 
Azerbaijan in 1253 and declared himself the ruler of the 
state.  
Azerbaijan was famous for its remarkable personalities 
known in the Near East as Muhammad Babakuhi Bakuvi, 
Shahabuddin Abu Hafs Suhrawardi, Qatran Tabrizi, Ali 
Khatib Tabrizi, Afzaladdin Khagani Shirvani, Omar ibn 
Osman Kafiaddin Shirvani, Ajami Nakhchivani, Mahmud 
Zanjani, Sheikh Nizami Ganjavi, Mahsati Ganjavi etc. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    70
during the age of Nasiraddin Tusi. Hulegu khan had also 
heard about these people as the science and culture were 
important for him. Nasiraddin Tusi was the most 
comprehensively developed representative of Azerbaijan 
and could amaze everybody with his knowledge. Hulegu 
khan trusted him even in the hardest situations. 
 
 
 
 
          Maragha observatory was considered the  
     greatest academy of the world in XIII century  
  
A lot of money was needed for construction of the 
observatory. At first this business didn’t seem expedient for 
Hulegu khan. But afterwards he spent 20 thousand dinars 
for construction of the observatory.  
Hulegu khan had taken possession of great trophy when 
he occupied Baghdad. N. Tusi didn’t waste the opportunity 
and could make the ruler to pay salaries to all scientists, 
who had participated in construction of the observatory and 
worked there. Those salaries were paid with money 
collected by means of taxes according to the initiative of 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    71
the scientist. N. Tusi made great efforts in order to improve 
welfare of all scientists in Azerbaijan.  
Hulegu khan had taken possession of great trophy when 
he occupied Baghdad. N. Tusi didn’t waste the opportunity 
and could make the ruler to pay salaries to all scientists, 
who had participated in construction of the observatory and 
worked there. Those salaries were paid with money 
collected by means of taxes according to the initiative of 
the scientist. N. Tusi made great efforts in order to improve 
welfare of all scientists in Azerbaijan.  
Construction of Maragha observatory was started in 
1259 on the slope of the hill located in the west of the town. 
N. Tusi also participated in projection of the building and 
installation of astronomical equipments. Skilful architects 
were invited to Maragha for construction of the 
observatory. N. Tusi trusted Muayyidaddin Ordy, who was 
invited from Damascus, very much. N. Tusi installed five 
new and five old astronomical equipments in the 
observatory together with the remarkable astronomer and 
constructor M. Ordy. 
This observatory was considered one of the most 
important science centers. It hadn’t analogue in any region 
of the East until the middle of XIII century. Foreign 
representatives, especially Mongol representatives of Chine  
    
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    72
    
             Model of Maragha observatory was made by the  
                  Academician M. J. Bulatov (1907-2004) 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    73
and Middle Asia were amazed when they saw the 
observatory.  
 “Maragha observatory established by Nasiraddin Tusi in 
1259 was very popular in the East in the middle ages. It 
was the best equipped observatory of the world. There were 
sun and water watches, sky globes, armillary spheres, 
quadrants, devices for determination of horizontal 
coordinates of celestial bodies, device for determination of 
the Sun’s height on the meridian in Maragha observatory”.1 
The observation was built in 12 years and began to be 
used in 1271. There were all necessary facilities for 
scientists’ works in Maragha. There were a lot of 
equipments in the observatory. N. Tusi – the founder of the 
observation allowed to use those equipments in foreign 
countries too. The ruler of Azerbaijan Abaga khan was 
satisfied with works carried out in the observatory and tried 
to help experts, who worked there. The ruler’s kindness and 
benevolence pleased everybody. 
N. Tusi could establish medieval academy in the 
observatory. If Mongols didn’t cause a scare in European 
countries, students of those countries would come to 
Azerbaijan in order to get education. 
                                                 
     
1 
В. Н. Пипуныров. История часов с древнейших времен до наших 
дней. Издательство «Наука», Москва, 1982, стр. 91 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    74
The observatory established by N. Tusi had passed 
ahead of all well-known observatories of the East for its 
scale. Employees of Maragha observatory observed 
movements of the Moon, Sun and stars and “Astronomical 
tables of Ilkhanids” (“Zij-i Ilkhani”) was prepared in 
accordance with those astronomical observations. The last 
of those tables was made 10 years after Tusi’s death in 
1284. Such tables were made 400 years later in Europe.  
Tables consist of four books. Bases of Chinese, Uyghur, 
Jew and Arabic calendars and ways of passing from one 
calendar to another are explained in the first book, the 
second book includes descriptions of the Sun and planets, 
ecliptic length of the Sun disc center on Maragha meridian 
in afternoons of certain days, exact values of average daily 
movements of planets, determination of time has been 
described in the third book and fourth book includes 
different information about astronomy. The most important 
tables are tables of sinuses and tangents in sexagesimal 
numeral system and tables of geographic coordinates of 
256 cities, which were known in XIII century. The prime 
meridian was described at 34-350 west of today’s 
Greenwich Meridian, in the east of South America. So, H. 
Mammadbayli mentioned that, astronomers and 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    75
geographers were aware of existence of America even 
before Ch. Columbus.  
I think that, Christopher Columbus used Tusi’s tables 
when he discovered America. The most skilful and 
experienced scientists were invited to Maragha observatory 
in order to get necessary information about structures of the 
Earth and Sky. Columbus travelled to coasts of the New 
World and discovered the forth continent in accordance 
with that map. 
As I mentioned above, sky globe was made in Maragha. 
One of sky globes made by the son of Muayidaddin Ordy – 
Muhammad (1279) is kept in the hall “Physics-mathe-
matics” of the museum “Picture Gallery” in Dresden. It is 
considered the most ancient sky globe of the world.  
Tusi’s third son Sadraddin Ali Tusi became the leader of 
Maragha observatory after the scientist’s death (1274). The 
son of Muayidaddin Ordy – Muhammad also worked in the 
observatory then. He was one of well-known experts, who 
made astronomical equipments, as his father. The year of 
preparation of his globe was determined according to 
positions of stars described on it – 1279. Some scientists of 
Europe investigated that unique globe. The globe made of 
bronze and decorated with gold and silver is considered one 
of decorative artworks of XIII century.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    76
     
                 The sky globe of scientists of Maragha.  
                                   Museum of Dresden 
 
According to the well-known researcher of Maragha 
observatory H. Mammadbayli, equipments and devices 
made by Ordy had a significant role in development of 
equipments in Ulugbek’s observatory of Samarqand, Tycho 
Brahe’s observatory of Denmark and Jaipur observatory of 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    77
India. Further made astronomical equipments also were 
improved by using Ordy’s equipments. 
N. Tusi created a rich library for scientists of Maragha 
observatory using authority of Hulegu khan. There were 
400 thousand manuscripts at the library. Most of 
manuscripts had been written in Azerbaijan. Maragha 
library was considered one of the greatest libraries of the 
Near East and most of manuscripts, which were kept there, 
had their own histories. Authors of those works were 
genius and wise people. About 76 works of N. Tusi were 
kept there. Most of scientists, who worked in the 
observatory, used his works as the scientific source. 
Scientists of Chine, India, Arab countries, Mongolia and 
Europe carried out intensive scientific works in Maragha. 
The founder of the observatory considered the young 
Chinese scientist Fao Mun-Chi talented scientist and taught 
him all secrets of astronomy and mathematics.  
N. Tusi was comprehensively developed person. He is 
the author of different scientific works written in Turkish, 
Arabian and Persian on different science fields.  
 
 
 
 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    78
        Alonso Sanchez de Huelva and  
              Christopher Columbus 
 
Theoretically, half of Floridian peninsula, Anthills, 
Mexico and South America became properties of Portugal. 
After “Aeterna Regis” came into force, historians began to 
note that, America had been discovered by Portuguese 
seamen before 1481 and this fact had been kept secret till 
the convenient time. This thought was defended by all 
annalists of XVI century – Bartolome de las Casas, 
Francisco Lopez de Gomara and Gonzalo Fernandez de 
Oviedo y Valdes, even Peruvian annalist Garcilaso de la 
Vega (son of the Ink prince and the hidalgo of Estrema-
dura) mentioned name of Alonso Sanchez de Huelva as the 
seaman, who discovered the continent. Besides it, Jorje 
Blon, Francisco de Gomara Alonso and others noted that 
Huelva had met Columbus.  
According to historical sources, Columbus travelled to 
Portugal for the next time in 1478 and settled in Madeira 
Islands for several years.  
According to information given by the merchant and sea 
traveler of Venice Alvise Cadamosto, father-in-law of 
Columbus was well-known colonialist. Columbus could 
find several documents about different travels of 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    79
Portuguese in the Atlantic Ocean. Those documents helped 
him in preparation of the project about the discovery of the 
western part of the mentioned ocean.   
In 1484 Alonso Sanchez de Huelva, who was from the 
settlement of Niebla (Huelva), used to carry some goods 
from Spain to Canaries with his vessel. He carried fruits 
from Canaries to Madeira, then brought sugar and jam from 
Madeira to Spain. Ones Alonso Sanchez met with heavy 
hurricane when sailed from Canaries to Madeira. He sailed 
for about 28 or 29 days under the influence of that 
hurricane and approached an unknown island in the ocean. 
It is supposed that, that island was today’s Santo Domingo. 
People came to that conclusion as the hurricane (east wind) 
blew in the direction from Canaries to Solano.1  
Ones a wrecked vessel approached the coast of Porto 
Santo. Columbus noticed one weakened navigator among 
survived seamen. One of seamen raved about songs of 
motley birds, unknown animals and colored people. The 
vessel had been sailing from the west and struck the coast. 
Christopher Columbus took half-dead navigator home.  
He looked after his guest and it became clear that, 
navigator’s name was Alonso Sanchez de Huelva. After 
                                                 
1
 Горсиласо де ла Вега. Текст воспроизведен по изданию, 
История государства Инков. Л. «Наука». 1974. стр. 16-17. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    80
getting better, Alonso Sanchez explained everything that 
happened to them. It became clear that, they had lost their 
way in the dark sea (then Atlantic Ocean was called like 
that) and reached very charming island. Sanchez informed 
his liberator about the place where the island was situated.1 
After it he died as other survived seamen of the wrecked 
vessel.2  
According to Peruvian annalist Garcilaso de la Vega, 
historian Francisco Lopez de Gomara had written about the 
adventure of Alonso Sanchez de Huelva in his work 
“General history of India”. Son of the Ink prince caviled 
at that work as following: “De Gomara heard this 
information from ordinary persons – seamen and civil 
people, his father and father’s authoritative friends, 
including people, who were close to the palace”.  
This adventure was told by the bishop Joseph Acosta for 
the first time. When he was in Peru, he heard that, one 
seaman had discovered coasts of the New World at the 
result of heavy hurricane and showed the way to Columbus 
as the Genoese seaman helped him after the catastrophe 
happened on the way to Madeira. Columbus told this story 
                                                 
           1
 Жорж Блон, «Атлантический океан», стр. 15. 
           2   
Франциско-де-Гомара. «Общая история Индий», 1552 г., XIII 
глава, «Первая открытия Индии». 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    81
to some acquaintances including courtiers, and they helped 
him in organization of the expedition.1   
 
              
                      Alonso Sanchez de Huelva 
 
Spanish monarchs had to keep promises if Columbus 
could discover coasts of the New World. Obstacles began 
                                                 
       
1
 Горсиласо де ла Вега. Текст воспроизведен по изданию, 
История государства Инков. Л. «Наука». 1974. стр. 17-18.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    82
to be put in the way of the Genoese seaman, who had 
demanded great concessions. Columbus could get those 
concessions partly. People, who were close to the palace, 
prepared intrigues against the seaman who had become 
admiral after the first travel.  
Conquistadors noted that, America had been discovered 
by Alonso Sanchez (de Huelva – R.D.). It was said because 
there was an inheritance conflict between heirs of 
Columbus and leadership of Castilia at that time (1510-
1550). That’s why courtiers tried to prove that, lands 
located on the other side of the ocean hadn’t been 
discovered by Christopher Columbus.1   
Historians, who were against Columbus, noted that, II 
Juan wanted to entrust Sanchez with discovering those 
lands as he was in the west after surviving in the 
catastrophe. Columbus rendered the navigator harmless as 
he had prepared his own project for the discovery of places 
located in the west of the Atlantic Ocean and didn’t want 
any competitor in this work.  
This thought is so preconceived because when seamen of 
the wrecked vessel approached the coast, there were a lot of 
people besides Christopher Columbus and explanations 
                                                 
           1 
Путешествие Христофора Колумба. Свет Я. М., 1956. Колумб. 
1973 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    83
were made with participation of them. Peruvian annalist 
Garcilaso de la Vega, Francisco Lopez de Gomara and 
Jorje Blon didn’t want to deny services of Columbus when 
mentioned name of Huelva and noted that he had met the 
famous traveler. They only wanted to emphasize that, the 
Genoese seaman had got necessary information for 
realization of his transatlantic travel from Huelva. But as 
Columbus was very experienced navigator, he couldn’t 
believe in such unserious, inexact information. He was sure 
that, America was far from Madeira Islands and it was 
impossible to reach there without knowing coordinates. 
Alonso de Huelva might meet with any island – even with 
Green Cape Islands.  
This strange thought can’t cast a shadow on the authority 
of Columbus. It was written in Garcilaso de la Vega’s book 
that, Alonso Sanchez sailed in an unknown direction for 
28-29 days under the influence of the hurricane and 
approached Santo Domingo Island. How it was possible? It 
means that, the vessel, which was pushed towards the west, 
met with Gulfstream current and could run away from it 
easily. It isn’t convincing as in that case Portuguese could 
discover unknown lands located in the west of the Atlantic 
Ocean before the first travel of Columbus. Portuguese had 
sent there expeditions under the leadership of Vogado, 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    84
Telles and Van Olmen, but none of those expeditions 
resulted in success.  
Gulfstream current, which played the role of barrier in 
front of Big Anthill islands and Small Anthill islands, could 
take any vessel to Europe in the east of the Atlantic Ocean. 
It means that, the captain using North Passat blowing from 
east to west in the northern hemisphere wasn’t able to take 
his vessel to the Caribbean aquatory as the North Passat 
rises towards the north and unites with Gulfstream at that 
latitude of the Atlantic Ocean.  
If information of Huelva had positive influence on the 
project of Christopher Columbus, the Genoese seaman 
could follow the North Passat current during his first travel 
as soon as he left European coasts, directly reach South 
American coasts and discover Brazil. As Columbus had 
sailed near coasts of Guinea before, he was aware of 
existence of that current. 
Development of shipbuilding, navigation and geography 
resulted in achievement of great successes in the field of 
great geographical discoveries. There was need for 
experienced and skilful seamen for realization of long-
distance travels. Columbus owned all those characteristics. 
He (Columbus – R. D.) had got systematical education and 
learned geography, cartography and navigation as the 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    85
person, who was interested in everything… He had married 
with the daughter of the Portuguese seaman in Porto Santo 
Island, so could get sea maps and diaries of his father-in-
law.1   
Columbus had prepared for the transatlantic travel 
seriously unlike most candidates and could realize it 
successfully. He didn’t need Alonso de Huelva’s help. He 
had begun to work on his project before 1484 and didn’t 
want to change it. I had given detailed information about it 
in my work “The scientist passed ahead of centuries – 
Nasiraddin Tusi” and decidedly noted that, Columbus had 
used the astronomic catalogue “Zij-i Ilkhani” prepared by 
Nasiraddin Tusi in Maraga observatory. 2 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
       1 
Абрамсон М. Л., Кириллова А. А., Колесницкий Н. Ф. и другие. 
Под редакцией Колесницкого Н. Ф. История средних веков: 2-е 
издан. исп. и доп. – М., «Просвещение». 1986.стр. 393  
       2 
R. Qasımov. Əsrləri qabaqlamış alim – Nəsirəddin Tusi. Bakı, “Yurd”, 
2003. səh. 267 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    86
      Christopher Columbus’s first travel 
 
As it was mentioned above, Columbus had prepared for 
the travel more seriously than other travelers. Even vessels 
and staff of the expedition were chosen by him. I’ll use 
works of S. Morison, J. Backless and Ch. Verlinden, who 
had found historical documents about organization of the 
expedition, as necessary sources.  
Two of vessels were given by Spanish monarchs and one 
of them was rented by Columbus. Two vessels – “Pinta” 
and “Ninia” were caravels and one of them was nao by 
name “Santa Maria”. After the agreement was signed with 
monarchs, Columbus rented “Santa Maria” of Juan de la 
Cosa, who lived in the Port San Antonio. “Pinta” and 
“Ninia” were made in the dockyard by name Rio-Tinto 
near the Port Palos. According to historical documents, the 
owner of “Pinta” was Cristobal Cintero from Palos and 
owner of “Ninia” was Juan Ninio. Fortunes of seamen 
depended on the captain during the expedition. Besides 
being the navy’s commander, Columbus was the captain of 
“Santa Maria” either. His assistants were Juan de la Cosa 
and navigator Pedro Alonso Nino. The captain of “Pinta” 
was Martin Alonso Pinson, his assistant was Francesco 
Martin Pinson and navigator was Cristobal Garcia 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    87
Sarmiento. The captain of “Ninia” was Vicente Janez 
Pinson, his assistant was Juan Ninio and navigator was 
Sancho Ruiz de Gama. As you see, several representatives 
of Pinsons and Ninios participated in Columbus’s 
expedition. Though Pinsons thought only about their own 
benefits, Ninios did their best for the expedition’s success. 
Martin Alonso Pinson always desired to participate in great 
expeditions and to return with victory. He wanted to disco-
ver large territories and to become well-known traveler as 
Marco Polo, Bartolommeo Dias and Diego Can. Martin 
Alonso wanted to be respected by Spanish monarchs and to 
have a high position in the navy of Spain.  
Alonso Pinson also had read Marco Polo’s “Travel 
book” as the most professional seamen and wanted to reach 
Cipango first of all. That’s why he agreed to participate in 
Columbus’s expedition and invited his brothers too. During 
the travel, he didn’t agree with most decisions made by 
Columbus and intervened in everything. After the 
expedition discovered Bahamas, Alonso Pinson tried to 
continue the travel by himself and reach Spain first of all.  
Though the younger brother of Pinson Vicente Janez 
Pinson was 30, he showed himself as a professional seaman 
and model employee during Columbus’s first travel. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    88
Afterwards – in 1499 and 1500, he travelled to coasts of the 
New World and discovered Amazon by himself.  
Most historians and geographers were interested in sizes 
of Columbus’s vessels. Experts had different opinions 
about it. According to S. E. Morison, the tonnage of “Santa 
Maria” was 100 t, “Pinta” – 60 t and “Ninia” – 50 t. 
Columbus was sure that, he would be able to participate in 
any expedition with his vessels. He trusted in “Ninia” most 
of all. The commander knew that he would meet the group 
of islands after passing the ocean. He needed “Ninia” in 
order to sail speedily in such situation as it was very small. 
That’s why Columbus replaced triangular sails of caravellas 
with quadrangular sails as soon as he reached Canaries. 
After that reconstruction, “Ninia” became the speediest 
vessel of the expedition.  
Alisa Bache Gould could determine names of 87 of 90 
employees of Columbus’s expedition. 40 of them were in 
“Santa Maria” and other 25 persons were in other two 
vessels. Four of them weren’t Spaniards: one of them was 
Portugal from Tavira, others were Italians from Venetia, 
Calabria and Genoese. The rest of them were from Seville, 
Cadis, Jerez, Puerto-Santa-Maria, Cordova, Palos and 
Mogera.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    89
As the expedition was organized officially, it was 
accompanied by “escribano” (secretary) and “veedor” 
(inspector). The secretary would register discovered islands 
and lead negotiations with foreign rulers and inspector 
would defend monarchs’ rights when gold and valuable 
stones would be found. Besides it, there was one “alguacil” 
(policeman) in each vessel. The policeman of “Santa 
Maria” was Diego de Arana – brother of Columbus’s lover 
Beatriz.  
Negotiations would be carried out with discovered 
foreign countries by the Jewish converted to Christianity by 
name Luis de Torres, who knew Arabian. Why did 
Columbus need a translator, who knew Arabian, if he 
wanted to discover Chine, Japan and India? It was known 
owing to Marco Polo’s book that, Arabian was used in 
eastern coasts of Africa and Arabian Peninsula. 
Though there was a doctor in every vessel, their help 
wasn’t needed during the expedition. It’s interesting that, 
there wasn’t any churchman in vessels. 
The navy left the port of Palos on August 3, 1492 and 
reached Canaries soon. Then it became clear that, “Pinta” 
leaked and its rudder was out of order. As the vessel had to 
be repaired, the expedition could leave the island of Homer 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    90
of Canaries in September 6. Then, seamen lost the Hierro 
Island at the result of strong wind. 
Seamen saw long grasses on the ocean on September 16. 
They couldn’t determine bottom of the sea. The expedition 
discovered the Sargasso Sea – the only sea having no 
borders with land after sailing for three weeks.  
In spite of it, Columbus continued sailing towards the 
west. The vessels’ speeds increased a lot in the first week 
of October and became 142 miles in a day. Then, vessels 
began to sail towards the south-west. It was in favor of 
seamen. There were a lot of birds between North America 
and Bermudas on October 7. But the land couldn’t be seen. 
As if, there wasn’t any land area there. The discovery of the 
Sargasso Sea and appearance of birds proved existence of 
land area. But it couldn’t be seen. After birds were seen, 
Columbus changed the direction towards the south-west 
and made an important step for the expedition’s future.  
As the land wasn’t seen, seamen asked commander to 
return to Spain. Even some of them wanted to kill 
Columbus. They mentioned that, as the commander was a 
foreigner, he didn’t care of Spanish seamen. 
Columbus used his oratorical skill and explained to 
everybody that, they would be obliged to sail same distance 
towards Spain. He said that, if participants of the expedition 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    91
would kill him, they would be executed by Spanish 
monarchs. The commander mentioned that, they had to 
return to Spain together. Columbus asked for three-day 
delay for discovery of the land area at the end of his speech 
and promised that, he would return back if the land area 
wouldn’t be seen after three days.  
Really, Columbus was very lucky. After a day – on 
October 11 the wind strengthened and vessels became 
speedier. New signs of the land area began to be seen in the 
ocean. Branches and sticks sailed near vessels. It showed 
that, there were people around. Columbus became sure that, 
the land area wasn’t far away. The Moon lightened the 
Earth in the night between the 12th and 13th October and 
simplified seamen’s works. 
The well-known American historian J. Backless descry-
bed discovery of America by Columbus in “America in 
front of its discoverers’ eyes”:  
“It was midnight on October 11 of 1492. The event of 
the global importance would happen in two hours. Nobody 
knew it in the expedition, everybody was very excited. The 
man, who would see the land first of all, would get 10000 
maravedis reward and it had become clear that, the 
expedition would be completed soon… It was the end of the 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    92
day and three vessels sailed speedily by means of the strong 
wind…”1 
At last Columbus achieved his purpose on October 12, 
1492 – 33 days after he left Canaries. The fourth continent 
was first seen by the seaman of “Pinta” Rodrigo de Triana. 
America was at 6 miles away from America. 
 
 
     Columbus’s expedition leaves coasts of the New World 
                                                 
       
1
 Бейклесс Дж. Америка глазами первооткрывателей. Москва, 
1969. стр. 17. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    93
Columbus, who took the security of the expedition into 
account, ordered to drop all sails in vessels. The Guanahani 
Island of Bahamas having 20 km length and 10 km width 
appeared in front of seamen in the morning. It has been 
proved that, it was today’s Watling Island located at 240 
north latitude and 74.300 east longitude – Columbus called 
that island “San Salvador”.  
The well-known sea traveler wrote following sentences 
on his diary when he was in the island: “The Island is very 
large and plain. There are a lot of trees and waters here and 
a large lake in front of the island. But there isn’t any 
mountain here”.  
It became clear that, there were people in the island and 
their skins were red unlike Europeans. The commander 
wrote following sentences about them: “All of them were 
naked… I saw people, who were about 30, looked beautiful 
and had thick hairs… Faces were straight and had nice 
smiles… Their skins weren’t black, they were red…” 
The commander of the expedition went ashore and 
declared the island property of catholic kings with the 
participation of the secretary Rodrigo de Escobedo and 
inspector Sanchez Segovia. So, Christopher Columbus got 
all privileges, which were promised him by Spanish 
monarchs, and became admiral of Spain and vice-king of 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    94
discovered lands. After that event, new era began for the 
territory located in the Western Hemisphere. It meant new 
life for the population of that territory. They would be 
obliged to live in accordance with laws brought by 
missioners of the East.  
Columbus sailed towards south-west in order to find 
Cipango on October 14, after he discovered San-Salvador. 
He approached Santa Maria de la Concepcion Island – 
today’s Ram-Ki Island until the evening. 
Spaniards conquered the island in the morning and 
discovered the Fernandina Island – today’s Long Island 
after it. Spaniards were met everywhere with great 
pleasure. Hindus took on vessels and drank juices given by 
their guests delightfully. There weren’t sugar-beets in 
America then. Europeans found hamac in the Long Island.  
Columbus conquered every island he discovered. The ad-
miral saw a mountainous coast on October 27 and entered 
rank  of  the  wide  river, which  was  full of  flowers, on 
the next day. He thought that, it was Cipango. Then, there 
should be grandiose temples and palaces. But there weren’t 
such buildings in that island. Columbus sent several seamen 
to the island under the leadership of the translator Luis de 
Torres in order to investigate the island. Torres was 
accompanied by Rodrigo de Jerez, who had enough 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    95
experience in this field. As investigation of islands was 
important, Columbus sent different groups to different part 
of them. He wanted to learn which settlements were located 
in islands and which people lived there. But some 
historians write that, admiral’s purpose was to find the 
Great Khan of Chine.  
Those researches tired seamen. Martin Alonso Pinson 
used the opportunity and disappeared with “Pinta” on 
November 22 in order to start his own researches, which 
created great danger for his team. He wanted to find gold 
and valuable stones located in Cipango and Chine. 
Columbus was obliged to continue his travel with 
Vicente Janez Pinson and two vessels. He passed the 
remote eastern part of the northern coast of Cuba and found 
coasts of Haiti Islands on December 8. On the next day, the 
admiral called that island Espanola.  
Spaniards could find gold in Espanola when they talked 
to one of aboriginals on December 16. It was a golden 
board resembling hand. Another aboriginal brought some 
gold to “Santa Maria” and bartered for Spaniard’s things. 
Columbus noted every trade and prepared detailed report 
for his supporters. The admiral mentioned that, Hindus 
trusted Europeans and it was easy to occupy discovered 
territories. Hindus met Columbus and seamen as 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    96
ambassadors, but they thought of Hindus as their future 
slaves. 
 
 
   Columbus declares discovered lands property of Spain 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    97
 “Santa Maria” was wrecked in front of Espanola in 
midnight on December 24 at the result of Juan de la Cosa’s 
mistake. Early in the morning, foods, construction materials 
and weapons of the vessel were taken to the island. The fort 
La Navidad was established by means of remainders of that 
vessel in accordance with Columbus’s order. La Navidad 
was the first settlement of Spaniards established on coasts 
of the New World.  
A lot of seamen stayed in the fort. They wanted to stay 
there until the second expedition would come and find a lot 
of gold. 39 seamen stayed there. The commander of the fort 
was Diego de Arana. The translator Luis de Torres and 
secretary Escobedo, who had already completed his 
mission, (participants of the expedition wouldn’t discover 
new islands, they would return to Spain) also were among 
seamen, who stayed in the fort.  
Columbus left the fort and sailed to Spain on January 4, 
1493. Monarchs and all Spaniards had to hear of his 
discovery. Columbus could justify confidence of monarchs 
and his supporters.  
The admiral sailed with “Ninia”. It met “Pinta” in front 
of the La Cobra Island on January 6. Alonso Pinson 
approached Columbus and apologized as if nothing had 
happened. He mentioned that, he had found gold. Pinson 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    98
and Columbus were very happy as they had met each-
others. They needed companion on the way to motherland.  
  
      
 
The admiral changed the route towards north-east on 
January 16 - Wednesday three hours before the morning. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    99
According to the diary of Columbus, a strong wind started 
in the night between the 2nd and 3rd February and speeds of 
vessels became 598 miles in a day in the night between the 
4th and 7th February. It was considered the greatest speed 
during the expedition.  
The weather aggravated on February 12 and the wind 
changed direction of “Pinta” after two days. Vessels were 
separated. It turns out in accordance with Columbus’s notes 
that, he thought that he was dead. One of Azores – Santa 
Maria Island was seen on February 15. The admiral went 
asleep in the night of February 16 as he was sleepless for 
four days. 
 “Ninia” could stop in Nossa Senhora dos Anjos located 
in the north-east of the Santa Maria Island on February 18. 
Though that island belonged to Portuguese, Spaniards 
found shelter there.  
After a short conflict with Portuguese, Columbus 
continued his travel on February 24. But another storm 
started after sailing for 250 miles towards the east. That 
calamity impeded seamen to complete the expedition. The 
storm annihilated all sails of “Ninia” in the night between 
the 2nd and 3rd March. At last, Columbus entered rank of the 
Tagus River on March 4. So, he escaped of the strongest 
storm of recent years.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    100
 
               The “Ninia” returns from the first travel 
 
The king of Portugal Juan II invited Columbus to his 
temporary residence located at 45 km away from Lisbon 
when the expedition returned back. As plague had spread in 
Lisbon then, the king was in the monastery of Saint Maria. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    101
Though he had rejected Columbus before, was obliged to 
meet him after the expedition. After getting information 
about results of the expedition, the Portuguese monarch 
explained that, the territory discovered by Columbus should 
belong to Portugal in accordance with the treaty concluded 
between Portugal and Castilia in Alcasovas in 1479.  
The well-known traveler mentioned that, he hadn’t 
participated in mentioned negotiations. He said that as Juan 
II didn’t allow him to travel to coasts of Guinea, he was 
obliged to go to Spain. As he said these sentences ironi-
cally, noblemen advised the king to kill Columbus. Juan II, 
who was friend with Spanish monarchs, let the traveler go. 
He was invited to the king’s residence again when he was 
going to return to Spain. After talking to the traveler, the 
king asked Hindus how many islands had been discovered. 
One of Hindus put several beans on the table in response to 
him. After it, Portuguese forgot negotiations about Anthelia 
and the “Island of Seven Cities”.  
The king of Portugal organized farewell meeting for 
Columbus on March 11. On the next day, the traveler was 
offered to return to Spain on the land road. As Columbus 
considered this offer dangerous, he left the rank of Tagus 
River with “Ninia” on March 13 and went to Spain. The 
traveler entered rank of the Rio-Tonto River (the Port Palos 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    102
is situated there) after thirty-three-weeks travel on March 
15. 
 
       
      Columbus is received by Spanish monarchs after the  
                                         first travel  
 
Martin Alonso Pinson approached Palos with “Pinta” 
on the same day. He had reached coasts of Spain – the Port 
of Bayonne at the end of February. Pinson wanted to go to 
the palace of monarch in order to give information about 
the discovery before Columbus. But he couldn’t get 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    103
permission for certain reasons. Disappointed Pinson died in 
a month. 
The discovery of the global importance was made at the 
result of 32-days hard travel. The discovery, which was 
very important for most geographers, cartographers, 
cosmographers, historians and progressive-minded people, 
was made during a very short time and the Earth’s secret 
was brought to light. The approximate width of the Atlantic 
Ocean was determined and it became clear that, there was a 
large land area in the west of the ocean. Christopher 
Columbus also could realize importance of his discovery 
and he had completed his diary with following sentences: 
“Majesties, I was severely criticized for the idea of this 
expedition when I was in your palace. But, thanks to God, I 
could overcome all pressures and achieved success for 
Spain. I’m sure that, my travel will bring great fame to the 
Christian World”. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    104
Discovery of America and secrets brought  
            to light during that travel    
 
I want to mention some facts in order to analyze that 
discovery. There are different assumptions about the 
purpose of Columbus’s expedition. Some literatures even 
say that, Columbus didn’t aim to reach coasts of Asia in 
1492. The agreement signed by Columbus and two 
monarchs should be analyzed in order to understand it. He 
could get all privileges and titles, which he wanted, only in 
accordance with the order of Spanish monarchs after the 
discovery would be made. There wasn’t name of any place 
in the agreement. But it had other reason. After the Pope 
divided the Earth between Castilia and Portugal in 1479, 
Portuguese seamen could travel towards south and east of 
Canaries and seamen of Castilia could travel towards the 
west and north. So, monarchs of Castilia couldn’t speak 
about any part of Asia. That territory was under Portu-
guese’s control. It should be mentioned that, mentioned 
agreement could be about Asia only. Then, people all over 
the world thought that there was Asia on the other side of 
the Atlantic Ocean. That is, Asia was situated in east and 
west of Europe. That’s why Columbus sailed towards the 
west as soon as he left the Hierro Island. Besides it, the 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    105
expedition had to bring pearls, valuable stones, gold, silver 
and spices from discovered land in accordance with 
concluded agreement. India was considered motherland of 
such goods then. 
I. P. Magidovich and V. I. Magidovich write in II 
volume of “Historical essays on geographical disco-
veries”: “The expedition wasn’t organized for occupation 
of territories, it was organized for creation of commercial 
relations with discovered countries. Columbus’s expedition 
had to establish commercial relations with discovered non-
Christian countries (Muslim) and try to appropriate 
discovered islands. There weren’t professional fighters and 
enough weapons in the expedition and it proved that, the 
expedition wouldn’t realize serious military operations. 
Besides it, the expedition didn’t plan to spread Christianity 
in discovered lands, though Columbus had tried to achieve 
it. There wasn’t any churchman and monarch in the expedi-
tion, there was only the Jewish converted to Christianity, 
who knew Arabian”.1 
It should be mentioned that, Arabian wasn’t needed in 
Brazil or Anthelia Islands. It could be needed in East Asia 
as it was Muslims’ common language. It means that, the 
                                                 
       1
 И. П. Магидович, В. И. Магидович. Очерки по истории географи-
ческих открытий, II том. Москва, “Просвещение”, 1982. стр. 25 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    106
expedition planned to reach India and its neighbours in 
accordance with the agreement concluded between 
Columbus and monarchs. Monarchs’ main purpose was to 
establish commercial relations with India.  
 
          
   Columbus’s route and discoveries between Anthill Islands  
                                during the first travel  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    107
According to official chronics, after the first travel 
(1493), Columbus declared that, he had discovered India in 
the west of Europe and brought several Hindus from there. 
Columbus believed that he had reached the place where he 
wanted to go. Organizers of the first expedition also 
thought so. That’s why they began to organize a great 
expedition. There weren’t skeptics then, and they appeared 
afterwards. 
Portuguese didn’t believe that, Columbus could reach 
East Asia. Some scientists analyzed the route of 
Columbus’s expedition and didn’t believe that the Earth’s 
outline was so short. There were skeptics in Spain then. 
The Italian humanist Pietro Martire (Poignant Peter), who 
lived in Barcelona and were close to the kingdom palace, 
corresponded with his fellow-countrymen. He had written 
in the letter written on November 1, 1493: “One person by 
name Colon (Columbus) says that, he could reach India, 
the place of antipodes of the west. He discovered many 
islands located on the other side of the East Ocean near 
India as cosmographers thought… I don’t want to write 
anything about it, nevertheless size of the Earth made me to 
think otherwise”.  
That is, before the travel of Christopher Columbus, 
Pietro Martire thought otherwise about calculations of 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    108
Paolo Toscanelli. So, Columbus also might think as Pietro 
Martire, but not as Paolo Toscanelli. 
I think that, Ch. Columbus couldn’t agree with thoughts 
of the Florentine cosmographer. First of all, well-known 
sea traveler couldn’t agree with length of the Earth’s 
outline. It means that, Asia isn’t situated in the Atlantic 
Ocean at 10000-12000 km away from Canaries in the west 
as Paolo Toscanelli thought. Columbus had determined 
that, land area located in the west of the Atlantic Ocean was 
at 4500-5000 km away from Europe. It means that, the 
mentioned land was other land, which was unknown for the 
Old World. I think, he agreed with ideas of the Azerbaijani 
scientist after getting acquainted with N. Tusi’s “Zij-i 
Ilkhani” and his map and was sure that, the land area 
located in the west of the Atlantic Ocean was at 4500-5000 
km away from Europe. That distance could be overcome in 
30-35 days. The Italian scientist and humanist, cosmo-
grapher and astronomer Toscanelli (1397 – Florentine – 
May 10, 1482) was the defender and leader of the public 
library founded by the humanist Niccolo Niccolini. He 
defended ideas mentioning that, the Earth is spherical and 
planned to go to India through the western way. The 
astronomer had edited “Table of Alfonso” (XIII century). 
Though Toscanelli had read scientific works of most 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    109
scientists, he had lessened measurements of the Earth for 
unknown results. The Florentine scientist could make a 
mistake. It was difficult to find the length of the Earth’s 
outline then. The French physician Jan Ferrell (1497-1558), 
who was interested in astronomy, could determine exact 
length of the Earth’s outline. It means that, Toscanelli had 
made a mistake. 
I can’t justify Toscanelli for such rude mistake. He had 
made elementary mistakes when made his map in 1474. 
But he had opportunities for preventing those mistakes. The 
Greek scientist Eratosthenes lived in Alexandria founded 
by Macedonian Isgandar in 332 BC. That city attracted 
scientists and travelers of the world then.  
According to his calculations, the length of the Earth’s 
outline was 43625 km and its radius was 6943 km. There is 
no doubt that, Columbus knew this fact. As he was 
interested in astronomy, he had taken into account 
calculations of Eratosthenes, Poseidon, Al-Khwarizmi, Al-
Biruni, Tusi and Toscanelli before starting his travel. He 
planned to achieve success and to go down in history unlike 
other travelers who tried to find land in the west of the 
Atlantic Ocean. 
The French physician Jan Fernell wrote that, the length 
of the Earth’s outline was 39816 km and its radius was 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    110
6337 km.1 It means that, Toscanelli had made a mistake. 
According to his calculations, the length of the Earth’s 
outline was 29000 km. I think that, Columbus had read at 
least part of “Zij-i Ilkhani” written by Nasiraddin Tusi 
before his travel. Then, important scientific works, 
especially works on astronomy and the Earth’s measure-
ments were translated and sold to scientists with very high 
prices. Columbus, who was preparing for the important 
expedition, had got acquainted with Nasiraddin Tusi’s map 
besides “Zij-i Ilkhani” and protected that map with all his 
forces. Measurements and outlines described in mentioned 
map could influence on the result of the expedition. That’s 
why the traveler didn’t agree with the Florentine scientist’s 
report and used measurements and outlines determined by 
Eratosthenes and Tusi.  
Of course, my hypothesis is serious enough. N. Tusi’s 
map was kept in the library of Florentine and Paolo 
Toscanelli leaded that library. I think, Toscanelli couldn’t 
give that material to Columbus. Though they knew each-
others, the scientist didn’t show that material to anybody. 
But it is obvious that, Columbus had used that map when 
passed the ocean. How could Columbus find that map then? 
                                                 
         1
 О. Коротцев. Глобус, как измеряли землю. Ленинград, «Д.Л», 
1980. стр. 312  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    111
   
            Look, I kidnapped some people for you! 
 
Probably, Columbus began to be interested in the 
Azerbaijani scientist’s life and activity after he got 
acquainted with his map. He was interested in works of 
merchants and ambassadors visiting the Near East, Iran and 
Azerbaijan, in goods and materials brought by them. There 
is another hypothesis too. He could order scientific works 
on astronomy and geography by means of merchants and 
ambassadors and could get acquainted with “Zij-i Ilkhani” 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    112
in this way. He investigated Tusi’s activity not only in 
Florence and other cities of Italy. He continued this work in 
Portugal and Spain too. Everybody knows that there are 
large libraries and administrative buildings in big cities of 
Portugal and Spain, where archival documents were kept. 
Columbus spent his free times in reading scientific and 
interesting books. But it is not known whether “Zij-i 
Ilkhani” was in libraries of Portugal and Spain or not. 
   
 
 
 
 
    Scientific activity of Nasiraddin Tusi  
          and the map made in Maraga  
                        observatory 
 
N. Tusi thought that, the science should help people. He 
said following sentences to his son before his death: “I can 
die in peace as I spent my life for people’s welfare and 
science… The life, which wasn’t spent for good deeds, is 
the life spent in vain”. 
The scientist, who had devoted his life, knowledge and 
skills to the mankind and science, died on June 25, 127 in 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    113
Baghdad. Nasiraddin Tusi was buried in the Jame Mosque, 
which is situated at 10 km away from the capital of 
Abbasids – Baghdad. They say that, almost all of the 
population of Baghdad participated at the scientist’s 
funeral. People couldn’t believe that, Tusi had left them. 
Tusi’s comprehensive scientific activity amazed people 
of all time. The Syrian historian Abul Faraj Bar Hebraeus 
worked in Maragha observatory in XIII century. He wrote 
about the observatory in his “General history”: “I got an 
opportunity to work in Maragha library, which was full of 
books written in Syrian, Arabic and Persian. The library 
wasn’t smaller than the library of Alexandria of Egypt and 
was the greatest library of the world for number of 
scientific works kept there”. Bar Hebraeus could get 
acquainted with very significant historical materials there. 
The Syrian historian wrote about Tusi in his “General 
history”: “The Turkish philosopher, well-known scientist, 
mathematician Nasiraddin Tusi was introduced to me (in 
1264). He had invented equipments (astronomical) for 
observations and created bigger (in comparison with 
Ptolemy’s circles) copper circles. He had visited Alexan-
dria in order to observe and record planets’ movements. 
Scientists of different countries gathered around him in 
Maragha. He got salaries and grants of scientists and 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    114
students for them. He had a lot of works – translation of 
“Logic”, researches on theology and natural sciences… 
Besides it, he is the author of “Ethics” (“Akhlagi Nasiri” 
– R. D.) written in Persian. He collected thoughts of 
Platoon and Aristotle about applied philosophy there. He 
had got acquainted with works of ancient philosophers 
either and didn’t deny them”.  
The well-known Azerbaijani scientist Tusi was called 
Persian philosopher then. During those years, people, who 
lived in the Near East, though that, people, who lived in 
Azerbaijan, were Persians or Arabs. Nizami Ganjavi, 
Qatran Tabrizi, Afzaladdin Khagani Shirvani and other 
personalities of Azerbaijan were known as Persians.  
As Niccolo Niccolini’s library was popular in whole 
Italy, Tusi’s works might be kept there.  
After investigating Columbus’s activity, I came to the 
conclusion that, Columbus had got acquainted with “Zij-i 
Ilkhani” besides Nasiraddin Tusi’s map. Tusi had proved 
existence of unknown territory on the other side of the 
Atlantic Ocean by describing the prime meridian at 340 
west of today’s Greenwich Meridian.  
The value of the annual precession of the Earth’s rota-
tion axis was determined as 51//4 in Maragha observatory 
under the leadership of N. Tusi (modern value is 51//2). 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    115
There are a lot of mathematical, astronomical and 
geographical tables in “Zij-i Ilkhani”. The most important 
tables are tables of sinuses and tangents in sexagesimal 
numeral system and tables of geographic coordinates of 
256 cities, which were known in XIII century.  
Tusi’s discoveries amazed most scientists of the world. I 
want to quote the article written about N. Tusi by the 
journalist-researcher Oqtay Eldegez on August 31, 2000, in 
the newspaper “168 saat”: “N. Tusi could determine 
phases of the Moon 400 years before I. Newton, find the 
distance between the Moon and our planet with a small 
error (386.781 km) first of all, determine the Earth’s 
movement and find out that, the Earth wasn’t perfect 
spherical but depressed in poles. He found out that, the 
gravity power was six times weaker in the Moon than the 
Earth. Exactness of all these calculations amazes even 
modern astronomers”. 
The Azerbaijani scientist, who had passed ahead of I. 
Newton and other well-known astronomers for 400 years, 
proved that, ebb and flows didn’t happen by accident, they 
were results of gravity pressure, which occurred for 24 
times in a year at the result of the Moon’s movements and 
depressions in poles.  
 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    116
    
               Nasiraddin Tusi works on “Zij-i Ilkhani” 
 
Every employee of Maragha observatory had a copy of 
N. Tusi’s map. That is, the map had several copies. It 
proves that, N. Tusi didn’t want to lose discoveries made in 
Maragha observatory. He wanted to spread them all over 
the world.  
As everybody wonders how Tusi’s map was used in 
Apennine Peninsula, I’ll give some information about it.  
 
 
 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    117
The venetian traveler Marco Polo and well-
known map of Nasiraddin Tusi 
 
Fao Mun-Chi returned to his motherland Nanking before 
the death of N. Tusi. Fao Mun-Chi, who shared scientific 
investigations carried out in Azerbaijan with his colleagues, 
could become very popular in Nanking and in the 
Emperor’s Palace in a very short time. The emperor of 
Chine Khubilay khan (1256-1295), who paid special 
attention to all branches of the science, got acquainted with 
works of the young scientist and created good opportunities 
for him. Most works of Fao Mun-Chi were kept in large 
libraries as exponents after his death. The well-known 
Italian traveler Marco Polo, who had visited Chine in 1272, 
had worked as the ambassador of Khubilay khan in 
accordance with the offer of the Italian Aysen. Marco Polo 
could see the map brought from Azerbaijan in Nanking. He 
knew that, it was brought by Fao Mun-Chi. There is no 
doubt that, the Venetian traveler knew Fao Mun-Chi and 
learned something about scientific works carried out in 
Maragha. People were aware of discoveries made by N. 
Tusi in Chine. The Azerbaijani scientist was well-known 
among scientists and noblemen of Chine. Marco Polo 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    118
bought mentioned map and took it to Venetia as soon as got 
an opportunity. 
I came to the conclusion that, mentioned map could be 
kept in the public library founded by the Italian humanist 
Niccolo Niccolini in Florentine. The map, which was 
considered property of Polos, could be presented to the 
library in order to be preserved. They say that, Polos did 
their best in order to save Marco’s documents and didn’t 
give them to everybody without serious reason. Otherwise, 
they could be lost.  
Marco Polo presented a copy of his book to the 
Frenchman Tibo de Sepua, who was the ambassador in 
Venice, in 1307 – 8 years after leaving Genoa prison. The 
French ambassador returned to his motherland after 
completing his work in Venice. So, mentioned work began 
to be copied and spread in France and “Travel book” 
began to be discussed again. But afterwards it turned out 
that, the book was full of mistakes. In spite of it, materials 
of Marco Polo’s book were used by other authors either. 
For example, there were some citations from that book in 
the novel of Bodue.  
After a while the traveler’s book was found by 
geographers. Traveler’s biography was written by the 
Venetian geographer Ramuzino 200 years after his death. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    119
He translated Marco Polo’s work from French into Italian 
and included it in the second volume of “Travels by land 
and sea”. 
The map considered for start of cross marches was 
included in “Book of Christians” written by Marino 
Sanudo the Elder in 1320. That map included descriptions 
of Europe, Syria, Small Asia and Arabia. Probably, the 
author had used Marco Polo’s map. Besides it, the Venetian 
traveler had described territories of Georgia, Darband and 
Chine on the map correctly.   
The map made by Portuolono Medichini was published 
in 1375. That map was made in accordance with countries 
visited by Marco Polo and information given by him about 
those countries. Though names of countries were taken 
from the Venetian traveler’s book, their places were 
described incorrectly. Only Sumatra, Small Java, Bengali, 
Ceylon etc. were described on the map.  
The prince of Portugal Pedro also looked for Marco 
Polo’s book in Venetia in 1426.  
Marco Polo’s book was very popular in XV century, 
when vessels of Portugal and Spain began to conquer the 
Atlantic Ocean, so, it was published with the title “Novel 
about Great Khan”. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    120
Victor Shklovsky wrote in his historical narrative “Land 
explorer”: “There was Marco Polo’s “Travel book” in the 
vessel when Christopher Columbus left Spain during his 
first travel and that book substituted for the compass and 
map”. It is obvious that, Columbus was interested in the 
Venetian traveler’s book. Probably, he had got acquainted 
with all materials brought from Chine by Polo. Columbus 
accidentally found Tusi’s map when looked through 
materials brought by the Venetian traveler.  
Unlike V. Shklovsky, my hypothesis is as following: 
There was the map of America besides other materials in 
the vessel when Columbus started his travel towards the 
New World and that book substituted for the compass. The 
location of the continent located on the other side of the 
Atlantic Ocean was approximately described on the map. 
Columbus had realized this fact very well.  
I want to mention another significant detail. Marco Polo 
learned the role of Chine in development of culture and 
science of the world when he was in that country and 
worked in the palace of Khubilay khan. He was especially 
interested in countries located far from the eastern and 
southern coasts of Chine. Though Europe wasn’t aware of 
those countries, Chine sent there expeditions and estab-
lished relations. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    121
Probably Chinese travelers traveled to Ceylon, Taiwan, 
Philippines, Indonesian Islands, Malacca Islands, India, 
Burma, Thailand, Kampuchea, coasts of the Arabian Sea 
and eastern coast of Africa in the middle ages. As compass 
was invented by Chinese, they could easily travel to 
different islands by using it. 
According to historical sources, the greatest travel of the 
middle ages was realized by the expedition leaded by the 
plenipotentiary representative of the emperor of Chine Chei 
Khe (or Chen Kho). He completed that travel successfully 
by leading the navy, which consisted of 317 vessels and 27 
thousand employees - seamen, soldiers, navigators, carto-
graphers. 
Vessels of Chine were larger and more developed than 
vessels produced in European countries. Chinese navigators 
and cartographers were professional. Chei Khe’s expedition 
had investigated South-Eastern Asia, Indochina and Malay 
Islands. Some historians mention that, several vessels of the 
expedition had traveled to the north-western coast of 
Australia either.  
Rudolf Balandin wrote in the chapter “The longest travel 
of the middle ages” of the book “100 greatest geogra-
phical discoveries”: “The navy passed India, Persian Gulf, 
Arabian Peninsula and eastern coast of Africa as soon as it 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    122
entered the Indian Ocean. Probably, they passed the Cape 
of Good Hope too… The south-western coast of Africa was 
described exactly on the map of Chine made in 1420.  
Chei Khe had realized seven great expeditions between 
1405 and 1433”.1 
Owing to Chei Khe, Europeans knew locations of main 
places of Asia since the ancient times. Arabian seamen 
used maps made by him in the Indian Ocean. There is no 
doubt that, some of those maps were brought to the Apen-
nine Peninsula by Marco Polo and used there by experts.  
Tusi had described the place of the continent located on 
the other side of the Atlantic Ocean approximately. 
According to his map, the land area located in the west of 
the Atlantic Ocean was at 4500-5000 km west of Europe. 
But Toscanelli wrote that, mentioned territory was the 
eastern part of Asia and situated at 10000-12000 km west 
of coasts of the Old World.2 
Toscanelli wrote as most scientists of XV century that, 
there couldn’t be another continent in the Earth besides 
existing three continents. The Florentine cosmographer 
thought that, if the fourth continent existed, it could be 
                                                 
    
  
    1
 Баландин Р. К. Маркин В. А. Сто великих географических 
открытий. Москва, «Вече», 2000. стр. 56  
          2
  R. Qasımov. Əsrləri qabaqlamış alim – Nəsirəddin Tusi. “Yurd” 
NPB, Bakı, 2003. səh. 282 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    123
discovered before. So, only the eastern part of Asia could 
be situated in the west of Europe, on the Atlantic Ocean. 
Besides it, the Florentine cosmographer wrote that, huge 
land area could be reached after about 10000-12000 km. 
Columbus took all these facts and reports made in 
Maragha into account and decided that, mentioned land 
area could be reached after 4500-5000-6000 km. But 
Columbus didn’t write that, the land area located on the 
ocean was unknown in the Old World. Thus, he falsely 
defended Toscanelli’s idea, which mentioned that, the land 
located in the west of the Atlantic Ocean was part of Asia. 
According to most scientists, mentioned distance 
confused the well-known traveler. The Florentine scientist 
mentioned that, it was possible to reach Asia by 
overcoming that distance. That’s why after the first travel, 
Columbus declared that, he had met Asia on the other side 
of the Atlantic Ocean. According to official documents, 
Christopher Columbus traveled to coasts of the New World 
for four times – in 1492-1493, 1493-1496, 1498-1500 and 
1502-1504 – and thought that he had discovered Asia 
during all travels. These assumptions may be met in all 
sources.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    124
I don’t believe it. Now I’ll try to prove it. Columbus 
knew that he had found unknown land even during the first 
travel. 
It is known that, participants of the first expedition tried 
to rise in rebel before reaching coasts of the New World. 
Columbus used his oratorical skill and explained to 
everybody that, they would be obliged to sail same distance 
towards Spain. He said that, if participants of the expedition 
would kill him, they would be executed by Spanish 
monarchs. The commander mentioned that, they had to 
return to Spain together. Columbus asked for three-day 
delay for discovery of the land area at the end of his speech 
and promised that, he would return back if the land area 
wouldn’t be seen after three days.  
I don’t believe that, any seaman can surely mention that, 
land area will be seen in three days in such situation. 
Besides it, nobody had sailed on those parts of the ocean 
before Columbus. 26 hours after the delay – on October 12, 
1492, at 2 o’clock the seaman of “Pinta” Rodrigo de 
Triana saw Guanahani Island of Bahamas (today’s Watling 
Island) and informed everybody. Thus, the fourth continent 
– America was discovered. 
Columbus proved existence of the fourth continent 
owing to his courage, fearlessness, skills and knowledge. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    125
But though the discovery was made by the admiral, the 
fourth continent was named in favor of the adventurer 
Amerigo Vespucci. Nevertheless, progressive-minded 
people, geographers, cartographers and historians of Spain, 
Portugal and other countries of Europe had to name the 
fourth continent “Columbia” in favor of its discoverer.  
Scientists, who were against Columbus, wrote that, he 
discovered coasts of the New World by accident and 
thought that, it was Asia. It is impossible to accept this 
assumption. Columbus could ask for five days, a week, two 
weeks or three weeks instead of three days during the 
rebellion. But he asked for three days only. It means that, 
Columbus knew where he was going. The well-known sea 
traveler had overcome about 6000 km when he reached 
Bahamas. According to Toscanelli’s map, the expedition 
had overcome 10000 km as minimum - Cipango and 12000 
km as maximum - Chine. It means that, he couldn’t think 
that, was going to Asia. But other participants of the 
expedition thought that, the island discovered on October 
12 was part of Cipango.  
One detail also should be mentioned. I could reveal 
several secrets after investigation of the rebellion raised in 
Columbus’s expedition. It is known that, the rebellion was 
raised on October 10. Of course, it was leaded by one 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    126
person. He was Martin Alonso Pinson. Birds flied towards 
the south on October 7. Every experienced seaman could 
understand that, there was a land area in front of the 
expedition. Pinson also knew it and understood that, the 
land would be seen soon. Then, the discoverer of that land 
area would be the Genoese seaman. Alonso Pinson’s 
purpose was obvious. He wanted to appropriate fame of the 
expedition. The captain of “Pinta” had learned coordinates 
of that part of the ocean and could discover the territory 
located there afterwards.  
That’s why he tried to rise in rebel before completion of 
the travel. But he couldn’t imagine that the foreign traveler 
would calm seamen and ask for three-day delay. When 
participants of the expedition agreed with Columbus, 
Alonso Pinson understood that, he was defeated.  
Columbus went ashore when Guanahani Island was 
discovered and met with half-naked people. He wrote in his 
diary that, aborigines colored their faces and bodies. They 
hadn’t metal weapons and didn’t know anything about 
metal. When Columbus showed his sword to aborigines, 
Hindus confused and wounded their fingers. They were far 
from civil life. Everybody knew that, Cipango was popular 
for its Samurai swords. Besides it, aborigines’ skin colors 
differed from skin colors of population of Cipango. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    127
Columbus realized all these differences and couldn’t mix 
Guanahani with Cipango. He continued the travel and 
discovered Espanola and Cuba afterwards. Then, he 
became sure that, discovered islands weren’t Cipango, 
Chine or India. 
If Columbus discovered mentioned territory, he should 
have rights on it. This condition was fixed in the agreement 
concluded between the traveler and Spanish king. Nobody 
could appropriate the territory discovered by him. Then, 
why did the admiral keep his discovery secret? May be, 
Columbus thought that, he had discovered Asia? Otherwise, 
he had to demand everything he had earned. I’ll answer this 
question below.  
 
 
 
 
 
 Christopher Columbus’s second travel  
 
Besides having monopoly on expeditions organized 
towards the New World, Columbus got new subsidies of 
Spain. Monarchs wanted him to bring spices and gold. But 
he had brought less gold when returned to motherland. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    128
Spanish monarchs couldn’t accept such result. Columbus 
was against shedding blood during his first travel. 
Otherwise, he could kill Hindus and got a lot of gold.  
But he let to kill aborigines during his second travel. 
Other hidalgos also benefited by this decision. Seamen, 
who came to this territory after Columbus, also killed 
Hindus. Most travelers could get a lot of wealth at the result 
of plundering.  
Everybody knew that, Columbus was a ruler of 
discovered territories and owner of this position had as 
great authorities as the Spanish king. Local noblemen were 
dissatisfied as such important position belonged to the 
foreigner. Moreover, this position was heritable.  
This progress damaged the traveler’s authority. That’s 
why everybody tried to prove that, his discovery was made 
by accident owing to the mistake. But that mistake was 
made by the traveler intentionally – he mixed coasts of the 
New Word with Asia deliberately.  
Columbus’s expeditions differed from each-other. Main 
sources include only information about the first expedition. 
I’ll describe some moments of the second expedition.  
After the first travel, Isabel and Ferdinand organized 
banquet for the Genoese traveler in Barcelona. After that 
banquet, Columbus began to live in the palace of monarchs. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    129
Monarchs affirmed all privileges and rights given to the 
traveler in 1492. Don Cristobal Colon (Columbus) was 
described as admiral, vice-king and ruler of discovered 
territories in the instruction written on May 29, 1493. 
Columbus’s fame spread in Spain. The archbishop of 
Toledo, who was the most influential person in the palace, 
invited the traveler to the dinner.  
Monarchs gave Columbus an emblem with pictures of 
castle, lion, islands and anchor. The traveler’s brothers 
Bartolommeo and Diego became caballeros and began to 
be called as “Don”. Bartolommeo was in France, but Diego 
was in Genoa.  
So, monarchs allowed to organize the second expedition 
without hesitating. The archdeacon of Seville Juan de 
Fonseca leaded preparation works. He created a miracle – 
organized 17 vessels with 1400-1500 employees. It 
resembled real armada. The armada consisted of 3 naos and 
14 caravellas (some of them were Cantabria barkas).  
Before the first travel, Columbus had overcome 
resistance of Spanish seamen as he was a foreigner. But 
during the second travel, hundreds of Spanish hidalgos 
accompanied him and it would be difficult for the admiral 
to overcome them. It meant that, he would meet with great 
difficulties in discovered territories. This travel had a 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    130
political purpose for Spanish monarchs. After the 
Reconquista was ended in Spain (1492), hidalgos, who 
were distinguished for their courage in the war, were very 
influential. If they would be met with injustice in Spain, 
they could easily unite. Monarchs had to solve this problem 
in order to strengthen their authority. Columbus’s discovery 
solved the problem. Fearless hidalgos left Spain in order to 
occupy new territories.  
Columbus left the Port Cadis with the greatest vessel 
“Maria-Gallant” (tonnage - 200 ton) on September 25, 
1493 with the great armada. As Bartolommeo hadn’t 
returned from France, Columbus started travel with his 
younger brother Diego. He trusted him most of all. 
Afterwards, other participants of the expedition – future 
travelers Alonso de Okheda, Ponce de Leon, cartographer 
Juan de la Cosa, annalists Diego Alvarez Chanca and 
Michael Cuneo became more popular for their activities. 
Ramon Pane became the first ethnographer of Hindus. 
Besides it, there were about two hundred noblemen in the 
expedition.  
They took sugar-beets and big dogs in Canaries and left 
the last island of Canaries – Hierro on October 13. 
Inhabitants of Espanola (Haiti) mentioned that, there 
were territories by name “lands of cannibal Caribbean 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    131
people” and “islands of unmarried women” full of gold in 
the south-east. Vessels began to sail at 100 towards the 
south. That route was convenient for the expedition: 
Columbus could pass the ocean in 20 days by means of the 
north-eastern Passat. That way began to be used as the way 
from Europe to “Western India” afterwards. 1  
According to historical sources, the island covered with 
mountains and forests began to be seen on November 3. As 
the discovery was made in Sunday (“Dominica” – in 
Spanish), Columbus named the island Dominica. As there 
wasn’t any convenient port, the admiral turned the route 
towards the north and saw a small island (Maria-Gallant). 
The greatest island - Guadeloupe was discovered on 
November 4. Spaniards stayed on that island for eight days 
and controlled its settlements.  
The doctor of the expedition Diego Alvarez Chanca 
described interesting events in his letters. He wrote: “A lot 
of human skulls and bones were hanged on walls of houses 
as kitchen utensils. There were few men in that village. 
Women said that, men had gone to other islands for 
plundering. Those people looked more developed than 
inhabitants of other islands… Though houses were built of 
                                                 
       1
 И. П. Магидович, В. И. Магидович. Очерки по истории географи-
ческих открытий, II том. Москва, “Просвещение”, 1982. стр. 25 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    132
chaff, they were orderly and there were a lot of household 
things in houses… There were a lot of cotton and cotton 
clothes. They weren’t worse than our clothes”. 
         
   
 Columbus goes ashore in Espanola for the second time  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    133
According to women’s words, population of all three 
islands consisted of Caribbean people. They attacked their 
neighbors, who lived peacefully and hadn’t any weapons. 
Their weapons were bows and arrows made of pelvises of 
tortoises and fish bones. D. Chanca wrote: “Caribbean 
people captivated a lot of girls in order to use them as 
wives and maids. There were too many women – we saw 
only women in 50 houses… Indigenous women said that, 
Caribbean people ate prisoner women’s children. They 
brought up only children of their women. They ate prisoner 
men as well”. Columbus and his colleagues couldn’t be 
indifferent to this barbarism. Localization of such negative 
situations is the debt of every honest person. Nobody could 
approve such behaviors.  
According to historians and ethnographers of XIX 
century, inhabitants of Anthill Islands had said that, 
Spaniards had introduced them as cannibals and wild 
people. They said that, they weren’t cannibals. Conquis-
tadors simply tried to get permission for using Hindus as 
slaves. The main reason of mass annihilation of aborigines, 
who lived in Small and Big Anthill Islands, was their 
presentation as cannibals. Christopher Columbus was 
considered main instigator of this event. I can’t agree with 
this assumption. Columbus was against annihilation of 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    134
guiltless people. He wanted to found civil society in 
discovered territories. The vice-king planned to use 
aborigines for this purpose.  
Everybody knows that, a lot of money was required for 
organization of great expeditions. Some officials had 
offered to compensate part of spent money by selling 
Hindus as slaves. They put pressure upon Columbus and 
asked him to send monarchs documents introducing 
aborigines as cannibals. Those officials thought that, the 
best way of overcoming Hindus is to sell them. Permissions 
of monarchs (Isabel and Ferdinand) were needed for it. 
Columbus sent mentioned presentation because of those 
pressures. After that presentation, all Hindu kin began to be 
known as cannibals in Spain and most other countries.   
The Genoese traveler’s opponents didn’t miss this 
opportunity. They began to accuse Columbus of making 
Hindus slaves. Especially when court sessions concerning 
the heritage started, “Memories” sent by the traveler to 
Spain, began to be used against him. Mass annihilation of 
aborigines of the New World was started after that 
“Memories”. Opponents called Columbus blood-sucker, 
cruel and merciless. But the traveler, who was enough 
restrained, was obliged to write “Memories” because of 
the situation existing in Espanola. It has very short history.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    135
   
      Christopher Columbus approached Guanahani Island 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    136
As it was mentioned above, Columbus had established 
the fort La Navidad in Espanola in December of 1492 at the 
end of his first travel and 39 seamen had stayed there. 
When the expedition approached the fort during the second 
travel, seamen went shore in order to take fresh water and 
saw four rotting corpses. Their necks and feet were tied 
with cord. One of them was bearded. It proved that, he was 
European. 
The navy approached the fort in the night of November 
27 and used gunfire as a signal. But any response wasn’t 
heard. Columbus went ashore on the next day and could 
only see burned poles of the fort and corpses there. It 
wasn’t possible to learn how Spaniards died. But it was 
obvious that, they were accused of plundering. Hindus said 
that colonists had appropriated women and it caused 
confusion. It turned out that, there was a conflict between 
young seaman and secretary of the expedition Escobedo for 
a Hindus woman. Both of them entered the territory of one 
kasic by name Caonabo in order to find women and gold. 
So, Caonabo killed both of them. After it, Hindus attacked 
the fort La Navidad. There was Diego de Arana and five 
fighters in the fort (each Spaniard lived with five Hindus 
women) and they couldn’t meet Hindus with strong 
resistance. Three fighters were killed in the fort, two of 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    137
them drowned in the water when tried to escape. Other 
Spaniards run to mountains and were killed there.  
The tragedy of Espanola caused Spaniards to grieve. 
Noblemen wanted to take vengeance on Hindus and said it 
to Columbus. But Columbus said that, it was untimely. Of 
course, hidalgos couldn’t accept this decision and began to 
look for opportunity for taking vengeance.  
Columbus founded a city near the burned fort in January 
of 1494 and named it Isabella in favor of the Spanish 
queen. Spaniards’ foods began to go bad as the weather was 
hot and damp. Starvation was inevitable for colonists. So, 
the admiral decided to send participants of the expedition 
back to Spain with 12 vessels under the leadership of 
Antonio Torres on February 2 besides 500 men, should stay 
in Espanola with him. He sent his “Memories” written in 
Espanola to Spain by means of Torres.  
I want to mention several sentences written there. 
Columbus wrote: “I think, it is better for cannibals and 
Hindus being sent to Castilia… Majesty, I want a lot of 
livestock and goods to be brought here in order to develop 
these lands… In return for it, we may send powerful 
cannibals to Spain. We are sure that, if they’ll live as 
slaves, it will be possible to teach them to live as civilized 
people”. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    138
After it, a lot of slaves began to be brought to Spain 
from coasts of the New World and people accused 
Columbus for it. But I think that, the genius traveler wanted 
to clean Small and Big Anthill Islands of cannibals. He 
defended Hindus, who lived peacefully.  
Soviet ethnographers wrote that, cannibalism existed 
among Caribbean people as well as other nations after 
passage from matriarchy to patriarchy. They thought that, it 
was possible to get courage, promptness and other 
characteristics of enemies by eating their hearts and 
muscles.    
Most of Hindu kins weren’t cannibals, unlike Caribbean 
people. But Columbus’s colleagues introduced all of them 
as cannibals. According to memories of the admiral, 
aborigines weren’t backward of Europeans for their 
mercies. The participant of the second travel Bartolommeo 
de las Casas wrote when the expedition reached Jamaica: 
“When the expedition was in Cuba, indigenous Hindus told 
us that, there was Jamaica Island full of gold in the south… 
We saw that island on May 5. Columbus named it Santiago. 
Half-naked Hindus, who had colored their faces and had 
feathers on their heads, approached our vessels and tried 
to resist us. Columbus ordered to shoot arrows. Hindus 
stopped resistance after six or seven of them were 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    139
wounded…. After it, goodwill Hindus approached us. 
Aborigines brought foods and other goods and began to 
barter with us. They treated us as guests”.    
Hindus tried to meet Europeans hospitably. But 
Spaniards tried to annihilate inhabitants of discovered lands 
for simple reasons. Columbus hadn’t any guilt in this 
business. I. P. Magidovich and V. I. Magidovich wrote in II 
volume of “Historical essays on geographical disco-
veries”: “When the admiral investigated Cuba and 
discovered Jamaica, his brother Bartolommeo Columbus 
brought a lot of soldiers and foods from Spain to Espanola 
with three vessels. Those soldiers began to plunder the 
island and raped women. Some of them were killed by 
Hindus”. Ch. Columbus started occupation of Espanola in 
March of 1495. 
The vice-king of discovered lands attacked the island 
with his soldiers. Soon Spaniards reached a rich valley. 
Beauty of the valley admired Columbus and he named it 
Vega-Real (Valley of King). Spaniards built the fort Saint 
Foma around the valley – between mountains. They 
established a castle near the fort. That place is called 
Fortaleza and it is in Dominican Republic at present. The 
fort Saint Foma became center of the trade of gold.  
 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    140
   
                      The map of the Caribbean Sea 
 
Military operations were continued against resisting 
Hindus. Espanola was occupied by Spaniards in spite of 
Hindus’ resistances. Aborigines had to bear charges with 
gold and cotton. People, who didn’t want to do it, were 
obliged to hide in mountains. Otherwise, they became 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    141
slaves of Spaniards. Most of Hindus, who hid in mountains, 
died of the unknown illness brought by Spaniards. Of 
course, it’s not just to accuse Columbus of mass 
annihilation of Hindus. First, Espanola became colony 
because of being discovered by Europeans. Second, 
aborigines had to fulfil conditions of Spaniards according 
to colonial laws. Otherwise, they would be punished. 
Columbus wanted to declare Espanola capital of discovered 
territories and so, he established the city Santo-Diego on 
that island in 1496. 1 
Columbus appointed his brother Diego ruler of the city 
Isabella and continued the travel with three vessels 
(admiral’s vessel was “Ninia”) on April 24, 1494 in order 
to investigate Cuba. 
The admiral sent 400 people, who committed tyranny, to 
the Fort Saint Foma under the leadership of Alonso Okheda 
in order to simplify his brother’s work and could create 
stability in Isabella.  
Columbus drove a cross into the ground as soon as he 
reached the eastern coast of Cuba. He discovered Jamaica 
either. Spaniards were met sincerely by aborigines when 
they approached most islands. Columbus could approach 
                                                 
    
1
 И. П. Магидович, В. И. Магидович. Очерки по истории географи-
ческих открытий, II том. Москва, “Просвещение”, 1982. стр. 31-32 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    142
discovered islands with great difficulties and sometimes 
bottoms of vessels touched bottom of the ocean. Smaller 
vessels were needed in order to sail between those islands. 
So, the admiral was obliged to return to Espanola on 
September 29. 
 
    
                     Meeting of Spaniards with Hindus  
 
Columbus’s brother Bartolommeo came to Isabella from 
Spain. He was greeted by Ferdinand and Isabella and 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    143
monarchs appointed him and Christopher’s sons as pajs of 
don Juan. Don Bartolommeo didn’t want to stay in Europe 
for a long time and travelled to Espanola with three 
caravels. Colonists looked forward his navy in Espanola.  
It should be noted that, Bartolommeo should be known 
as the leader of the third expedition organized towards 
coasts of the New World. Christopher gave the title “Ade-
lanto” to Bartolommeo as soon as met him in Isabella. So, 
Bartolommeo became plenipotentiary representative of the 
island. He became active assistant of Christopher. The 
admiral knew that, his brother was a great stayer and deci-
sive person, and could overcome difficult situations easily.  
It was difficult for the admiral’s younger brother Diego 
to overcome works in Espanola. He was a gentle man and 
couldn’t cope with impudent hidalgos. So, a lot of robbe-
ries, plundering, threats, raping and battles occurred in the 
island. The commander of the tower Margaret committed 
slaughters there. He and abbot Buil treated people as 
animals. None of Hindus had accepted Christianity until 
Columbus returned to Espanola. Besides it, Buil and 
Margaret returned to Spain with Bartolommeo’s vessels. 
They tried to blot Columbus brothers out in Spain by means 
of slanders.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    144
According to historical sources, Columbus was met with 
chaos when returned to Espanola. Hidalgos didn’t obey 
leaders appointed by the admiral. They rose in rebel against 
Bartolommeo. They shoot arrows on Hindus for pleasure, 
made them to work in plantations, to fish and hunt, to carry 
them on hammocks and used girls for household works. 
Each hidalgo used about ten girls as their wives. 
As Columbus couldn’t overcome that situation, he came 
to an agreement with hidalgos. He gave large land area and 
several Hindus to each rebel. Thus, the vice-king of 
discovered lands created serfdom on coasts of the New 
World. People attached to land might be killed or sold as 
slaves if they would try to escape. It is obvious that, the 
admiral can’t be accused of bad treatment against Hindus. 
Columbus simply couldn’t overcome hidalgos, who had 
traveled to the New World.  
It was necessary to end anarchy in Espanola. Columbus 
allowed to execute Hindus, who killed their owners, in 
order to calm everybody. After it, colonists became more 
active and cruel treatments against Hindus began to expand. 
Hindus, who lived in Haiti, Cuba and Bahamas, were also 
treated badly in spite of their kindnesses. Hindus were 
killed and turned to slaves by colonists when they rise in 
rebel in order to defend their rights. 200 of 400 slaves sent 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    145
to Europe on February 24, 1494 under the leadership of 
Antonio de Torres died on the way between Madeira 
Islands and Cadis and the rest of them were sold as slaves 
in Seville. Those slaves died at the result of unknown 
illness after a short time.  
Besides it, Spaniards tried to take vengeance on Hindus 
for their colleagues killed in the fort La Navidad and began 
to look for Caonabo in order to kill him. Alonso de Okheda 
came to Hindus’ camp and told Caonabo that, they’ll give 
him bronze bell considered for Isabella. But Caonabo had 
to help Spaniards. Caonabo get excited when heard of the 
bell, which was considered miracle for Hindus, and decided 
to join Spaniards together with his fighters. It wasn’t easy 
to caught Caonabo as he had a lot of fighters. That’s why 
Alonso de Okheda decided to play a trick. He said that, in 
Spain, the king sits on his throne after his hands and feet 
are chained up. Then, Okheda offered Caonabo to be the 
king. The Hindu agreed immediately. Okheda chained up 
Caonabo’s hands and feet, put him on his horse and tied 
himself to him. The Spanish commander went to the camp 
of Spaniards located in Isabella and ten Spaniards attacked 
on Caonabo’s fighters. Caonabo would be sent to Spain and 
executed there for his crimes. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    146
Columbus tried to develop coasts of the New World and 
create civilization there. Planted grains and plants had 
abundant fruits. A lot of workshops were established in the 
city and professional masters were prepared there. Women 
brought from Europe also learned those professions. The 
shipbuilding also was developed there. But most vessels, 
which were in the Caribbean Sea, were damaged at the 
result of storms and they needed to be repaired. The 
caravella by name “India” was made in the dockyard of 
Espanola and put into use.  
But it wasn’t possible to liquidate anarchy occurred in 
Espanola though the territory was developing. Columbus 
couldn’t overcome all hidalgos.  
In October of 1495, Columbus understood that, Spanish 
monarchs didn’t trust him. Hidalgos, which had returned to 
Spain, had achieved their goals. The plenipotentiary 
representative of catholic Christians by name Aguado came 
to Espanola and began to investigate the situation when 
Columbus was busy with stabilization of the situation in the 
center of the island. It became clear that, everybody, who 
lived in the island, was dissatisfied, most of them hated 
Columbus and suffered of unknown illness. But the reality 
was different: colonists’ conditions were very good: they 
found gold and exploited Hindus.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    147
Columbus had to return to Spain in order to justify 
himself. He asked his brother to leave Isabella and to found 
new city in the south of Espanola (the capital of Dominican 
Republic – Santo-Domingo). There was a convenient bay, 
rich land and gold in that place. 
The well-known traveler, who had come to coasts of the 
New World with 17 vessels, returned to Spain with two 
caravels – “Ninia” and the first vessel made in Espanola – 
“India”.  
There were 225 Christians, Caonabo and 25 Hindus in 
two small vessels. 
The way to Spain wasn’t convenient unlike the first 
travel. After four weeks – on April 6, 1496, the admiral was 
still in Small Anthelia Islands. Almost all foods had been 
used. Everybody thought that, Columbus wasn’t as skilful 
as before.  
The expedition found some foods in Anthill Islands and 
began to sail towards the west in the Atlantic Ocean on 
April 20. 
Spaniards moved very slowly and undecidedly. After a 
month, they didn’t know where they were.  
They ate 150 g bread each day. According to Colum-
bus’s diary, they starved very much and even some seamen 
offered to eat cannibals or drawn them in order to eat their 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    148
shares. On June 8, Columbus declared that, they would 
reach the Cape Vincent on the next day (it was his progno-
sis made as a prophet) in order to stop such offers. Really, 
they reached Odemir located at 35 miles away from the 
Cape Vincent on the next day. Columbus’s mysterious 
prognosis amazed everybody. When the traveler was near 
Azores, he determined the time when they would reach 
Pyrenean Peninsula approximately. It proves that, 
Columbus knew astronomy very well and was able to carry 
out exact calculations. 
He approached Cadis with two small caravellas on June 
11. All flags of vessels were hanged. Seamen, who were 
very tired and weakened, went ashore.  
Columbus began to live in the house of the abbot and 
historian of Catholic kings from Los-Palazzos by name 
Andres Bernaldes. He stayed there until monarchs invited 
him to the palace and gave his diary to Bernaldes.  
Columbus received invitation of Spanish kings after a 
month. The vice-king sent gold and parrot with his brother 
Don Diego (he was called as Caonabos in Espanola). Don 
Diego took six hundred “castellarios” (ancient golden 
monetary unit) gold and necklace to Spain. Besides them, 
he had a crown decorated with feathers, mask decorated 
with valuable stones and interesting jewelleries. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    149
Monarchs greeted the well-known sea traveler with 
respect, but this meeting differed from the first one. The 
traveler understood that, organization of the next expedition 
wouldn’t be achieved easily. Really, he could get vessels 
for the third travel only after two years. Then, 130 vessels 
accompanied Juan, who would marry in Burgundy, to 
Flandreau. Another armada was taking his future wife 
Margarita to Spain.  
Columbus spent his free times in reading scientific 
books and carrying out calculations concerning navigation 
when he was in Spain. Columbus, who amazed everybody 
with his prognosis, again gave sensational information to 
monarchs. He prognosticated the date when Margarita 
would come to Spain exactly. The admiral’s prognosis was 
correct and he became more influential in Spain.  
Columbus’s rights were restored and his financial 
condition was improved. 
The admiral was obliged to solve problems concerning 
his family before starting his third travel. He could legalize 
his authorities and properties. They should be passed to 
Columbus’s son Diego and to Ferdinand after Diego’s 
death. After death of the traveler’s both sons, Christopher’s 
brothers Bartolommeo and Diego would be the traveler’s 
heirs. The corresponding heir should get the admiral title 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    150
either. Columbus hadn’t forgotten the tradition of Genoa. 
His heir should put money in the bank San-Georgia located 
in the admiral’s native town to make taxes to decrease. 
Besides it, that person had to provide representatives of his 
kin, who lived in their house in Genoa, with money.  
Monarchs tried to make some changes in Columbus’s 
rights before each travel. He was an admiral and all 
captains and travelers had to report to him. But he could 
rule only islands discovered by him. His rights didn’t 
concern large territories or continents discovered 
afterwards. Lands had to be discovered by the admiral and 
he had to report about them. That’s why he tried to go to 
coasts of the New World as soon as possible. 
 
 
 
 
  
  Christopher Columbus’s third travel 
 
I want to reassume that, Columbus should look for Japan 
or Chine by sailing towards the west on 250-300 north 
latitudes if he thought that, he had discovered Asia. But it 
didn’t happen during his third travel.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    151
I will use historical sources in order to describe 
Columbus’s third travel. There were some difficulties in 
organization of the third expedition. Even criminals were 
offered to be freed of penalties. But atheists, killers and 
rapers weren’t invited to the expedition.  
The bishop of Badajoz Fonceca tried to prevent 
Columbus’s third travel. So, the admiral spent four months 
for buying vessels. But Columbus could buy six vessels – 
five caravels and a nao in spite of all difficulties.  
The well-known traveler started his third expedition on 
May 30, 1498 and left the rank of the Guadalquivir River. 
He came to the Port Porto-Santo located in the Madeira 
Island. His father-in-law was governor of this island and his 
wife Felipe lived there. The Madeira Island was at 40 miles 
away and admiral could overcome that distance in three 
days. Columbus spent six days together with his friends and 
remembered past. Nobody envied him for his fame.  
The admiral began to sail towards Homera of Canaries 
located at 290 miles away after taking water and wood. He 
sent three vessels to the Dominica Island. Then those 
vessels had to sail to Santo-Domingo.  
The admiral sailed to the Green Cape Islands with three 
vessels on June 21. As the weather was fine, the expedition 
could overcome 750 miles in six days. Seamen casted in the 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    152
Boavista Gulf and were obliged to leave it because of 
infectious illness. They went to the Portuguese’s colony 
Santiago Island on July 1 in order to find meat. But they 
left there without meat after 8 days.  
The expedition overcame 380 miles in 9 days. The 
weather was very hot. Water barrels cracked of hot and 
foods went bad. The wind began to blow on June 22 and 
vessels’ speeds were increased.  
The admiral changed direction towards the south-west in 
order to reach the equator and sail to coasts of the New 
World. As the weather was very hot, the expedition was 
obliged to sail on 100 north latitude.  
The expedition discovered three hills on July 31 owing 
to the seaman by name Alonso Peres and Columbus named 
that place Trinidad. Seamen reached the Cape of Sand (the 
Cape Icacos located in the south-west of Trinidad) on 
August 1. There was a land area in the west – it was rank of 
the Orinoco River. Columbus named that territory Garcia. 
The Trinidad Island was at two liq (12 km) away from that 
territory.  
Vessels came to the Boca de la Sierpe (“Mouth of the 
snake”) by means of the wind. The water was fresh there. 
The admiral sailed towards the north and discovered the 
second strait between the continent and Trinidad and 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    153
named it Bocas Del Dragon (Mouths of the dragon). After a 
while, a lot of boats of Hindus approached the vessel. 
Columbus described it in his diary: “Aborigines approac-
hed our vessels and tried to talk to us. Big gold accessories 
were hanged on their necks. Some of them had pearls on 
their wrists. They said that, pearls are found in the north”. 
Spaniards were greeted by Hindus sincerely. The 
admiral sent the smallest caravel “Corres” to the western 
coast of the Gulf of Paria in order to learn whether the land 
was a continent or not. But they were obliged to return 
from there.  
After it, vessels passed ranks of Amana, San-Juan and 
Rio-Grande and reached the fourth bay. The water was very 
fresh there. 
After Columbus entered the Gulf of Paria, he found a lot 
of fresh water there. Such water can’t be in the island. It 
proved that he had discovered a continent. The admiral 
wrote following sentences on August 15 in his diary: “Is 
this a continent? Is this a new world? 
I think it is an unknown island and there is a lot of fresh 
water here. I think the river comes from unknown territory 
located in the south”. 
Columbus continued sailing towards the west. Then he 
continued travel towards Espanola. He met his brother 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    154
Bartolommeo on the way to Espanola. They entered the 
port of the new capital located in the rank of the Osalia 
River.  
Columbus made his greatest discovery during his third 
travel. He discovered a huge land area. As the admiral 
didn’t want to attract attention of people to that territory, he 
described it as an archipelago in his diary. I’m sure that, the 
well-known traveler made this mistake deliberately. The 
professional seaman Columbus knew that the Orinoco 
River couldn’t be in any large island.  
The hard situation occurred in Espanola waited 
Columbus brothers. Colonists had risen in rebel under the 
leadership of Francisco Roldan. Number of rebels was 
enough large. Francisco Roldan had occupied center of the 
island together with Hindus kasic by name Guariones. 
Bartolommeo attacked rebels with his soldiers.  
Columbus’s vessels were taken by Roldan. They were 
obliged to give food stocks to rebels. The admiral prepared 
report about results of the third travel, send it to Spanish 
monarchs and asked help for suppression of rebel. But that 
report wasn’t taken into consideration. Noblemen wanted to 
use that rebel against Columbus.  
The admiral’s indecisiveness caused great problems for 
him. He asked Spanish monarchs to send someone to 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    155
Espanola for stabilization of the situation. So, he introduced 
himself as an incapable person.  
Monarchs decided to send the inspector by name 
Francisco Bobadilla to coasts of the New World. He 
reached Santo-Domingo on August 25, 1500. Then, Colum-
bus fought against one of Roldan’s supporters Adrian de 
Moxica.  
When Bobadilla reached the New World he saw that, 
seven rebels were hanged. It proved that, Columbus treated 
Spaniards’ cruelly. The younger brother of Columbus 
Diego didn’t agree to give five rebels, who would be 
murdered, to Bobadilla. So, Ch. Columbus and his brothers 
were arrested by the representative of Spanish monarchs. 
Columbus was sent to Spain at the beginning of October 
of 1500 in order to be judged. He reached the port Cadis at 
the end of the month. People, who respected the traveler, 
tried to help him. The admiral could pass this “exam” 
successfully.  
Columbus was set free as his supporters mentioned that 
he was guiltless and monarchs were obliged to restore his 
rights and privileges. He introduced written and verbal 
explanations about the anarchy occurred on coasts of the 
New World. His guiltlessness was almost proved. But 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    156
monarchs were dissatisfied with Columbus’s activity in 
Espanola especially for financial reasons.  
Monarchs earned less at the result of the expedition. 
Then, the Portuguese traveler Vasco da Gama discovered 
the seaway to India (1498). He could establish commercial 
relations with India and brought valuable spices to his 
motherland. Thus, Spaniards began to understand that 
Columbus had discovered unknown territory. 
When monarchs thought that, Columbus hadn’t disco-
vered India, they liquidated his monopoly on discovered 
lands in 1499. Most colleagues of the admiral used this 
opportunity and began to organize expeditions to those 
territories.  
Surely, such expeditions should be leaded by 
experienced travelers. Alonso de Okheda and Juan de la 
Cosa were chosen for this purpose. They were sent to the 
south of the Caribbean Sea, discovered Curacao, Aruba and 
Bonaire (these islands belong to Holland at present) in 1499 
and found plenty of pearls there. Okheda didn’t give any 
information to the admiral about those discoveries.  
After a while, the participant of Columbus’s three travels 
Pedro Alonso Nino (Peralonso) could get permission to 
organize expedition to coasts of the New World. He 
discovered the Margarita Island, Araya Peninsula and 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    157
Cariaco Basin located in the north of Venezuela and 
brought 38 kg pearls. After it, Vicente Janez Pinson 
discovered the San Roka Cape of Brazil (50 south latitude) 
on January 26, 1500 and Amazon River after several days. 
Reports on those discoveries were given to monarchs and 
Columbus knew nothing about them.  
After Bobadilla’s report, Nicolas de Ovando was 
appointed ruler of Espanola. Though according to Bobadil-
la’s laws, Hindus working in mines got salaries, gold and 
pearls were brought from Espanola and Coast of Pearl to 
Spain. Hundreds of migrants went to Anthill Islands in or-
der to gain easy profits. 30 vessels took 25 thousand people 
to Santo-Domingo under the leadership of Ovando in April 
of 1502. Mass annihilation of aborigines was started after 
mass migrations were organized to the New World.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    158
   Christopher Columbus’s fourth travel  
 
It became more difficult for Columbus to organize new 
expedition after the third travel. Other expeditions were 
organized under leadership of different sea travelers. 
Nicolas Ovando was appointed a governor of India on 
September 3, 1502. He wasn’t a vice-king, but Columbus 
also hadn’t that title, though the Spanish king hadn’t 
repealed it. 
When Columbus was obliged to stay in Spain, Rodrigo 
de Bastidas discovered the north-western coast of South 
America and lands between Venezuela and Darien. 
Portuguese sea travelers Corterial and Pedro Cabral 
discovered the Newfoundland Island of North America and 
Brazil (April 22, 1500). 
Though Columbus couldn’t find vessels for the fourth 
travel, he knew that, 30 vessels - 24 caravels, 5 naos and a 
bark - had been sent to the New World on February 13, 
1502. 
Columbus made new plans in order to deceive 
monarchs. As it was mentioned above, Rodrigo de Bastidas 
had discovered Darien. Columbus told monarchs that, lands 
discovered by Bastidas might be part of Indochina and 
there should be a strait for going to India. He offered to find 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    159
that strait and to bring a lot of spices from India to Spain. 
That idea looked persuasive. Monarchs could appoint other 
captain for his mission, but they needed Columbus’s 
navigation experience, knowledge and skills of carrying out 
calculations. This mission could be overcome only by 
Columbus.  
It was prohibited for Columbus to travel to Espanola 
before the fourth travel. He could visit it only on his way 
back to Spain in case of necessity.  
At last the traveler could get four vessels with 140 
seamen for the next expedition. The expedition left Cadis 
on May 11, 1502. Seamen reached the Port Artsil in two 
days and sailed towards Gran Canaria. They came to 
Anthills from Canaries on May 25 and approached the 
Martinique Island on June 15. It was the shortest passage of 
Columbus. Then, Columbus passed Small Anthill Islands 
and approached Santo-Domingo on June 23. But the 
governor of the island Ovando didn’t allow him to enter the 
port.  
Columbus didn’t leave the port. He mentioned that, 
tornado would break out soon, so, the governor should keep 
vessels in a safe place. But Ovando didn’t listen to the well-
known traveler and sent 30 vessels to the Spain with a lot 
of goods. Columbus’s enemy Bobadilla was in the main 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    160
vessel. Tornado broke out as soon as vessels left Espanola. 
20 vessels and 500 people went down. Bobadilla also died 
at the result of that tragedy. Escaped vessels returned to 
Santo-Domingo. Only the smallest vessel carrying 4000 
golden peso hadn’t damaged at the result of tornado.  
The governor of Espanola was guilty as he didn’t listen 
to Columbus. But he accused Columbus of bewitching. The 
well-known traveler took damaged vessels to the safe place 
and rescued seamen. He approached Puerto-Escondido 
secretly in order to restore vessels. Columbus reached 
Honduras on July 27. The expedition continued travel 
towards the east without having a rest.  
Columbus declared discovery of Honduras on August 
14. The expedition reached the La Huerta Island of today’s 
Costa-Rica on September 25. Aborigines called that place 
Kvirekvetana. There Columbus could get a lot of gold by 
means of copper.  
Columbus reached the coast of Viroqua on October 17. 
His grandson got the title Herzog of Viroqua in 1536 and 
Columbus’s kin still has this title. As the weather was bad, 
Spaniards spent three months in Viroqua. Columbus 
reached to Puerto-Belo with great difficulties on Novem-
ber 2.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    161
Seamen continued travel on November 9 as soon as the 
weather became milder and casted in the Bay Retreat on 
November 26.  
 
 
                       Columbus is in Honduras  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    162
The Columbus brought vessels to the narrowest part of 
Panama. They needed to overcome several kilometres in 
order to reach the Pacific Ocean, but seamen hadn’t forces 
to continue the travel. According to some scientists, 
Columbus thought that, there was Chine and India on the 
other side of Panama. But to my mind, Columbus knew 
that, there was a large water basin separating new continent 
and Asia on the other side of the isthmus. Perhaps, he 
planned to discover that water basin during his fifth travel.  
Spaniards casted in the rank of a river on January 6 and 
admiral named that place Belen. He founded a settlement 
and castle there. His purpose was to find a lot of gold. But 
seamen could find very little gold. Columbus knew that, he 
wouldn’t be able to overcome that mission without 
additional assistance of Spain. He wanted to leave 
Bartolommeo in Belen and to go to Spain. But Columbus 
had weakened during the last travel.  
Bartolommeo didn’t give up looking for money. He did 
his best for finding more valuable metals. Spaniards 
founded the settlement Santa Maria de Belen besides 
looking for gold.  
They left Belen on April 16, 1503 with three caravels. 
They burned the fourth caravel as it had rotted. Another 
caravel was burned on April 23 in Porto-Belo. Other two 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    163
caravels also had damaged. Spaniards had only one boat for 
approaching the coast. 
  
   
   Route scheme of Columbus’s four travels on the Caribbean Sea 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    164
Two vessels began to sail towards the north on May 1 
and approached coasts of Cuba on May 12. Vessels leaked 
and it was impossible to go to Espanola with them. So, 
Columbus began to sail towards Jamaica and reached the 
Bay Puerto Santa Gloria on June 25. 
That port was convenient for Spaniards. There was fresh 
water and village of Hindus and climate was mild. The 
expedition consisted of 116 people and they had to be 
provided with food. Brave Diego Mendes went to the 
village of Hindus and wanted food for his friends. Besides 
it, he went to Ovando and informed him about the admiral’s 
situation. But the governor kept Mendes in his camp for 
seven months instead of helping the expedition.  
After three vessels came to Santo-Domingo from Spain, 
Mendes could send one of them to the admiral. Then, he 
went to Spain in order to take Columbus’s letter to 
monarchs. 
Columbus’s expedition left Jamaica on July 29 after 
staying there for a year and a day and reached Santo-
Domingo on August 13. Columbus, his son Ferdinand and 
his brother Bartolommeo and 22 seamen began to sail 
towards Spain. They could reach the Port San-lucar de 
Barrameda after 56 days – on November 7. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    165
State officials didn’t greet Columbus after the fourth 
travel and he wasn’t invited to the palace.  
 
 
 
 
  Historical achievements of Christopher    
     Columbus weren’t appreciated by monarchs  
                       as necessary  
 
As the situation was hard in the palace, the admiral 
wasn’t invited there. Columbus’s supporter Isabella was 
dying. She died on November 26 - 19 days after Columbus 
returned from the travel. So, the independent activity of the 
well-known traveler came to the end.  
I described the chronology of Columbus’s four travels in 
order to show that, coasts of the New World weren’t 
discovered easily.  
Columbus discovered many islands as Montserrat, 
Antigua, Nevis, Saint-Kitts, Sint Eustatius, Saba and Santa-
Cruz between November 11 and 13 after the Guadeloupe 
Island was discovered. There were sowing areas in Santa-
Cruz. Columbus decided to find a guide in this island in 
order to reach Espanola and discover other important 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    166
islands and so, sent the boat full of people and weapons to 
the island. Spaniards could take several women and boys. 
But they met with Caribbean people’s canoe when returned 
back. Caribbean people were surprised as saw the great 
vessel of seamen. They couldn’t imagine such great vessel. 
Columbus could see their surprises. The admiral knew that 
it wasn’t strange for Asians to see sailing vessels.  
Besides being surprised, aborigines were frightened and 
thought that, Europeans had come from the other world. 
The doctor of the expedition Diego Alvarez Chanca 
descryibed meeting of aborigines of Santa-Cruz and 
Spaniards: “As Hindus were surrounded by the boat and 
vessel, they decided to resist. There were four men and two 
women in Hindus’ boat. We were 25 people. Hindus began 
to shoot arrows. Women weren’t worse than men. They 
wounded two of us. If we should try to drown them, our 
losses would be more than theirs. Aborigines lied down and 
continued shooting… We could take prison only one of 
them after wounding him by means of spear”. 
It proves that, Hindus did their best for their freedom. 
Columbus understood that, it wouldn’t be easy to occupy 
their lands. Really, Caribbean people were very brave. But 
Spanish hidalgos could overcome them afterwards. Hindus, 
who first respected Spaniards, were annihilated. Number of 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    167
aborigines of Anthill Islands began to decrease. Only 500 
of 100000 people survived between 1492 and 1548 in 
Espanola. It isn’t just to accuse Columbus of these 
tragedies. The well-known traveler wanted to civilize the 
Old World. 
The continent located on the other side of the ocean was 
discovered in 1492 owing to the skills of Columbus. The 
admiral could use Passats as the experienced navigator. If 
another seaman could discover coasts of the New World, he 
couldn’t return back safe and sound. It was very difficult to 
find Passats and return to Spain after discovery of Haiti and 
Anthill Islands. So, expeditions could die in the ocean. 
America couldn’t be discovered either in 1492, or in 50-60 
years after that time without Columbus. Improvement of 
navigation equipments, development of the navigation 
system and determination of geographical coordinates on 
the open ocean were necessary for discovery of the new 
continent. If he couldn’t return from the first travel safe and 
sound, coasts of the New World wouldn’t be discovered in 
time. Then, number of travelers traveling to the west of the 
Atlantic Ocean - Vogado, Thelles, Estreita, Ferdinand van 
Olmen and Christopher Columbus - would increase and 
number of travelers traveling to dangerous places would 
decrease significantly.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    168
   
   Route scheme of Columbus’s four travels on the Atlantic Ocean 
 
It is interesting that, 1492 - the year when Columbus 
started his travel - was successful in the history of 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    169
geographical discoveries of the global importance. The sea 
traveler of Portugal Bartolommeo Dias discovered the Cape 
of Good Hope in 1488. Though the way to India was open, 
the seaway hadn’t been discovered yet. If Vasco da Gama 
would discover the way to India before 1492, but not in 
1488, Spanish monarchs wouldn’t allow Columbus to start 
his travel. It means that, Columbus could accelerate 
discovery of the New World for 100 years by passing ahead 
of Vasco da Gama for 6 years. So, the great traveler could 
create a mystery in the field of geographic discoveries by 
making that discovery.  
We wouldn’t have chance to know Francisco Pissarro, 
Hernan Cortez, Vasco de Balboa, Alonso de Okheda, Pedro 
Alonso (Peralonso) Nino, Vicente Janez Pinson, Juan Dias 
Solis, Francisco Hernandez Cordova, Alvaro Nunez Cabeza 
de Vaca, Martin Hernandez Enciso, Andres Urdaneta, Die-
go Lepe, Alonso Velez de Mendoza, Rodrigo de Bastidas, 
Sebastian Ocampo, Juan Ponce da Leon, Francisco de 
Orellana, Juan de Grijalva, Gaspar Espinosa and other 
travelers without Christopher Columbus. 
Columbus travelled to coasts of the New World for four 
times and investigated different places of the Caribbean Sea 
each time. The admiral discovered Haiti, Cuba and 
Bahamas during his first travel (1492-1493), Puerto-Rico 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    170
and Jamaica located in the north-east of Small Anthill 
Islands during the second travel (1493-1496). Besides it, 
the admiral investigated the southern coasts of Espanola 
and Cuba. Columbus discovered the southern part of Small 
Anthill Islands, northern coast of the continent and rank of 
the Orinoco River during his third travel (1498-1500). He 
discovered Dominica and Martinique islands and eastern 
coasts of the Golden Castilia during the fourth travel (1502-
1504). Thus, Columbus completed discovery of important 
places of the Caribbean Sea. 
When he returned to Spain in 1504 after his last voyage, 
Columbus was fifty-three and in poor health. Inflammation 
of the eyes sometimes made it impossible for him to read 
and he suffered agonies from what was once diagnosed as 
gout or arthritis, but is now suspected to have been 
something called Reiter’s syndrome. He went to Seville and 
waited in vain for a summons to court. His patrons King 
Ferdinand and Queen Isabella had doubts about his mental 
condition and had no intention of giving him any official 
position, and Isabella was in any case only three weeks 
away from her death. 
Columbus lived most of his last eighteen months 
unhappily in Valladolid, comfortably off and cared for by 
his family, but in an increasingly disturbed state of mind 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    171
and ceaselessly agitating for the official recognition, money 
and prerogatives that had been promised him. He managed 
a brief word with the king at Segovia in 1505, struggling 
there on mule-back, but Ferdinand was noncommittal and 
Columbus was mainly represented at court by his elder son 
Diego, a member of the royal guard. 
 
             
                                Old Columbus  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    172
On May 20th Christopher Columbus took a sudden turn 
for the worse. Hissons Diego and Ferdinand, his brother 
Diego and a few old shipmates were at the bedside when a 
priest said Mass and the great explorer was heard to say 
that into God's hands he commended his spirit. After the 
funeral at Valladolid, Columbus was buried in the 
Carthusian monastery of Santa Maria de las Cuevas in 
Seville. The body was exhumed in 1542 and taken to Santo 
Domingo in the Caribbean, where it remained until the 
island was ceded to the French in the 1790s, when it was 
moved again, to Havana. After the Spanish-American war 
of 1898 and Spain’s loss of Cuba, Christopher Columbus’s 
remains were at last returned to Spain and buried in Seville 
Cathedral. 
The traveler could realize his fifth travel to the New 
World if didn’t die. Columbus had rights on lands 
discovered by him. But he had deceived his supporters 
Isabella and Ferdinand. So, lands discovered by him were 
named in favour of other traveler at the result of it. Coasts 
of the New World had to be named “Columbia” in favour 
of the Genoese seamen instead of “America”. Columbus 
noted results of his travels in the diary, which was prepared 
for being given to the financer Luis de Santangel, and 
described discovered lands as parts of Japan, Chine and 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    173
India. That report was published for thirty times and 
accelerated organization of the next expedition. But it 
helped Amerigo Vespucci in appropriation of Columbus’s 
success. Vespucci could achieve naming discovered 
continent “America” with helps of Columbus’s opponents 
and the king Ferdinand.  
 
   
  The death of Columbus. Lithograph by L. Prang & Co., 1893 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    174
 
Discovery of America by Normans and     
 indifference concerning that discovery 
 
Toscanelli and Columbus were aware of Tusi’s scientific 
achievements. But did they know anything about expedi-
tions of Normans (Vikings) organized towards the north-
eastern coasts of America? 
Columbus had read a lot of books on history and 
geography when he prepared his project. He wanted to 
know how long he had to sail towards the west in order to 
see a huge land area in the west of the Atlantic Ocean. Did 
anybody tried to sail to the west of the Atlantic Ocean 
besides Vogado and van Olmen? The professional 
navigator had read annals of Scandinavian historians 
besides works of Marco Polo and other travelers. Surely, he 
was aware of Vikings’ travels towards the north-western 
part of the Atlantics. But Vikings’ expeditions weren’t 
interesting for most travelers. The reason was the map 
made by the Dane cartographer Claus in 1427. Claus had 
described Greenland and “Vinland” united with the north-
western part of Europe on his map. Thus, land areas were 
obstacles for seamen in the northern part of the Atlantic 
Ocean. Besides it, great parts of those lands were described 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    175
in Poles. It means that, it was impossible to sail to those 
lands.  
It should be noted that, Normans had traveled to costs of 
America 500 years before Columbus. I’ll use historical 
sources in order to lighten this issue.  
The sensational article was published in the newspaper 
“New-York times” of the USA on October 10, 1965: 
“Scientists of the Yale University made a great discovery in 
the field of cartography – the map of coasts of the New 
World made by Leif Ericson in XI century was found”.  
The map was also published in the newspaper. Experts 
determined that, the map had been made in 1440 – 50 years 
before Columbus’s first travel. 1 
The Irish annalist of the middle ages Dicuil wrote: “A 
group of Irish monarchs went to Spain at the end of VIII 
century and some of them stayed there”. 
One of Viking leaders Naddod was lost at the result of 
storm in 867 when he traveled from Norway to Faroe 
Islands. He approached an island covered with snow by 
accident and named it Iceland. 
Another group of Vikings went round Iceland under the 
leadership of Gardarin and learned that, it was located on 
                                                 
   1 Гуляев В. И. Доколумбовы плавания в Америку: Мифы и 
реальность. «Международные отношения», Москва, 1991. стр. 10 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    176
the island. Erik Blonde left Iceland in 981 or 982 and 
discovered Greenland.  
Normans established settlements in lands discovered in 
the north-eastern part of the Atlantic Ocean and informed 
the Pope about it. As welfares of new colonies were impro-
ved, the Pope included Greenland in his eparchy in 1112 
and appointed Erik Gnuffson the first bishop of the largest 
island of the world. Several churches were established in 
the island. The last bishop of Greenland Alf died in 1377. 
So, colonial possessions began to decline there.  
According to the source of Iceland of 1347, Vikings 
often visited America 347 years after its discovery.  
But there wasn’t any information in countries located in 
the south of Europe about lands located in the west of 
Greenland. Thus, results of mentioned discoveries were 
known only in the northern countries.  
The historian R. Henning wrote: “Discoveries of 
Normans made in the western part of the ocean were 
known in the north of Europe only. Other countries knew 
nothing about them. Even there weren’t exact proofs about 
existence of countries in the west of Greenland”.1  
That’s why Christopher Columbus didn’t know anything 
about Normans’ expeditions organized towards the north-
                                                 
        
1
 Хенниг Р. Неведомые земли. Том II. Москва, 1961. стр. 353 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    177
west of the Atlantic Ocean. Otherwise, he could take 
Vikings’ routes into account during preparation of his 
transatlantic project. But it wasn’t real to use those routes 
for Columbus. They were very cold and dangerous for 
Spaniards.  
 
 
 
 
 
    Achievements of Columbus in fields of    
  geography and history aren’t appreciated  
                      by the humanity  
 
New ship constructions were made, navigation equip-
ments were improved and new maps of coastlines were 
made. There was a convenient ground for great geographic 
discoveries.  
Seamen were interested in ways to India, Chine and 
Japan, merchants and European monarchs were interested 
in spices, valuable metals and silk clothes. There were two 
ways towards mentioned countries: the land way extending 
towards the east and seaway around Africa. The first way 
was dangerous for merchants and supporters of expeditions 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    178
at the end of XV century. That way, which was called as 
“Silk way”, was under the control of the Ottoman Empire. 
The second way hadn’t been discovered completely. 
Navigation experts of Portugal tried to discover that way 
and organized preparation of maps, which included outlines 
of Africa and Arabian Sea.  
The Great Venetian map was especially important for 
seamen and scientists. The eastern way to India had been 
described on that map clearly. But P. Toscanelli had 
described India in the west of Europe and mentioned that, it 
was possible to go to Japan, India and Chine by using the 
western way. The spherical form of the Earth was described 
on the globe made by the astronomer and traveler of 
Nurnberg Martin Behaim in 1492. But Columbus hadn’t 
seen that globe before his first travel.  
Even scientists of the ancient time mentioned that the 
Earth was spherical. But travelers didn’t try to apply this 
idea.  
Rudolf Balandin wrote in the book “100 greatest 
geographical discoveries”: “Columbus had a great role in 
discovery of the Earth’s form, existence of settled lands in 
Atlantics (Plato’s Atlantics) and possibility of going to the 
east by sailing towards the west. It was mentioned by 
Eratosthenes and Strabo accepted his ideas. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    179
Columbus described the Earth as a pear unlike Ptolemy 
and Kosma Indopoklov. The traveler called upper part of 
the pear “Protuberance of Heaven” and had discovered 
that part during his third travel. It was considered the rank 
of the Orinoco River”.1 
Columbus discovered mentioned place (rank of the 
Orinoco River) during his third travel (1498-1500) and 
called that place “heaven” of the Earth. 
Columbus became very popular in Spain and other 
countries. His enemies tried to disgrace the traveler. Even 
they accepted Amerigo Vespucci as the discoverer of coasts 
of the New World.  
Valery Gulyayev, who was known as the author of a lot 
of scientific works, wrote in his book “Travels to America 
before Columbus, myths and realities”: “Columbus had 
never been on coasts of North America. He could discover 
islands of the Caribbean Sea and part of the eastern 
coastline of Central America (Honduras, Nicaragua, 
Costa-Rika and Panama) during his fourth travel in 1502. 
North America was discovered by the English traveler John 
Cabot. 
                                                 
       
1
 Баландин Р. К. Маркин В. А. Сто великих географических 
открытий. Москва, «Вече», 2000 стр. 68-69  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    180
Columbus thought that, he had discovered India. So, he 
is considered one of main figures of the age of great 
geographic discoveries. The genius Genoese traveler 
established intensive relations between Old and New 
Worlds”. 1  
If Columbus couldn’t organize travels towards the west 
of the Atlantic Ocean, there wouldn’t be any relation 
between the Eastern and Western Hemispheres. The only 
mistake of Columbus was declaring discovered lands as the 
eastern part of Asia.  
I want reemphasize relations between Nasiraddin Tusi, 
Paolo Toscanelli and Christopher Columbus. As it is 
known, Columbus lived in Portugal and its colonies 
temporarily and was interested in navigation. His brother 
Bartolommeo was a cartographer wherever he lived. The 
most educated merchants learned that profession as it had 
become popular in the Apennine Peninsula.  
Cartography and map trade were considered profitable 
occupations in European countries then. Bartolommeo 
Columbus used to buy and sell modern and ancient maps. 
Probably, he had found copies of maps made during the age 
of Macedonian Isgandar. 
                                                 
       1 Гуляев В. И. Доколумбовы плавания в Америку: Мифы и 
реальность. «Международные отношения», Москва, 1991. стр. 10-11 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    181
Knowing navigation and coastlines was very important 
for seamen sailing across the Mediterranean Sea. There was 
strong competition between Catalan and Italian experts in 
the field of cartography. Bartolommeo got acquainted with 
cartographers, geographers, archivists and library directors 
in several cities of Italy when looked for maps. He got 
acquainted with Toscanelli in Florentine. As it was mentio-
ned above, the well-known scientist leaded N. Niccolini’s 
library besides carrying out other works. Of course, there 
were a lot of materials about geography and astronomy.  
In general, Toscanelli was known as well-known expert 
of geography and everybody tried to be his friend. Besides 
Christopher Columbus, Bartolommeo Columbus also 
visited the library leaded by Toscanelli when he was in 
Florentine and analyzed necessary materials kept there. He 
could be indifferent to strange maps kept in the library as 
exponents. Bartolommeo was especially interested in the 
map, which described outlines of the land located in the 
west of the Atlantic Ocean and wanted to get the map made 
in Maragha observatory. I think Bartolommeo informed 
Christopher about mentioned map and he copied it. I have 
proved that, Columbus had discovered coasts of the New 
World by means of the map made by the well-known 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    182
Azerbaijani astronomer and mathematician Nasiraddin 
Tusi.  
Though Columbus could do Spanish monarchs’ 
biddings, he wasn’t rewarded by them and the world 
community as necessary. 
But the traveler’s services were appreciated afterwards. 
There is a country, river, state etc. named in favour of 
Columbus.  
The Norwegian archaeologist Kh. Ingstad found 
settlements, where Normans lived in X-XI centuries, in 60th 
years in the north of the island of Newfoundland and it 
proved that, Europeans had traveled to the New World 500 
years before Columbus and settled there. So, the president 
of the USA Lyndon Johnson accepted a law about 
celebrating the 9th of October as the day of Leif Ericson in 
1964. And Leif Ericson began to be known as the 
discoverer of coasts of the New World.  
Of course, the day of Columbus is also celebrated. But 
the day of Leif Ericson is celebrated three days before it. 
Even supporters of Columbus held demonstrations on 
October 12, 1965 in order to protest it.  
I can’t accept the decision of Lyndon Johnson. America 
was discovered by Columbus on October 12, 1492. But the 
date of Vikings’ discovery is unknown. I think only one 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    183
day may be celebrated as the day of discovery of America 
and it should be the 12th of October! 
 
 
 
 
 
Solution of most problems concerning    
                        Columbus 
 
1. Most authors thought that, Columbus had listened 
Toscanelli’s advices when he was in Italy. He didn’t apply 
those advices only in several principles. But he didn’t agree 
with some ideas. According to Toscanelli’s calculations, 
measurements of the Earth were smaller than real 
measurements (according to calculations of the Greek 
scientist Eratosthenes, the length of the Earth’s outline was 
43625 km). If Columbus believed in Toscanelli, he would 
sail towards Eastern Asia through the Atlantic Ocean. 
Columbus declared that, he had discovered Eastern Asia 
though knew that, discovered territory was the land, which 
was unknown in the Old World according to Tusi’s 
calculations. But he deceived himself when tried to deceive 
Spanish monarchs.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    184
He kept it secret until his death and thought that, his 
defenders will lay bare the truth after his death and the 
world community would be aware of Columbus’s 
discoveries.  
2. I think that, the well-known Azerbaijani astronomer 
and mathematician Nasiraddin Tusi had a great role in 
discovery of coasts of the New World. He had drawn 
outlines of America and calculated its coordinates with the 
help of stars and celestial bodies. Columbus had determined 
according to his calculations that, there was a huge 
territory, which was unknown in Europe, in the other side 
of the Atlantic Ocean at about 5500-6000 km and he 
organized expedition towards that territory. Really, Tusi 
had described the huge territory located in the west on the 
map made in Maragha observatory. It shouldn’t be 
forgotten that, all geographic measurements were 
determined with the help of the Moon, Sun and stars during 
ocean passages. It wasn’t difficult for Columbus to find 
mentioned territory as he was an experienced seaman and 
professional astronomer. 
3. Why did Columbus describe the territory he 
discovered as Eastern Asia? May be, he didn’t want people 
to move to coasts of the New World. Otherwise, Spaniards 
could appropriate discovered territories gradually. It 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    185
contradicted Columbus’s plans. But what was the 
difference between Eastern Asia and New World? Why 
wouldn’t Eastern Asia be appropriated? Columbus could be 
considered the heir of territories he discovered, according 
to the contract signed with rulers of Spain Isabella of 
Castilia and Ferdinand of Aragon. Discovered territories 
were known as eastern coasts of Asia. It means that, if the 
expedition would discover another unknown territory, 
Columbus would lose monopoly of organization of 
expeditions towards those territories. Then, other sea 
travelers would organize expeditions towards mentioned 
part of the Atlantic Ocean.  
4. Columbus knew that, the territory he looked for was 
unknown for Europeans and besides it, he knew the 
distance between that territory and Pyrenean peninsula. The 
rebellion of seamen occurred near coasts of the New World 
proved it as the commander of the expedition asked for 
only there days in addition. As it was mentioned above, 
Guanahani Island of Bahamas was discovered twenty six 
hours after added period. Thus, Columbus knew that, huge 
territory of the Western Hemisphere wasn’t far away. The 
unknown territory should be located in the east of the 
expedition’s location according to Tusi’s map. May be, 
Columbus thought that, the route of the expedition hadn’t 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    186
been determined precisely. So, he thought that, the 
unknown territory described on Tusi’s map wasn’t in the 
east. Every day after October came, Columbus was sure 
that, he would meet with the land.  
5. According to the Professor H. Mammadbayli, who 
investigated Tusi’s activity, astronomers and geographers 
of that time were aware of existence of America in the 
Western Hemisphere. It means that, the map made by Tusi 
in Maragha wasn’t kept as the personal property of Polos 
for a long time after being brought from Chine to the 
Apennine Peninsula. The map was taken out of Venetia 
after a short time and was found by people interested in 
astronomy and geography. People, who analyzed the map, 
thought that, the coastline described in the western coast of 
the Atlantic Ocean was Far Eastern Asia. Why did they 
think so? 
Progressive-minded people of that time believed that, the 
Earth was spherical. Before Columbus’s travel people 
thought that, the Old World consisted of three continents. It 
was difficult to imagine existence of another continent. So, 
only the eastern part of Asia could be situated in the west of 
the Atlantic Ocean. Any huge territory located in the east of 
the Pacific Ocean was considered western part of Europe. 
Thus, if Tusi’s map was known by experts before being in 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    187
the library of Florentine, that territory was considered Asia. 
P. Toscanelli thought that, mentioned territory was remote 
eastern part of Asia. So, the Earth’s measurements were 
considered very small.  
6. Columbus believed that, the territory located in the 
west of the Atlantic Ocean, which was described on Tusi’s 
map, was unknown territory. But he kept it secret for some 
reasons. If he would base on the map made by the 
Florentine scientist, he had to sail towards the west through 
35-400 north latitudes and he would reach Cipango then. 
According to maps of that time, Japan and Chine were 
situated at 35-400 north latitudes. But Columbus changed 
his route towards south-west when he passed the Atlantic 
Ocean and preferred 20-250 north latitudes. So, the 
expedition met with Bahamas (Guanahani Island).  
7. Columbus usually thought about the future of 
geographical points he discovered. But he didn’t use to 
explain essences of most discoveries to members of 
expeditions and its supporters.  
The admiral knew that, there was a huge water basin at 
several mils towards the west and it separated the continent 
he would discover from Asia when he was in Belen. So, the 
well-known sea traveler understood that, calculations of the 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    188
Greek scientist Eratosthenes concerning the Earth’s 
measurements were right.   
 
   
 
Besides it, Columbus used to talk to indigenous 
population when he approached shores and asked where 
large gold deposits were. Probably aborigines of Panama 
had explained him that, gold was mostly brought from Biru. 
So, it should attract the admiral’s attention and surely, he 
would plan to visit that country. According to the history, 
Martin Enciso Hernandez, Diego de Nicuesa, Vasco Nunez 
de Balboa, Pedro Arias Avila (Pedrarias) and Francisco 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    189
Pissarro heard a lot about Biru when they were in Panama. 
Columbus had to save his authority over Spanish monarchs. 
Surely, he had shared his ideas with his brother 
Bartolommeo.  
Columbus knew that, the coastline located in the west of 
the Caribbean Sea would help him to realize his future 
plans and his children would be the richest people of Spain. 
The admiral declared his son Ferdinand heir of Belen and 
entrusted his heirs with the discovery of Biru. But 
Columbus’s family lost their monopoly on the Caribbean 
Sea and Biru was discovered by Francisco Pissarro in 1532. 
8. It is possible to prove that, scientists, who wrote that, 
Columbus had discovered part of Asia, were wrong. As it 
was mentioned above, Columbus had enough information 
about clothes, traditions and races of population of Japan, 
Chine and India when he started his travel. He had 
discovered Haiti, Cuba and Bahamas but hadn’t met with 
those populations.  
If geographers were right, the Genoese admiral would 
return to Spain after he discovered Bahamas. But, 
Columbus travelled to coasts of Central America and 
investigated very large territory. That territory didn’t 
resemble Asia. As Columbus was a skilful geographer, he 
couldn’t mix Asia and coasts of the New World up. If the 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    190
admiral did it, he couldn’t overcome the expedition towards 
the west of the Atlantic Ocean. It was impossible for a 
seaman, who had made such mistake.  
9. Amerigo Vespucci tried to appropriate Columbus’s 
victory. The Florentine cosmographer had prepared for this 
purpose for many years.  
Alonso Okheda had seen the map of the Gulf of Paria 
and coasts of Pearl (the north-eastern coast of South 
America) sent by Ch. Columbus to Spanish monarchs 
before the travel to the Caribbean Sea. Probably, Vespucci 
also could look through that map. He was eager to see 
materials concerning any part of the New World. Though 
there weren’t any coordinates on the map, it was enough to 
see coastlines for professional navigators.  
After getting acquainted with Columbus’s map, 
Vespucci began to spread news about his false “first” travel 
(1497-1498) in Europe. He mentioned that, he had 
investigated north-western coasts of the Caribbean Sea. 
Vespucci used admiral’s mistake. Columbus had declared 
after his third travel that, he had discovered eastern 
coastline of Asia. But Vespucci declared that, he had 
discovered unknown continent in “1497”. Nevertheless, 
nobody had heard anything about the expedition mentioned 
by the Florentine cosmographer.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    191
   
          Columbus’s expedition passes the Atlantic Ocean 
 
10. Columbus discovered Cuba after Espanola during his 
first travel and determined that it was at 420 north latitude. 
The error made by the well-known sea traveler was 200. 
After Anthill islands were discovered, it turned out that 
their geographic coordinates had been determined correctly. 
Then, why did he make error of 200 when determined 
geographic coordinates of Cuba? The well-known sea 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    192
traveler had described territories he discovered during his 
first travel with wrong coordinates in order to keep them 
secret. Otherwise, Spanish monarchs could organize 
expeditions towards the Caribbean Sea independently. 
That’s why Columbus leaded great navy during his second 
expedition and could easily reach Haiti. Geographic 
coordinates of other geographical points discovered during 
expeditions were fixed correctly. Alonso de Ojeda, Pedro 
Alonso (Peralonso) Nino and Vicente Yanez Pinson leaded 
different expeditions and travelled towards the huge 
territory located on the southern coast of the Caribbean Sea 
without admiral’s assistance and investigated those 
territories.  
11. Columbus risked his life and revealed an important 
secret out – he proved that, the huge territory located in the 
west of the Atlantic Ocean wasn’t eastern part of Asia, it 
was the fourth continent of the Earth. He proved that, the 
territory described on Nasiraddin Tusi’s map made in XIII 
century on the other side of the Atlantic Ocean was 
unknown territory. So, investigations carried out by the 
Azerbaijani scientist in Maragha observatory resulted in 
real discovery.  
Columbus should be grateful to Tusi for his success and 
probably, the seaman had kept the scientist’s map until the 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    193
end of his life. Because Tusi had described the territory 
located on the other side of the Atlantic Ocean together 
with its coordinates, divided the Earth into 24 meridians 
and mentioned that the first meridian was near the Atlantic 
Ocean, determined that, storms, cyclones and tsunamis 
weren’t caused by winds, they were caused mostly by the 
Moon circulation. Those investigations were very important 
for geographers and navigators.  
Columbus could prognosticate the weather in accordance 
with those results. He asked to stop the navy, which should 
be sent to Spain, for several days though the weather was 
fine when it reached Espanola in 1498, as he had 
prognosticated that, the weather would be stormy on that 
part of the Caribbean Sea. But owing to the stubborn 
governor, most vessels of the expedition were destroyed by 
the storm.  
12. After the world community learned existence of the 
unknown continent on the other side of the Atlantic Ocean, 
it became necessary to name that continent. Vespucci was 
very prompt from this point of view. He tried to name that 
continent “America”. 
The main reason of it was as following – Columbus’s 
children tried to get rights on discovered territories. 
Ferdinand of Aragon also wanted new continent to be 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    194
named as “America”. He had organized negotiations with 
Amerigo Vespucci about it. Usage of Columbus’s name 
wasn’t convenient for the Spanish king. If the continent 
would be named “Columbia”, the admiral’s children could 
get rights on discovered territories. It would result in the 
Spanish king’s defeat.  
13. The Florentine cosmographer could use the conflict 
between Columbus and Ferdinand. 
The real career of Vespucci, who wanted to have fame, 
began when he participated in the expedition of A. Okheda. 
He used the opportunity as knew that routes and discovered 
coastlines of the travel would be kept secret. He introduced 
most discoveries made during the travel as his own 
successes. I described this event in “Coasts of the New 
World and ruse of Amerigo Vespucci”.  
A. Vespucci began to be friend with well-known 
cartographers, astronomers, navigators and noblemen in 
Pyrenean Peninsula after his last travel (1503-1504). The 
German scientist Martin Waldsemuller also was among 
them. Probably, the German scientist defended the idea to 
name new continent “America” in 1507 in the circle of 
geography held in France in accordance with the 
“instruction” of Vespucci.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    195
M. Waldsemuller demonstrated the second letter written 
by the Florentine cosmographer in order to prove the role 
of Vespucci in discovery of America. After it, people 
believed that, the new continent was first discovered by 
Vespucci in 1497. So, it was just to name the continent 
“America”. Everybody knew that, Columbus had reached 
the new continent in 1498 and thought that, he had 
discovered part of Asia. 
14. I came to the conclusion that, the second letter, 
which brought fame to Vespucci, included events happened 
during Columbus’s second travel. He had written that, most 
of inhabitants of the north-eastern coasts of Brazil were 
cannibals. Nevertheless, there weren’t cannibals in coasts 
of Brazil. Vespucci tried to popularize his letter by means 
of this lie.  
Vespucci wrote following letter to the bank director of 
Florentine Laurence di Pierre Francesco after he returned 
from the “new continent” (1503): “Those countries should 
be named “New World”… Most of ancient scientists 
thought that, there wasn’t any territory in the south or there 
weren’t any people there. But my last travel proved that, 
they were mistaken. I found new continent having milder 
and finer climate in the south”.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    196
These sentences became last argument for naming new 
continent “America”. The discoverer of the new continent 
was A. Vespucci according to letters published in most 
Europeans countries. Thus, nobody remembered Columbus. 
The reason was as following: Columbus had declared 
territories discovered by him as East Asia. So, he confused 
the world community.  
15. Vespucci knew what he wanted. Though he knew 
that, the new land was discovered by Columbus (1498) and 
Juan de la Cosa, who was a navigator of the expedition 
organized by Alonso Okheda in 1499-1500, could 
understood that, discovered land was a continent (1500), he 
didn’t feel shy and introduced that success as his own. La 
Cosa gave corresponding information to the “Council of 
India” located in Seville. But Vespucci spread opposite 
thoughts in his popularized letter.  
16. Vespucci was prompt from this point of view unlike 
Columbus and Okheda. Results of expeditions organized 
towards the New World were kept secret. The Florentine 
cosmographer knew it and published his lies in foreign 
countries. The German scientist Martin Waldsemuller 
demonstrated his scientific work “Introduction to cosmo-
graphy” and his map of coasts of the New World in the 
circle of geography held in France in 1507. He had 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    197
described new continent in his map as America. After it, 
scientists of that time began to name discovered continent 
“America”.  
17. Columbus was the most skilful and experienced sea 
traveler of his time and he knew how to use winds and 
flows on the ocean better than any seaman. He sailed to 
England, Ireland and Guinea and analyzed directions of 
flows and winds blowing from the eastern part of the 
Atlantic Ocean to the west and made a diary about it before 
starting difficult travels. He could sail to the western part of 
the Atlantic Ocean by means of the Canary current and 
return back by means of flows blowing towards Europe on 
30th and 40th parallels and near the equator.  
Surely, Columbus could use the flow blowing near the 
equator during his first travel, but he used the northern 
current by basing on Tordesillas treaty (1494) signed 
between Portugal and Spain. Thus, Columbus knew all 
routes, but didn’t want to share his knowledge with others. 
N. Tusi wrote that, there were several strong flows blowing 
towards the west and east on the Atlantic Ocean. Columbus 
used this necessary information professionally. 
Though Columbus had great services in Spain as a 
traveler, the Spanish monarch Ferdinand didn’t appreciate 
him as necessary. The traveler went to the king’s temporary 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    198
residence – Segovia in May of 1505, when he was ill. 
Though the king greeted him with great pleasure, didn’t 
meet any of his wishes. Only the property located in 
Castilia was offered him. But he rejected that property and 
said that he wanted his rights to be restored.  
 
                   
           Christopher Columbus’s grave in Seville 
 
The traveler made his will on May 19, 1506 and felt very 
bad on the next day. He had called the hero of the fourth 
travel Diego Mendes and Genoese captain Fieschi to him. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    199
Christopher Columbus’s sons and brother Diego were near 
him already.  
The well-known sea traveler died in Valladolid on May 
20 and none of state officials participated in his funeral. He 
was buried in the Franciscan monastery of Valladolid. His 
grave’s place was changed afterwards. The traveler’s 
corpse was taken to Seville in 1507 or 1509. He was taken 
to Santo-Domingo (Haiti) in the middle of XVI century.  
Columbus’s brother Bartolommeo, son Diego and 
grandson Luis also were buried there.   
Spain was obliged to give the eastern part of Espanola 
(Haiti) to France and so, the commander of the Spanish 
navy ordered to move the admiral’s corpse to Havana. 
Columbus was buried there for the fourth time. But it 
wasn’t his last place. Spain lost Cuba at the result of the 
war in 1898 and admiral’s corpse was taken to Seville 
again. His grave is in the cathedral temple of Seville at 
present. The genius traveler’s body could find peace after 
390 years. But his soul is troubled yet. Columbus’s services 
hadn’t been appreciated as necessary.  
Representatives of N. Tusi’s and Ch. Columbus’s kin 
live in different parts of the world at present. Columbus’s 
heir is the admiral of Spain and does his best for Spain as 
the well-known traveler. And Tusi’s heirs live in 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    200
Azerbaijan divided into two parts (independent Azerbaijan 
Republic and Southern Azerbaijan occupied by Iran in 
1828). The scientist’s grandchildren live in different cities 
of Azerbaijan and work in fields of science and culture. 
Most of his heirs have moved to Northern Azerbaijan 
(Ordubad and Baku) from Southern Azerbaijan and work 
mainly in the field of medicine. Briefly, native countries 
and whole world community should be proud of Ch. 
Columbus and N. Tusi.  
Though the structure of the Earth, which is full of 
contrasts, was enigmatic for people of the middle ages, they 
sought to organize geographical discoveries in order to 
understand reality. Columbus could open the firm door 
consisting of ocean for discovery of the forth continent. But 
the key of the door was made by the Azerbaijani scientist 
Nasiraddin Tusi.  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    201
                  Literature 
 
Абрамсон, М. Л. Кириллова, А. А. Колесницкий Н. Ф. и 
др.; Под ред. Колесницкого Н. Ф. История средних веков: 
2-е изд. испр. и доп. Москва, «Просвещение», 1986. 
Андре М. Подлинное приключение Христофора Колумба. 
Пер. с фран. М-Л., Земля и фабрика, 1928 
Azərbaycan Beynəlxalq Universiteti. N. Tusinin 800 illik 
yubileyinə həsr edilmiş Respublika konfransının materialları. 
Bakı-2001 
Афанасьев. В. Л. Текст воспроизведен по изданию: 
Бартоломе де Лас Касас. История Индии. Ленинград, 
«Наука», 1968. 
Bakıxanov A. A. Gülüstani-irəm. Bakı, 1951 
Bakıxanov A. A. Seçilmiş əsərləri. Bakı, “Yazıçı”, 1984 
Белый Ю. А. Тихо Браге. М. «Наука», 1982. 
Берри А. Краткая история астрономии. 1946. 
Бертельс Е. Я. Суфизм и Суфийская литература. М., 1965 
Бейкер Дж. История географических открытий и иссле-
дований. Пер. с англ. М., «Иностранная литература», 1950 
Бейклесс Дж. Америка глазами первооткрывателей. Пер. 
с англ. М., «Прогресс», 1969 
Велиев С. С. Древний, древний Азербайджан. Баку, 
«Гянджлик», 1983 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    202
Верлинден Ч. Христофор Колумб, Эрнан Кортес. Ростов-
на-Дону, «Феникс», 1997  
Веселовский, Н. Белый. Ю. А. Николай Коперник. М.: 
1974. «Наука», стр. 65 
Qаbusnamə. Bakı, “Azərnəşr”, 1989  
Qacar Ç. Azərbaycanın görkəmli şəxsiyyətləri. Bakı, 
“Nicat”, 1997  
Голант В. Я. Планету открывали сообща. М., «Наука», 
1971 
Qasımov R. Ə. Xristofor Kolumb, Nəsirəddin Tusi və 
Amerika qitəsinin həqiqi kəşfi. Bakı, “Çaşıoğlu”, 2002 
Гуляев В. И. Доколумбовы плавания в Америку: мифы и 
реальность. Москва, «Международные отношения», 1991 
Гумилевская М. А. Как открывали мир. Москва, «Д.Л.», 
1997 
Дитмар А. Б. Родосская параллель. Жизнь и деятельность 
Эратосфена. Москва, «Мысль», 1965 
Hüseynov R. Ə. Astronomiya. Ali məktəblər üçün dərslik. 
Bakı, “Maarif”, 1997 
Hüseynov R. Ə. “Bilgi” dərgisinin “fizika, riyaziyyat, yer 
elmləri” seriyası. Nəsirəddin Tusinin astronomiya elmində 
xidmətləri. Bakı, 2002, №2  
Əbu Əli Həsən ibn Əli Xacə Nizamülmülk. Siyasətnamə. H. 
Məmmədzadənin əlavəsi. Bakı, “Elm”, 1989 
Əbu Əli Həsən ibn Əli Xacə Nizamülmülk. Siyasətnamə. R. 
Sultanovun yazdığı müqqədimədən. Bakı, “Elm”, 1989 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    203
Ионина Н. А. Автор-составитель. Сто великих чудес 
света. Москва, «Вече», 2000 
Исаченко А. А. Развитие географических идей. Москва, 
«Мысль», 1971 
История античности. Сост. Томашевская М. Н. Москва, 
«Правда», 1989, II том 
Каган В. Ф. Основание геометрии. М-Л., 1949 
Кечори Ф. История элементарной математики. Одесса, 
1971  
Клацко-Рындзиун. Журнал Ассоциации искусственного 
интеллекта. Новости искусственного интеллекта. М., 1993  
Коротцев О. Как измеряли мир. Глобус. Ленинград, 
«Д.Л», 1980 
Купер Ф. Дж. Мерседес из Кастилии или путешествие в 
Катай. Одесса, «Маяк», 1985 
Kəndli-Herisçi Q. Xaqani Şirvani. Bakı, 1988 
Лас Касас Б. История Индии. Пр. с исп. Ленинград, 
«Наука», 1968 
Магидович И. П. Христофор Колумб. М., «Географгиз», 
1956 
Магидович И. П. История открытия и исследования 
Северной Америки. Москва, «Географгиз», 1962 
Магидович И. П. История открытия и исследования Цен-
тральной Южной Америки. Москва, «Географгиз», 1965 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    204
Магидович И. П., Магидович В. И. Очерки по истории 
географических открытий том I, Москва, «Просвещение», 
1983 
Магидович И. П., Магидович В. И. Очерки по истории 
географических открытий том II,Москва, «Просвещение», 
1983 
Максудов Ф. Г., Маммедбейли Г. Дж. Мухаммед 
Насирэддин Туси. Баку, «Гянджлик», 1981  
Марко Поло. Книга Марко Поло. Пер. старофранцуз-
ского текста. Москва, «Мысль», 1965 
Mehrəliyev E. Babakuhi Bakuvi Ş.M. (Nişapuri, Şirazi) və 
Pirhüseyn Şirvani. Bakı, “Nafta-Press”, 2002 
Mehrəliyev E. Şirvan Elmlər Akademiyası. Bakı, “Çaşıoğlu”, 
2000 
Mehrəliyev E. Şirvanilər. Bakı, “Çaşıoğlu”, 1996 
Məmmədbəyli H. C. Mühəmməd Nəsirəddin Tusi. Bakı, 
“Gənclik”, 1980 
Məmmədbəyli H. C. və Haşımzadə M. “Şəklül-qita” 
kitabının fiyaziyyat tarixində əhəmiyyəti. Az.SSR EA., 
Xəbərləri, 1951 №8 
Морисон С. Э. Христофор Колумб – мореплаватель. Пер. 
с англ. Москва, «Иностранная литература», 1958 
Муромов И. А. Сто великих путешественников. Москва, 
«Вече», 2000 
Рашид-ад-дин. Сборник летописей том III, Москва, 1946 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    205
Самин Д. К. Сто великих научных открытий. М, «Вече», 
2002 
Самин Д. К. Сто великих ученых. Москва, «Вече», 2002 
Страбон. География. Пер. с гречес. Москва, «Наука», 
1964 
Строева Л. В. Государство Исмаилитов в Иране в XI-XIII 
вв. Москва, «Наука», 1978  
Субботин М. Ф. Работы Мухаммеда Насирэддина по 
теории движения Солнца и планет. «Известия АН Азерб. 
ССР», №5, 1951 
Свет Я. М. Колумб. Москва, «Молодая гвардия», 1973 
Свет Я. М. Севильская западня. (Тяжба о Колумбовом 
наследстве) Москва, «Молодая гвардия», 1969 
Томашевская М. Н., Составитель, Историки античности. 
Москва, «Правда», 1989, том II 
Фукидид. История том I, Москва, 1915 
Xacə Nəsirəddin Tusi. Rəhim Sultfnovun farscadan 
tərcüməsi. Əxlaqi-Nasiri. Bakı, “Lider nəşriyyat”, 2005. 
səh.235 
Ханке Х. Люди, корабли, океаны. Москва, «Прогресс» 
1984 
Харт Г. Венецианец Марко Поло. Пер. с англ. М., «ИЛ», 
1956 
Хауз. Д. Гринвичское время и открытие долготы. Москва, 
«Мир», 1983. 
Хепгуд Ч. Древние карты морских королей. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    206
Христофор Колумб. Путешествие. 1952 
Шкловский В. Земли разведчик. М., «Молодая гвардия», 
1966 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    207
Table of contents 
 
Preface…………………………………………….. 5-9 
Christopher Columbus born in Genoa and his  
travel to Portugal……………………………………. 10-23  
Christopher Columbus’s travel to Spain………. 23-40 
Rich financers, who defended Columbus’s  
project………………………………………………. 41-46 
Calculations of the Florentine cosmographer  
Paolo Toscanelli brought about a fundamental  
change in Columbus’s life………………………….. 47-58  
The well-known astronomer of Azerbaijan  
Nasiraddin Tusi and his scientific services……….. 59-68  
Calculations of Nasiraddin Tusi and Paolo  
Toscanelli’s popular map………………………….. 68-70 
Maragha observatory was considered the  
greatest academy of the world in XIII century…… 70-77  
Alonso Sanchez de Huelva and Christopher  
Columbus…………………………………………… 78-85 
Christopher Columbus’s first travel…………… 86-103 
Discovery of America and secrets brought to  
light during that travel……………………………. 104-112 
Scientific activity of Nasiraddin Tusi and the  
map made in Maraga observatory……………….. 112-116 
The venetian traveler Marco Polo and well-known  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    208
map of Nasiraddin Tusi………………………….. 117-127 
Christopher Columbus’s second travel ……… 127-150 
Christopher Columbus’s third travel………… 150-157 
Christopher Columbus’s fourth travel………. 158-165  
Historical achievements of Christopher  
Columbus weren’t appreciated by monarchs as  
necessary………………………………………….. 165-173 
Discovery of America by Normans and indif- 
ference concerning that discovery……………….. 174-177 
Achievements of Columbus in fields of geography  
and history aren’t appreciated by the humanity… 177-183 
Solution of most problems concerning  
Columbus…………………………………………… 183-200 
Literature…………………………………………… 201-206 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    209
 
 
 
                                     Ramiz Daniz 
 
 
          Christopher Columbus, Nasiraddin Tusi  
                  and real discovery of America 
 
 
 
                                    Format: 60 x 84 1/16 
                                    Volume: 13 
                                    Edition: 1000 
                                    Price: Contract-based 
 
 
 
      Printed in the Printing-House of the “Nasir” enterprise 
 
                       
 
                                    Tel: (050) 314 09 37; 
                                           (012) 431 11 00 
 
 
