
Annotation
Selected	as	one	of	 the	 thirteen	best	novels	of	supernatural	horror	of	all-time	by	 the
Iate	 author/editor	 Karl	 Edward	 Wagner,	 Dark	 Sanctuary	 more	 than	 Iives	 up	 to	 its
Iegendary	status.	First	published	in	1940,	this	powerful	novel	of	Lovecraftian	horror	takes
place	in	a	demon-haunted	abbey	off	the	Cornish	coast.	H.B.	Gregory	demonstrates	a	sure
hand	at	sustaining	a	sense	of	mounting	dread	surprising	in	a	first	novel.
The	story	opens	with	Anthony	Lovell,	Sr.,	master	of	the	ancient	abbey	of	Kestrel	and
its	 Iike-named	 island	off	 the	Cornish	coast,	 raving	 in	madness	and	fear	over	 the	ancient
family	curse	that	”dwells	in	the	bowels	of	the	abbey	rock.”	What	has	caused	his	madness
is	unclear,	but	it	is	obviously	Iinked	to	something	seen	or	experienced	in	Kestrel’s	ancient
crypts.	 Lovell’s	 son	 is	 called	 back	 from	London	 and,	 soon	 thereafter,	 John	Hamilton,	 a
freelance	journalist	and	friend	to	the	younger	Lovell,	makes	his	way	to	Kestrel	as	well…
Virtually	 unobtainable	 for	 over	 sixty	 years,	 the	 2001	 edition	 from	Midnight	House
sold	 out	 quickly,	 Ieaving	 many	 aficionados	 of	 the	 weird	 tale	 disappointed.	 This	 new
edition	 from	Dancing	Tuatara	Press	 reprints	 the	 informative	 introduction	by	D.H.	Olson
from	 the	 Midnight	 House	 edition	 and	 adds	 a	 new	 introduction	 by	 John	 Pelan	 and	 an
interview	conducted	with	the	author	shortly	after	his	ninety-second	birthday.
H.B.	Gregory
FORGOTTEN	MASTER	OF	THE
INTRODUCTION
Chapter	I
I
II
Chapter	II
Chapter	III
I
II
Chapter	IV
I
II
Chapter	V
Chapter	VI
I
II
Chapter	VII
Chapter	VIII
Chapter	IX
Chapter	X
I
II
Chapter	XI
Chapter	XII
I
II
Chapter	XIII
I
II
Chapter	XIV
Chapter	XV
Chapter	XVI
I
II
Chapter	XVII
Chapter	XVIII
Chapter	XIX
Chapter	XX
I
II
Chapter	XXI
I
II
DISCUSSING	DARK	SANCTUARY
H.B.	Gregory	
Dark	Sanctuary	
TO
MY	WIFE
FORGOTTEN	MASTER	OF	THE	
MACABRE	—	H.B.	GREGORY	
There	are	any	number	of	books	 that	get	 touted	as	“rare”	or	 scarce”;	words	 that	get
tossed	 around	 far	 more	 often	 than	 is	 seemly.	 Among	 knowledgeable	 booksellers,	 the
definitions	are	quite	a	bit	different	from	what	you	might	expect…	“Rare”	would	be	a	book
that	a	resourceful	bookseller	or	collector	might	see	once	every	ten	years	or	so.	“Scarce”,
now	there’s	a	word	that	if	used	correctly	signifies	something	very	special	indeed…	A	book
that	a	resourceful	collector	with	a	huge	list	of	contacts	with	similar	 interests	and	a	great
deal	of	expertise	may	see	only	once	in	a	lifetime!	The	books	that	often	get	described	with
these	terms	are	usually	just	“uncommon”	or	as	is	more	often	the	case,	“expensive”.
The	 original	 edition	 of	 this	 novel	 is	 genuinely	 “scarce”;	 whereas	 something	 like
Lovecraft’s	 The	 Outsider	 &	 Others	 is	 merely	 “uncommon”	 and	 most	 certainly
“expensive”.	 Just	 as	 an	 aside,	 to	 demonstrate	 the	 point	 that	 Arkham	House	 titles	 don’t
qualify	for	the	“rare”	or	“scarce”	designation,	I	used	to	have	a	standing	wager	with	friends
that	 if	 they	gave	me	a	blank	check	 to	work	with	 I	 could	put	 together	 a	 complete	 set	 of
Arkham	House	 books	within	 thirty	 days	 (and	 that	was	 pre-internet!)	Conversely,	 if	 one
attempts	 to	 assemble	 “The	Wagner	 List”	 we’re	 looking	 at	 a	 much	 more	 difficult	 feat,
(some	would	say	impossible,	thanks	in	large	measure	to	H.B.	Gregory’s	Dark	Sanctuary.)
My	 colleague	Dwayne	Olson	 discusses	 the	Wagner	List	 in	 the	 article	 that	 follows,
and	 was	 originally	 used	 as	 the	 introduction	 to	 the	 Midnight	 House	 edition	 of	 Dark
Sanctuary.	However,	in	the	decade	since	several	events	have	occurred	which	allows	me	to
cast	 some	 additional	 light	 on	 just	 how	 scarce	 the	 first	 edition	 of	Dark	Sanctuary	 really
is…	To	start	with,	in	2005	I	received	an	e-mail	from	Harry	Gregory’s	daughter!	As	it	turns
out,	the	Gregorys	were	delighted	to	see	a	new	edition	of	the	novel	and	while	quite	elderly,
Harry	Gregory	was	 still	 sharp	 as	 a	 tack	 and	 had	 very	 clear	memories	 of	 his	 foray	 into
supernatural	fiction.	He	was	gracious	enough	to	grant	an	interview,	(originally	published
in	Allen	Kozsowski’s	wonderful	magazine	Inhuman,	and	reprinted	here	as	an	afterword.)
The	 genesis	 of	 the	 novel	 was	 in	 large	 part	 an	 answer	 to	 H.P.	 Lovecraft	 and	 his
penchant	for	“indescribable,	unspeakable	horrors”,	eschewing	the	idea	that	the	menace	is
more	terrifying	if	left	entirely	to	the	imagination,	Gregory	shows	us	the	demoniacal	entity
and	 still	 manages	 to	maintain	 the	mystique	 and	 impart	 a	 genuine	 feeling	 of	 dread.	 No
mean	feat,	as	I	can	tell	you	as	a	writer	who	has	used	both	extremes	that	what	I	 leave	to
your	 imagination	 is	bound	 to	be	 far	more	 terrifying	 than	what	 I	describe	on	 the	printed
page.	It	takes	exceptional	control	and	very	precise	prose	to	fully	describe	a	monster	and	do
so	 effectively.	 Some	 examples	 that	 come	 to	 mind	 are	 Long’s	 “Second	 Night	 Out”,
Brennan’s	 “Slime”,	 and	 Leiber’s	 “Smoke	 Ghost”.	 That	 puts	 H.B.	 Gregory	 in	 pretty
illustrious	company,	quite	an	achievement	for	a	first	novelist	with	no	previous	experience
in	writing	weird	fiction.
The	setting	of	the	Gregory’s	honeymoon	proved	influential	in	the	development	of	the
novel;	but	 I’ll	not	say	 too	much	more	on	 that	 for	 fear	of	stealing	Harry’s	 thunder	 in	 the
interview	that	follows	the	novel.	Suffice	it	to	say,	one	of	the	books	strengths	is	the	strong
sense	of	place	 that	Gregory	 is	 able	 to	 infuse	 in	his	descriptions	of	Kestrel	 and	Pentock,
which	are	not	quite	as	imaginary	as	his	disclaimer	would	imply…
A	devout	Christian,	Gregory	also	dismisses	 the	Lovecraftian	view	of	an	 indifferent
and	amoral	cosmos	and	makes	his	novel	a	very	clear-cut	struggle	between	Good	and	Evil.
He	does	 so	without	being	 trite	or	 the	 slightest	bit	preachy,	but	 there’s	no	doubt	 that	 the
author	subscribes	to	a	belief	that	Evil	is	a	very	real	force	and	can	only	be	overcome	by	a
powerful	reliance	on	the	forces	of	Good.
There’s	 little	 doubt	 that	 had	 the	 book	 even	marginal	 exposure	 it	 would	 have	 been
lauded	 as	 a	 classic	 in	 the	 genre.	 What	 happened	 to	 the	 book	 and	 its	 subsequent
resurrection	 is	 a	 bibliographic	miracle,	 in	 itself	 almost	 so	 fantastic	 as	 seem	 the	 stuff	 of
fiction.
The	 publishing	 house	 of	 Rider	 was	 well-known	 for	 their	 books	 dealing	 with	 all
aspects	of	theology	and	frequently	delving	into	fiction,	so	Dark	Sanctuary	was	a	natural.
Unfortunately,	the	company	also	favored	tiny	print	runs	and	only	400	copies	of	the	book
were	 produced.	 Four-hundred	 copies	 is	 generally	 still	 enough	 to	 ensure	 that	 a	 book
achieves	a	certain	 immortality,	as	at	 least	a	handful	of	copies	will	 fall	 into	 the	hands	of
collectors,	some	of	whom	may	correspond	about	 it	or	even	get	 reviews	published.	Dark
Sanctuary	wasn’t	 so	 lucky…	According	 to	 the	author	only	 review	copies	and	“Colonial
pre-orders”	had	shipped	when	the	Blitz	began	and	the	warehouse	holding	the	rest	of	 the
copies	(and	many	other	books)	was	burned	to	the	ground.	The	author	recalls	the	publisher
asking	to	borrow	one	of	his	two	author	copies	in	pursuit	of	a	foreign	language	sale…	He
never	got	it	back…
The	number	of	papers	that	reviewed	Rider	publications	can	be	counted	on	the	fingers
of	two	hands.	The	number	of	“Colonial	pre-orders”,	which	would	have	included	Canada,
Australia,	New	Zealand,	and	India	was	likely	about	the	same	number.	That	a	copy	found
its	 way	 into	Karl	 Edward	Wagner’s	 hands	was	 little	 short	 of	miraculous…	One	 of	my
mentors	 in	 book	 collecting	 as	 well	 as	 editing,	 Karl	 told	 me	 a	 trick	 he’d	 learned	 for
discovering	 interesting	 supernatural	 titles…	 (In	 fairness,	 I	 think	Ramsey	Campbell	 also
commented	 on	 this,	 so	 I’ll	 give	 credit	 to	 both	 gentlemen).	 Obviously,	 if	 an	 author	 has
written	an	interesting	book,	 it	behooves	one	to	 look	into	 the	rest	of	 that	author’s	output.
Karl	 applied	 the	 same	 logic	 to	 publishers,	 reasoning	 that	 if	 a	 publisher	 offered	 one
supernatural	thriller,	they	were	likely	to	have	published	others…	Then	it	was	all	down	to
finding	other	titles	from	the	same	time	frame	(when	the	same	editorial	staff	was	likely	in
place)	and	tracking	down	promising-sounding	titles…	(this	last	can’t	always	be	relied	on,
as	some	great	books	have	been	cursed	with	awful	titles,	The	Dumpling,	anyone?)
Armed	with	 the	knowledge	 that	Rider	had	been	home	to	Warrington	Dawson’s	The
Guardian	Demons	and	Furze	Morrish’s	Bridge	over	Dark	Gods,	on	one	of	his	many	trips
to	England,	Karl	had	his	eye	out	for	Rider	titles	and	discovered	a	copy	of	Dark	Sanctuary.
The	book	so	impressed	Karl	that	he	listed	it	as	one	of	the	thirteen	best	supernatural	horror
novels	in	his	column	in	The	Twilight	Zone,	but	frustratingly	enough	to	collectors,	very	few
were	lucky	enough	to	find	a	copy	of	their	own.	After	all,	it	can	reasonably	be	assumed	that
only	 about	 two-dozen	 copies	were	 distributed	 and	 likely	 only	 about	 half	 of	 those	 have
survived	into	the	present.	One	such	copy	made	its	way	onto	the	hands	of	D.H.	Olson,	who
discusses	the	book	and	Rider	&	Co.	in	the	article	that	follows.
It	so	happened	that	when	Dwayne	mentioned	the	book	to	me,	I	was	pretty	much	set
on	Midnight	House	just	publishing	short	story	collections,	and	wasn’t	keen	on	deviating
from	a	formula	that	had	been	working	very	well,	however,	there	was	a	new	publisher	who
had	 just	 started	 up	 by	 publishing	 another	 fabulous	 rarity	 and	was	 looking	 about	 for	 his
next	 project…	Dwayne	 had	 brought	 a	Xerox	 of	Dark	Sanctuary	 to	 a	 convention	where
both	the	other	publisher	and	myself	were	exhibiting	our	wares,	so	we	approached	the	other
publisher	on	the	last	day	of	the	convention	as	he	was	disassembling	his	table	and	told	him
the	 story	 of	Dark	Sanctuary	 and	 offered	 him	 a	 xerox	 copy…	Much	 to	 our	 surprise,	 he
seemed	unimpressed	by	the	book’s	story	and	to	our	shock	left	the	Xerox	on	his	table	when
he	left…	Then	and	there	I	decided	that	there	were	enough	great	“lost”	supernatural	novels
to	make	 it	worth	 expanding	 the	 horizons	 of	Midnight	House	 and	 promptly	 published	 a
new	edition	of	Dark	Sanctuary	a	couple	of	months	later.
Dark	Sanctuary	proved	 to	be	one	of	Midnight	House’s	best-selling	 titles	and	all	of
our	copies	have	been	gone	for	a	number	of	years.	However,	two	editions	of	this	excellent
novel	 still	 comprise	 less	 than	 500	 copies	 in	 circulation.	 That	 fact,	 taken	 with	 the	 new
information	about	the	novel	available	from	no	less	than	the	book’s	author	makes	the	idea
of	a	new	edition	quite	compelling.
It’s	 not	 often	 that	 a	 novel	 is	 published	 with	 so	 much	 editorial	 apparatus,	 (two
introductions	 and	 an	 interview	with	 the	 author),	 but	 I	 think	 that	 after	 reading	 it	 you’ll
agree	that	Dark	Sanctuary	is	a	classic	of	the	genre	that	merits	such	special	treatment.	For
my	own	part,	I’m	honored	to	be	able	to	do	my	bit	to	keep	this	amazing	work	alive.
John	Pelan
Midnight	House
Gallup,	NM
INTRODUCTION	
In	 1983,	 T.E.D.	 Klein,	 editor	 of	Rod	 Serling’s	 The	 Twilight	 Zone	Magazine	 had	 a
brilliant	 idea.	He	 approached	 three	of	 the	best	 read	people	he	knew,	Thomas	M.	Disch,
Karl	Edward	Wagner,	and	R.S.	Hadji,	to	list,	for	Twilight	Zone’s	readership,	some	of	their
favorite	“forgotten”	works	of	fantasy	and	horror.	The	lists	thus	produced	are	some	of	the
most	 amazing	ever	 compiled.	Published	 separately,	 those	of	Disch	or	Hadji	would	have
been	 impressive	 by	 any	 standard.	 Yet,	 over	 time,	 they’ve	 been	 overshadowed	 by	 Karl
Edward	Wagner	and	his	three	lists	of	thirteen	books	each.	“Why?”	is	debatable.	Perhaps	it
was	 just	 the	 force	 of	 Karl’s	 personality.	 Or,	 maybe,	 it	 was	 something	more	 intangible.
Wagner’s	 thirty-nine	 books	 have	 since	 become	 legendary,	 drawing	 attention	 to	 writers
who	would	 otherwise	 have	 languished	 in	 obscurity,	 while	 simultaneously	 driving	 hard-
core	collectors	into	spasms	of	frustrated	apoplexy.	Part	of	 this	 is	undoubtedly	due	to	the
personality	 and	 acumen	 of	 the	 compiler,	 for	Wagner,	 like	Hadji	 and	Disch,	 had	 a	 keen
grasp	 of	 historical	 perspective	 and	 a	 sharp	 editorial	 bent.	Wagner	 though,	 for	whatever
reasons,	had	a	more	unusual	and	eclectic	vision	 than	either	of	his	co-selectors.	He	also,
whether	 by	 accident	 or	 by	 design,	 produced	 lists	 that	 were	 ready-made	 for	 would-be
bibliophiles.
Of	the	thirty-nine	books	in	the	“Wagner	list,”	roughly	one-third	are	easy	to	find,	and
even	common	—	novels	like	Frankenstein	or	Psycho.	A	second	third	are	obscure,	but	still
relatively	findable,	at	least	to	anyone	with	connections	in	the	rare	book	market.	The	real
key	to	Wagner’s	list	however,	the	thing	that	made	it	memorable	and	its	books	worthy	of
desire	by	all	true	bibliophiles,	was	the	incredible	scarcity	of	the	final	thirteen	or	so	books.
To	this	day,	collectors	search	in	vain	for	such	rarities	as	Alan	Hyder’s	Vampires	Overhead,
or	 fantasize	 of	 finding	books	 by	obscure	British	 authors	 like	R.R.	Ryan,	Mark	Hansom
and	Walter	 S.	Masterman.	 At	 one	 time	 it	 had	 even	 been	 suggested	 that	 a	 few	 of	 Karl
Wagner’s	selections	were	not	real	books	at	all,	but	only	titles	made	up	to	fool	a	gullible
readership.	An	elaborate	April	Fools	prank	 for	bibliophiles.	Of	 course,	 that	was	not	 the
case.	All	of	 the	books	 in	Karl’s	 list	were	 real,	however	 rare	and	unavailable	 they	might
otherwise	be.
Among	 the	 rarest	 of	 those	 books	was	Dark	 Sanctuary	 by	 a	 certain	 H.B.	 Gregory.
Exactly	why	 this	book	 should	be	 so	difficult	 is	 a	question	 that	may	never	be	answered.
The	fact	that	its	author	never	wrote	another	may	have	something	to	do	with	it.	It	may	also
have	 never	 been	 reprinted,	 unlike	 contemporaneous	 works	 by	 authors	 like	 Ryan	 and
Hansom,	whose	work	remains	rare	despite	multiple	editions.	Then,	of	course,	there’s	the
matter	of	time	and	place.	London,	1939–1945,	was	not	a	healthy	place	for	books.	German
fire-bombing	raids	clearly	took	a	toll,	especially	along	Paternoster	Row	where	the	offices
of	Dark	 Sanctuary’s	 publisher	were	 located.	 Then	 there	was	 the	 damage	 inflicted	 upon
such	books	by	the	British	public	themselves:	lending	libraries	went	through	books	quickly
and	wartime	 paper-drives	 were	 a	 patriotic	 duty.	 Yet,	 for	 all	 of	 these,	Dark	 Sanctuary’s
biggest	 problem	 may	 have	 been	 its	 own	 publisher,	 for	 whom	 fiction	 was	 but	 a	 small
sideline.
William	Rider	&	Son,	later	Rider	&	Co.,	appears	to	have	begun	life	as	a	publishing
house	 sometime	 in	 the	 first	 decade	 of	 the	 twentieth	 century.	 From	 the	 beginning	 their
tastes	were	esoteric,	to	put	it	mildly.	Primarily	a	publisher	of	non-fiction,	Rider’s	specialty
were	titles	of	an	occult	or	metaphysical	nature.	Strange	fact	books	by	Eliot	O’Donnell	and
parapsychological	explorations	by	Hereward	Carrington	were	 two	of	 their	staples.	Other
typical	releases	included	such	titles	as:	The	Mystery	of	Death,	The	Phenomenon	of	Astral
Projection,	 Michael	 Juste’s	 The	 White	 Brother;	 an	 Occult	 Autobiography,	 A	 Search	 in
Secret	India,	and	Ghost	Parade.
But	 Rider,	 from	 its	 very	 beginning,	 was	 not	 content	 to	 limit	 itself	 solely	 to	 non-
fiction.	Deciding	 that	 its	 readership	would	occasionally	 like	 to	 relax	with	 less	 “serious”
books,	 they	 began	 to	 seek	 out	 fiction	which	 shared	 plot	 elements	 or	 themes	with	 their
other	 publications.	 Some	 early	 examples	 of	 these	 were	 books	 by	 Bram	 Stoker	 and
Marjorie	Bowen,	R.J.	 Lee’s	An	Astral	 Bridegroom,	 and	Mrs.	 Campbell	 Praed’s	 Soul	 of
Nyria:	The	Memory	of	a	Past	Life	in	Ancient	Rome.	To	better	understand	Rider’s	editorial
slant,	 and	 Dark	 Sanctuary’s	 place	 in	 it,	 one	 need	 only	 compare	 it	 with	 other	 novels
published	by	them	at	around	the	same	time.
By	 far,	 the	 most	 over	 the	 top	 of	 these,	 published	 just	 a	 few	 years	 after	 Dark
Sanctuary,	is	Bridge	Over	Dark	Gods	by	Furze	Morrish.	Part	Gnostic/Theosophist	Life	of
Jesus,	it	is	also	the	tale	of	an	eternal	triangle	between	a	Greek	youth,	a	British	slave	girl,
and	the	wife	of	the	Roman	Commandant	of	the	garrisons	in	Palestine.	Salome	becomes	an
early	Christian.	Joseph	of	Arimathea	is	unmasked	as	a	Zoroastrian	sage.	A	youthful	Jesus
tours	 the	world,	 honing	 his	 spiritual	 powers	 in	 secret	Himalayan	 valleys	 and	 in	 hidden
passages	beneath	the	Pyramids	of	Giza.	England	is	revealed	as	the	future	birthplace	of	one
of	 the	 Seven	Races	 of	Man,	 its	 early	 church	 as	 a	 union	 of	 Christianity	 and	Ceridwyn-
worship.	Pilate	and	friendly	Romans	plot	to	make	Jesus	King	of	Syrian.	The	Essenes	are	a
branch	 of	 the	 White	 Brotherhood	 of	 Tibet	 and	 reincarnation	 an	 engine	 of	 spiritual
atonement	and	reward.	Toss	in	healthy	doses	of	astrology,	Lemuria,	the	mythology	of	the
Watchers,	Dualism,	 astral	 travel,	 elemental	 spirits,	 and	Atlantean	 sex-cult	 survivals	 and
one	has	a	pretty	good	idea	of	the	sort	of	subjects	that	Rider’s	readers	were	most	interested
in.	Perhaps	most	amazing	of	all,	Morrish	does	all	of	this	—	and	more!	—	in	a	slender	one-
hundred	and	sixty	page	book.
Of	 course,	 the	 problem	 with	 most	 “idea”	 books,	 especially	 those	 written	 by	 true
believers,	 is	 that	 they	 are	 seldom	 successful.	 In	 this,	 Bridge	 Over	 Dark	 Gods	 is	 no
exception.	While	 some	 of	 the	 ideas	might	 be	 interesting	 on	 their	 own,	 or	 if	 developed
properly,	Morrish	simply	didn’t	have	the	skills,	or	the	perspective,	to	pull	it	off.	In	the	end,
Bridge	Over	Dark	Gods	is	simply	a	huge	muddle,	readable	only	with	difficulty	by	any	but
the	most	avid	of	what	are	now	called	New	Agers.	It’s	only	redeeming	value,	at	 least	for
fans	 of	weird	 fiction,	 is	 a	 rather	 effective	 invocation	 of	 a	 powerful	 but	mindless	water
elemental	(Dagon)	aboard	a	storm-wracked	Phoenician	cargo	ship.
A	far	more	successful	Rider	title,	and	one	that	predates	Dark	Sanctuary	by	a	dozen
years,	is	The	Guardian	Demons	by	American	diplomat	and	novelist	Warrington	Dawson.
It	 tells	 the	story	of	Noel	and	Sibylla,	an	independently	wealthy	but	high-strung	southern
couple	 who	 make	 the	 mistake	 of	 sitting	 in	 on	 an	 amateur	 séance.	 Exposed	 to	 such
otherworldly	 forces,	 Sibylla	 finds	 herself	 haunted	 by	 two	 “Guardian	 Demons,”	 who
inform	her	that	 they	will	remain	with	her	until	her	death,	upon	which	they	will	steal	her
soul.	 Noel,	 in	 an	 ill-fated	 attempt	 to	 save	 his	 wife,	 makes	 contact	 with	 Olive	 and	 Dr.
Moyle,	 a	 shady	 spiritualist	 couple.	 The	 result	 is	 disaster	 for	 all.	 Sibylla	 dies	 and	Noel,
concerned	 for	 the	 safety	 of	 her	 eternal	 spirit,	 becomes	 more	 involved	 with	 Moyle’s
spiritualistic	explorations.	Then	a	séance	goes	horribly	awry	and	Moyle	meets	his	end	as
well.	Noel,	 an	unconscious	but	powerful	medium	 in	his	own	 right,	 succumbs	 to	Olive’s
influence	and	soon	finds	his	life	spiraling	even	more	rapidly	out	of	control,	as	even	faked
séances	explode	into	riots	of	materializations	and	malevolent	visitations.	Finally,	at	rock-
bottom	and	ready	to	end	his	life,	Noel	is	saved	by	the	very	people	who	had	inadvertently
caused	his	problems	in	the	first	place.	Their	intervention	brings	him	not	just	salvation,	but
the	realization	that	Sibylla’s	soul	had	never	really	been	in	jeopardy	at	all.	It	was,	in	fact,
his	own	that	had	been	in	real	danger.
Like	Bridge	Over	Dark	Gods,	 The	Guardian	Demons	 is	 an	 idea	 novel.	Unlike	 the
former,	however,	 it	 is	 a	novel	with	a	 single	message,	which	does	not	confuse	or	detract
from	 the	 development	 of	 the	 tale’s	 plot.	One	may	 find	Demons’	 end	 trite	 or	 even	 anti-
climatic,	 but	 it	 still	 retains	 a	 level	 of	 readability	 even	 to	 those	who	would	 discount	 the
author’s	 message.	 For	 that	 message,	 while	 implicit	 within	 the	 plot	 structure,	 is	 only
explicitly	stated	in	the	book’s	closing	pages.
Dark	Sanctuary,	 unlike	most	 novels	 published	by	Rider,	 is	 hardly	what	 one	would
call	a	message	novel.	Yet,	it’s	not	all	that	far	removed	either.	Like	The	Guardian	Demons,
or	 Bridge	Over	Dark	Gods,	 it	 is	 imbued	with	 a	 certain	 ethos	 from	which	 it	 cannot	 be
separated.
The	novel	opens	with	Anthony	Lovell,	Sr.,	master	of	the	ancient	abbey	of	Kestrel	and
its	 like-named	 island	off	 the	Cornish	coast,	 raving	 in	madness	and	 fear	over	 the	ancient
family	curse	that	“dwells	in	the	bowels	of	the	abbey	rock.”	What	has	caused	his	madness
is	unclear,	but	it	is	obviously	linked	to	something	seen	or	experienced	in	Kestrel’s	ancient
crypts.	 Lovell’s	 son	 is	 called	 back	 from	London	 and,	 soon	 thereafter,	 John	Hamilton,	 a
free-lance	journalist	and	friend	to	the	younger	Lovell,	makes	his	way	to	Kestrel	as	well.
Of	the	remaining	plot,	 little	more	need	be	said	in	this	context.	Of	the	Universe	in	which
the	plot	is	set,	however,	there	are	many	observations	that	can	be	made.
The	 first	 thing	worth	 noting	 in	Dark	 Sanctuary	 is	 its	 use	 of	 a	 historical	 record	 to
provide	 authenticity.	 The	 history	 of	 Kestrel	 given	 in	 chapter	 one	 is	 as	 fictitious	 as	 the
abbey	 and	 island	 itself,	 but	 it	 includes	 just	 enough	 real	 historical	 data	 to	 be	 believable.
Positioned	as	it	is,	early	in	the	novel,	it	also	has	the	benefit	of	pulling	the	reader	into	the
story	almost	immediately.
More	important	is	the	spiritual	worldview	against	which	the	action	is	set,	for	when	all
is	 said	 and	 done,	Dark	 Sanctuary	 is	 a	 very	Christian	 novel.	 By	 this,	 I	 mean	 not	 that
Gregory	is	preachy	in	the	way	a	Benson	or	Blackwood	or	Roger	Pater	can	sometimes	be,
but	rather	 that	 the	author’s	viewpoint	 includes	both	for	proactive	evil	and	for	an	equally
active	and	 far	more	powerful	good.	 In	 this,	 and	 in	 its	depiction	of	Kestrel’s	 true	horror,
Dark	 Sanctuary	 is	 actually	 very	 similar	 to	 both	 Adrian	 Ross’	 The	 Hole	 of	 the	 Pit	 and
Eleanor	Ingram’s	much-neglected	The	Thing	From	the	Lake.
Still,	 being	 a	 Rider	 novel,	 there	 are	 also	 differences.	 When	 Ingram	 introduces
supernatural	intervention	to	the	climax	of	her	novel	it	seems	slightly	out	of	place,	not	least
because	a	religious	element	is	almost	wholly	lacking	up	until	that	point.	Gregory	does	not
make	the	same	mistake.	Partly	that’s	because	Dark	Sanctuary	is,	from	very	early	on,	quite
clearly	the	story	of	a	struggle	between	good	and	evil;	a	conflict	between	the	godly	Michael
Bennett,	 rector	of	St.	Martins,	 and	 the	worldly	Dr.	Grant,	who	would	willingly	 free	 the
demon	trapped	beneath	the	Abbey	and	send	it	out	to	ravage	the	world.
The	result	is	an	unusual	but	very	entertaining	mix.	Black	Masses	vie	with	Christian
epiphanies.	 The	 belief	 in	 “a	 personal	 God”	 clashes	 with	 the	 ideal	 of	 “union	 with	 the
Ultimate	Reality.”	Christian	miracles	are	contrasted	with	the	miracles	of	other	beliefs	and
systems	 (“magic	 leads	 to	 egotism”…	 etc.).	 Nor	 is	 that	 all.	 Hauntings,	 astral	 bodies,
elemental	spirits,	and	the	tri-part	nature	of	man	are	referenced,	as	is	the	legendary	Merlin,
who	has	a	role	of	his	own	in	the	Kestrel	mystery.	Even	a	smattering	of	theosophy	makes
its	way	into	the	mix.	When	Michael	Bennett	says,	“Mr.	Hamilton,	when	you	reach	my	age
you	will	learn	never	to	scoff	at	other	people’s	beliefs,	because	those	beliefs	often	come	to
have	a	real	existence,	simply	because	they	are	believed	in,”	he	is	restating	an	idea	that	was
not	 only	 used	 in	Bridge	 Over	 Dark	 Gods,	 but	 which	 also	 underlies	 a	 large	 amount	 of
classic	supernatural	fiction,	including	at	least	two	of	Jack	Mann’s	“Gee’s”	novels.
Religious	and	philosophical	elements	notwithstanding,	what	makes	Dark	Sanctuary
worth	 reading	 is	 the	 power	 of	 its	 story.	 In	 classic	 pulp	 and	 weird	 mystery	 tradition,
Gregory	produces	both	solid	heroes	and	solid	villains,	but	he	also	throws	in	some	twists
and	turns	along	the	way.	And,	when	the	conflict	veers	into	the	cosmic,	it	becomes	hard	for
the	reader	to	predict	how	the	plot	will	eventually	play	itself	out.
Sadly,	Dark	Sanctuary	 is	H.B.	Gregory’s	only	known	book.	Did	 the	author,	having
produced	the	one	novel	which	he	had	been	impelled	to	write	simply	put	down	his	pen	and
move	on	to	other	things?	Was	it	the	first	novel	of	a	career	cut	short	and	a	life	lost	in	World
War	II?	We	may	never	know.	And	while	we	can	regret	that	the	pen	that	brought	us	such	a
memorable	place	as	the	stormy,	accursed	isle	of	Kestrel	never	again	put	nib	to	paper,	we
can	at	least	be	thankful	that	its	one	creation	is	now	back	in	print	and	ready	to	thrill	new
readers	the	way	that	it	once	thrilled	a	young	aficionado	of	the	obscure	named	Karl	Edward
Wagner.	I	think	it	is	fair	to	say	that	Karl	would	be	pleased	by	such	a	development.
D.H.	Olson
Minneapolis,	MN
December,	2000

Chapter	I	
I	
The	doctor	passed	a	weary	hand	over	his	eyes	and	looked	down	half	incredulously	at
the	still	figure	on	the	bed.	It	seemed	almost	impossible	that	less	than	half	a	minute	before
those	white,	silent	 lips	had	been	screaming	the	most	horrible	words	it	had	ever	been	the
misfortune	of	a	little	country	doctor	to	hear.	Struggling	to	maintain	his	professional	calm,
he	began	methodically	to	dismantle	the	shining	syringe	from	which	that	merciful	oblivion
had	come.	The	two	servants	who	stood	watching	looked	at	each	other.	The	man	spoke:
“Will	he	be	all	right,	Doctor?”
“For	 the	 moment,	 yes.”	 He	 must	 not	 let	 these	 people	 see	 how	 bewildered	 and
uncertain	he	was.	“But	his	son	must	be	sent	for;	he’s	in	London,	I	suppose?”
“Yes,	Doctor.	I’ll	send	him	a	wire	at	once.”
“Do.”
Without	 another	word	 the	manservant	went	 out.	 The	woman	made	 as	 if	 to	 follow
him,	but	turned	back	to	the	doctor	once	more.
“Doctor	—	is	it	—	the	curse?”
“Don’t	be	ridiculous,	my	good	woman!”	There	was	nervous	anger	in	his	voice.	“He’s
had	a	bad	shock,	that’s	all.	Now	go	and	rest.	I	don’t	want	another	patient	on	my	hands.”
Obediently	she	turned	and	left	him	alone	with	the	sick	man.	As	soon	as	the	door	was
shut	behind	her	the	doctor	left	the	bedside	and	went	to	the	narrow,	mullioned	casement.
For	a	long	time	he	stood	there,	gazing	with	unseeing	eyes	across	the	waste	of	grey,
heaving	water	to	the	distant	mainland	coast.	His	thoughts	ran	round	and	round	in	his	head
like	 ferrets	 in	 a	 cage.	 The	 curse?	 Nonsense!	 He	was	 a	 doctor	—	 a	man	 of	 science	—
nothing	existed	for	him	save	that	which	he	could	see	and	touch,	measure	and	analyse	with
his	eyes	and	hands.	This	—	this	old	wives’	 tale	—	was	the	veriest	nonsense:	a	bogey	to
frighten	disobedient	children	with.	And	yet	—	here,	on	this	lonely	island,	within	the	very
walls	 of	 the	 Abbey	 itself,	 things	 seemed	 not	 quite	 as	 they	 had	 seemed	 to	 him	 in	 his
spotless,	shining	surgery	but	yesterday.
He	 set	 his	 hands	 on	 the	 worn	 stone	 embrasure	 of	 the	 casement,	 and	 the	 contact
brought	him	a	brief,	crushing	vision	of	 the	enormous	mass	of	masonry	within	which	he
stood:	pier,	wall,	and	buttress;	arch,	tower,	and	crenellated	battlement	—	all	imbued	with
that	 spirit	 of	 antiquity	which	makes	man	 seem	so	ephemeral	 a	 creature.	And	 this	place,
above	all	other,	left	with	a	legacy	from	that	forgotten	past	beyond	all	human	understanding
—	or	so	the	legend	ran.
The	dreadful	screaming	of	the	sick	man,	so	lately	silenced,	still	rang	in	his	ears.	What
had	 been	 the	 words?	 A	 quotation,	 evidently	 from	 some	 book,	 thrown	 up	 by	 the
subconscious	in	delirium.
“During	his	lifetime,	the	curse,	from	a	formless	cloud	of	evil,	grew	into	a	monstrous
thing	having	material	shape,	which	at	length	overthrew	his	dominion	and	destroyed	him.
And	now	it	dwells	in	the	bowels	of	the	abbey	rock…”
Fantastic,	of	course,	albeit	interesting	folk-lore,	no	doubt,	in	its	proper	place.	But	the
proper	place	emphatically	was	not	here,	on	 that	very	rock.	The	doctor	strove	 to	 turn	his
mind	 from	 the	 subject,	but	 the	old	man’s	 last	 cry	beat	 remorselessly	upon	his	unwilling
memory:
“It’s	after	me,	Doctor!	Save	me!	Save	me!”	And	then	such	a	scream	as	might	have
sickened	Bedlam,	until	the	drug	cut	it	short	in	his	throat.
Bah!	 Nonsense!	 Since	 when	 have	 doctors	 taken	 seriously	 the	 delirious	 ravings	 of
their	patients?	That	way	lay	madness.	With	something	of	an	effort	he	took	his	hands	from
the	cold	stone	and	turned	from	the	window	and	the	grateful	light	of	day	to	the	dim,	vaulted
chamber	and	his	unconscious	patient.
II	
Young	Anthony	Lovell	helped	himself	to	one	of	his	friend’s	cigarettes	with	the	air	of
a	man	making	a	great	effort.	John	Hamilton	smiled	slightly	as	he	watched	him.
“What’s	the	matter,	Tony?”	he	asked.	“Life	getting	you	down?”
“Oh,	I’m	bored,	John,	bored	to	tears.	There’s	nothing	doing	in	London	tonight.”
“I	can’t	think	why	you	stay	here	at	all,	Tony,	when	you	could	be	at	that	superb	place
of	yours	in	Cornwall.”
“What,	Kestrel?	I	loathe	the	place.	It	would	suit	you,	John,	but	it’s	too	beastly	lonely
for	me.	Do	you	know,	we	only	keep	 three	 servants	 at	 the	Abbey	—	a	housekeeper,	 her
husband,	and	one	maid.	Three,	mark	you,	to	run	a	place	which	would	take	thirty	to	do	the
thing	properly.”
“But	your	father	lives	there.”
“Well,	 he’s	 getting	 on,	 you	 know,	 and	 likes	 it,	 or	 says	 he	 does.	 Personally,	 I	 don’t
think	he’s	any	keener	than	I	am;	but	it	has	a	sort	of	fascination	for	him.	Perhaps	that’s	why
I	keep	away;	it	might	grow	on	me	too.”
“And	why	not?”	Hamilton	leaned	forward	eagerly.	“It’s	not	as	if	you	kept	any	style
here.	You	don’t	use	your	Town	house	—	”
“That	mausoleum?	Never.	It	won’t	do,	John;	it	simply	will	not	do.	You	can’t	bully	me
into	living	up	to	tradition.	I’m	quite	satisfied	with	my	life	as	it	is.”
“But	I’m	not!	Can	you	give	me	the	least	reason	for	your	existence?	Oh,	you’re	a	good
fellow,	and	all	 that	sort	of	 thing,	and	amuse	your	own	little	set,	no	doubt.	But	 that’s	not
enough.	Either	take	your	proper	place	here	in	Town,	as	your	father’s	heir,	or	go	to	Kestrel,
and	live	as	God	meant	you	to.”
Tony	did	not	reply	to	his	friend’s	outburst,	but	sat	staring	at	the	glowing	filaments	of
the	electric	fire,	his	forgotten	cigarette	sending	up	a	steady	tendril	of	smoke	in	the	warm
air.	He	 looked	oddly	out	of	place,	with	his	 immaculate	evening	kit,	 in	 the	workmanlike
study	 of	 Hamilton’s	 flat.	 Behind	 him	 a	 desk,	 with	 typewriter	 and	 heap	 of	 manuscript,
proclaimed	 its	 owner’s	 trade	 in	 unmistakable	 terms,	 although	 the	 near-by	 bookcase
betrayed	a	poetic	taste	seemingly	at	variance	with	freelance	journalism.	The	truth	was	that
Hamilton,	albeit	a	poet	at	heart,	could	not	afford	to	give	his	art	full	rein,	and	eked	out	a
very	modest	private	income	with	the	less	romantic	literary	work.
When	the	silence	had	become	almost	oppressive	Hamilton	spoke	again:
“Forgive	me,	Tony,	if	I	said	too	much.	But	I’m	your	friend,	and	it	hurts	me	to	see	you
wasting	Heaven-sent	opportunities	like	this.”
The	other	looked	up	with	a	start.
“Sorry,	old	man.	I	was	day-dreaming.	Don’t	apologize.	Everything	you	said	was	true,
and	very	much	to	the	point.	But	don’t	deceive	yourself	about	our	traditions:	we	have	none
—	to	be	proud	of.	The	Lovells	have	been	either	bad	or	indifferent	since	they	first	owned
Kestrel.	You’ve	heard	the	tale,	of	course?”
“Everyone	 has,	 more	 or	 less.	 A	 family	 curse,	 or	 something,	 wasn’t	 it?	 You	 don’t
mean	to	say	you	believe	in	it,	Tony?”
“I	don’t	know.	Sometimes	I	don’t,	and	sometimes	—	I	wonder.	Kestrel’s	queer,	John,
very	queer.	You’ve	never	been	there,	have	you?”
“Once	 I	 saw	 it	 from	 the	coast.	 I	must	 say	 it	 impressed	me	 then.	That	 rocky	 island,
with	 the	 Abbey	 crouching	 on	 its	 back,	 jutting	 so	 starkly	 from	 the	 sea.	 Rather	 grim,	 it
looked,	with	the	sun	setting	right	behind	it.”
“And	rather	grim	it	is,	John	—	sunset,	sunrise,	or	high	noon.	We	were	never	wanted
there,	and	now	we’re	bound	to	it,	whether	we	like	or	no.”
“Tell	me	the	story,	Tony.	But	have	another	drink	first.”
Tony	 nodded,	 and	 his	 friend	 charged	 their	 empty	 glasses	 from	 the	 decanter	 at	 his
elbow.	Then	he	waited,	watching	that	young	face	across	the	table,	with	its	fine	brow	and
delicate	nose,	marred	only	by	a	mouth	ever	so	slightly	irresolute,	now	set	in	an	unwonted
grimness	 as	 its	 owner	marshaled	his	 thoughts.	Without	 looking	 at	Hamilton	he	plunged
into	his	tale.
“About	the	middle	of	the	thirteenth	century	an	order	of	Cistercian	monks	settled	on
Kestrel,	and	built	the	Abbey.	There	is	a	rather	peculiar	legend	in	those	parts	that	there	had
been	a	castle	on	the	island	before	—	the	Wizard	Merlin’s	castle,	to	be	exact,	for	it	is	said
to	be	the	last	remnant	of	Lyonesse	left	above	the	sea.
“Be	 that	as	 it	may,	 the	good	monks	flourished	for	nearly	 three	hundred	years,	until
the	Dissolution	of	 the	Monasteries	 in	 1532.	Then	Henry	VIII	 presented	 it	 to	 one	of	 his
boon	companions,	the	first	Sir	Anthony	Lovell,	my	unfortunate	ancestor.
“He	 went	 along	 and	 rousted	 out	 the	 brethren	 with	 scant	 ceremony,	 and	 scantier
respect	for	their	cloth.	There	was,	I	believe,	some	pretty	dirty	work	done	—	sacrilege,	you
know	 —	 one	 of	 the	 monks	 murdered	 at	 the	 altar.	 The	 Abbot	 was,	 rather	 naturally,
annoyed,	and,	as	was	customary	in	those	days,	proceeded	to	curse	Sir	Anthony,	going	into
the	fullest	details	of	how	Kestrel	would	ruin	him,	and	his	family,	body	and	soul.
“At	 which	 Sir	 Anthony,	 never	 an	 easy-going	 fellow,	 from	 all	 accounts,	 killed	 the
wretched	Abbot	on	the	spot.	A	general	massacre	began,	from	which	only	six	of	the	monks
escaped,	by	boat,	to	France.
“I	 imagine	 that	 my	 tactless	 ancestor	 was	 rather	 shaken	 when	 he	 sobered	 up	 and
realized	what	he’d	done,	but	he	was	a	tough	nut,	and	didn’t	care	to	show	that	he	was	badly
frightened.	He	 swore	 that	 it	would	 take	more	 than	 old-wives’	 tales	 to	 scare	 him	off	 his
rightful	 property,	 and	 proceeded	 to	 adapt	 the	Abbey	 to	 his	 own	 uses,	 fortifying	 it,	 and
turning	the	chapel	into	a	dining-hall.
“Curse	or	no,	he	went	from	bad	to	worse,	and	some	pretty	unpleasant	tales	are	told	of
the	orgies	which	took	place	on	Kestrel	when	he	gathered	his	friends	together.”
At	 this	 point	 Hamilton,	 who	 had	 been	 following	 the	 narrative	 with	 close	 interest,
interjected:
“And	how	did	he	die?”
Tony	looked	at	him	oddly.
“No	one	knows,”	he	said	slowly.	“He	disappeared	one	day,	after	a	particularly	violent
drinking	bout.	It	was	thought	that	he	must	have	gone	on	to	the	western	battlements,	which
are	sheer	above	the	sea,	and	fallen	off;	still	stupid	with	drink,	and	unable	to	save	himself.
Naturally,	there	are	other	legends,	but	they	are	too	fantastic	to	take	seriously.”
“What	sort	of	legends?”	Hamilton	insisted.
“Oh,	 some	 rot	about	 the	curse	materializing	 in	 the	 shape	of	a	ghastly	monster,	 and
carrying	him	away.”
“I	see.	Who	succeeded	him?”
“His	son,	James	Lovell.	Quite	a	different	type:	no	hearty,	hard-living,	hard-drinking
bully	like	his	father,	but	a	lean,	cruel-lipped	ferret	of	a	man.	Just	what	he	did	on	Kestrel	no
one	really	knows,	but	 there	are	dark	hints	of	black	magic,	pacts	with	 the	devil,	and	 that
sort	of	bilge.	They	even	go	so	far	as	to	accuse	him	of	stealing	children	from	the	mainland,
for	use	at	his	satanic	rites.	I	believe	the	country	people	would	have	burnt	him	at	the	stake
if	they	could	have	got	hold	of	him,	but	the	island	was	too	well	fortified.
“Finally,	 even	 his	 bosom	 friends	 deserted	 him,	 and	 he	 spent	 several	 weeks	 alone.
Here	again	the	legends	go	off	the	rails	with	their	tale	of	the	lurid	glare	that	shone	from	the
Abbey	turrets	in	those	days.
“When	his	 friends	plucked	up	courage,	 and	went	back,	 they	 found	him	dead.	He’d
been	 dead	 quite	 a	 while,	 too,	 or	 else	 the	 natural	 process	 of	 decay	 had	 been	 unusually
rapid…”
Hamilton	 relit	 his	 pipe,	which	 he	 had	 let	 go	 out	 in	 his	 absorption,	 and	 pushed	 the
cigarette-box	 towards	Tony.	The	younger	man	 took	one	absently	and	 lit	 it	at	Hamilton’s
match.	Then	he	went	on:
“James	left	no	son,	and	the	estate	and	title	passed	to	one	Thomas	Lovell,	his	nephew,
an	undistinguished	man,	who	slept	—	or	 failed	 to	 sleep	—	one	night	on	 the	 island,	and
then	retired	hurriedly	 to	London.	However,	a	 few	weeks	before	his	death	he	went	back,
and	died,	quite	quietly,	in	his	bed.
“Since	then	nothing	of	any	great	note	has	happened.	There	have	been	one	or	two	bad
hats,	but	no	one	really	distinguished,	either	bad	or	good.	Just	nonentities;	and	yet	the	line
still	 goes	on.	 It’s	 amazing,	 really.	Every	one	of	us	has	died	on	Kestrel,	 I	believe;	 either
spending	our	last	years	there	or	just	going	back	to	die.	My	father	has	been	there	now	for
five	years;	he	went	after	Mother	died.	I	expect	he’ll	die	there	too,	and	so	shall	I,	and	so
on…
“It’s	heart-breaking	—	a	family	so	old.	We	should	be	great,	and	yet	we	do	nothing,
nothing	at	all,	except	keep	Kestrel	going.	The	shadow	of	that	blasted	island	is	always	upon
us,	from	the	cradle	to	the	grave.”
He	drank	deeply,	and	lapsed	into	silence.	Hamilton	sat	still,	his	lean,	strong	face	very
grave,	his	eyes	closed.	He	seemed	to	see,	as	in	a	picture,	that	unhappy	family	passing	like
pale	shadows	through	the	unchanging	halls	of	Kestrel;	meek,	bowing	their	necks	beneath
the	yoke,	 living	only	that	 the	dark	and	secret	 life	of	 that	great	pile	of	stone	might	go	on
eternally	—	drawing	its	sustenance	from	them,	and	leaving	empty	husks	of	no	account.
His	reverie	was	interrupted	by	a	strangled	cry	from	Tony,	and	he	opened	his	eyes	to
see	that	the	other	had	jumped	up,	and	now	stood	grinding	out	the	stub	of	his	cigarette	in
the	ash-tray.
“No,	by	God,	it	shan’t	go	on!”	he	cried.	“I	am	the	last,	and	there	shall	be	no	more.	I’ll
never	marry;	 there	shall	be	no	heir	 this	time.”	With	something	very	like	a	sob	he	turned
abruptly	and	strode	to	the	window,	pulling	aside	the	curtains	and	staring	into	the	dark.
His	friend	did	not	move;	he	knew	these	moods.	Gently	he	said:
“There	is	a	better	way,	Tony.	Not	by	annihilation,	and	the	ending	of	the	line,	but	by	a
clean	break.	Take	something	up	—	politics,	art,	any	mortal	thing.	When	your	father	dies,
sell	Kestrel,	or	burn	it	to	the	ground.	You	could	be	great.”
The	other	turned	slowly.
“Do	you	 think	 so,	 John?	Do	you	 really	 think	 so?	 If	only	 I	 could!	 If	we	could	 start
again,	here	 in	London,	among	people,	at	 the	heart	of	 the	world,	away	from	that	damned
rock!”
For	 a	 moment	 his	 blue	 eyes	 blazed	 with	 enthusiasm,	 and	 the	 light	 from	 a
neighbouring	 street	 lamp	 caught	 his	 hair,	 turning	 it	 to	 gold.	 Then	 the	 glory	 faded,	 his
shoulders	drooped,	and	his	face	took	on	its	former	dejected	look.
“No,	John,”	he	said	sadly,	“it’s	not	possible.	We’ve	tried	before;	we’re	done	for	now.
Oh,	give	me	another	drink,	I	feel	like	hell!”
He	came	slowly	back	to	the	fireside,	his	feet	dragging,	and	slumped	heavily	into	his
chair.	Hamilton	 poured	 out	 the	 requested	 drink,	 and	 returned	 to	 the	 charge	with:	 “That
seems	to	have	been	the	attitude	of	all	your	people:	defeatism,	Tony.	Be	a	man,	lad;	I	know
you’ve	mettle	in	you.	Show	the	world	that	all	the	Lovells	aren’t	quitters.”
“God	knows	I’ve	tried.	But	if	you’ll	help	me,	John,	I’ll	try	again.	What	shall	I	do?	I
know	nothing	of	art;	politics	bore	me	stiff.”
“Then	get	a	job.	You’ve	plenty	of	capital;	get	interested	in	some	business.”	Hamilton
considered	for	a	moment,	 then	went	on:	“Wait	—	I’ve	got	 it!	The	very	 thing	—	I’ve	an
uncle	 in	Birmingham	who	wants	 a	 partner;	 he’s	 getting	 too	 old	 to	 carry	 on	 by	 himself.
He’d	be	glad	to	have	you	—	engineering.	He	has	a	branch	in	South	Africa.	Go	out	there,
get	away,	make	a	career	for	yourself.”
“But	I	don’t	know	anything	about	the	job,”	objected	Tony.
Hamilton	laughed	shortly.
“You’ll	learn,”	said	he,	“if	you’ve	got	any	guts.	You	can	manage	men,	that’s	the	big
thing.	You	were	house-captain	at	school,	weren’t	you?”
“D’you	think	I	could	do	it,	John?”
“You’ve	got	to	do	it.	I’ll	write	him	tonight	—	better	still,	let’s	go	down	and	see	the
old	bird	tomorrow.	He’ll	like	you,	Tony,	I	know	it.”
“If	I	can	do	this,”	said	Tony	slowly,	“it’ll	be	the	end	of	Kestrel.”
“Then	the	sooner	the	better.	And	when	you’re	a	captain	of	industry,	marry	some	nice
girl,	settle	down	out	there,	and	forget	the	whole	blasted	business.”
“By	Jove,	I	believe	you’re	right,	John.	I’ll	do	it!”
Tony	was	on	his	feet	again,	his	dejection	forgotten;	and	now	Hamilton	rose	too.	They
gripped	hands,	and	for	an	instant	Tony’s	excitement	was	stilled.
“I’ll	never	forget	this,	John,”	he	whispered,	“not	so	long	as	I	live.”
Hamilton	looked	deep	into	the	resolute	blue	eyes,	and	his	heart	went	out	to	his	friend.
Tony	picked	up	his	glass.
“A	toast,”	he	cried,	“to	Big	Business,	and	to	hell	with	Kestrel!”
As	 their	 glasses	 clinked,	 like	 an	 echo	 came	 the	 trilling	 of	 a	 bell	 in	 the	 little	 hall
outside.
Hamilton	put	down	his	drink	untasted,	and	with	a	muttered	query	went	to	the	door.
Tony	stood	waiting,	an	inexplicable	shiver	of	apprehension	running	down	his	spine.	From
outside	came	a	murmur	of	voices;	then	Hamilton	reappeared,	a	buff	envelope	in	his	hand.
“It’s	your	man,	Johnston,	Tony.	A	wire	for	you.”
Tony	took	the	telegram	with	fingers	that	refused	to	keep	steady,	and	tore	it	open.	As
he	read	his	mouth	twisted	a	little,	and	he	crumpled	the	form	savagely.
“From	Kestrel,”	he	said,	in	a	colourless	voice;	“my	father	is	desperately	ill	and	I	must
go	down	at	once.”

Chapter	II	
It	was	close	on	10:30	 the	next	morning,	and	John	Hamilton	stood	on	 the	departure
platform	 at	 Paddington	 taking	 leave	 of	 his	 friend	 through	 the	 window	 of	 a	 reserved
compartment	 in	 the	Cornish	Express.	For	 the	 tenth	 time	he	implored	Tony	to	 let	him	go
with	him,	but	the	young	man	was	adamant.
“No,	John,”	he	said.	“I	must	see	this	through	alone,	or	I	shall	never	be	able	to	look
you	in	the	face	again.”
Hamilton	gave	it	up.
“Well,	have	it	your	own	way,	then,”	said	he,	“but	if	you	do	want	me,	or	if	there’s	any
mortal	thing	I	can	do,	wire	at	once.”
The	guard’s	whistle	shrilled,	 the	 two	friends	exchanged	a	hasty	handshake,	and	 the
train	 began	 to	 move	 ponderously	 away.	 Hamilton	 watched	 it	 until	 the	 last	 coach	 had
disappeared	round	the	bend,	and	then	walked	slowly	out	of	the	station,	his	brows	knit	in
perplexity.
Tony	pulled	up	 the	window	of	his	compartment,	sat	down,	and	 lit	a	cigarette.	Now
that	 he	 had	 actually	 started,	 he	 found,	 somewhat	 to	 his	 surprise,	 that	 he	 felt	 almost
cheerful.	After	the	arrival	of	the	fateful	telegram	he	had	been	almost	overwhelmed	by	the
setback	 which	 Fate	 had	 dealt	 him.	 He	 had	 lain	 awake	 all	 night,	 imagining	 all	 sorts	 of
horrors,	but	now	he	began	to	reason	with	himself.
After	all,	this	was	but	a	momentary	interruption.	His	father	would	soon	be	well	again,
and	he	could	take	up	Hamilton’s	plan	where	they	had	left	it.	Or	if	the	worst	happened,	and
the	old	man	died,	then	indeed	he	could	make	a	clean	break	and	leave	Kestrel	for	ever.
The	 train	 drew	 out	 of	 the	 smoke	 of	 the	 Metropolis,	 and	 the	 spring	 sunshine	 fell
through	 the	 window,	 warming	 him.	 He	 took	 out	 a	 book	 and	 settled	 down	 for	 the	 long
journey.
He	was	lunching	when	they	reached	Exeter,	and	soon	afterwards	fell	asleep.	The	stop
at	Plymouth	failed	to	rouse	him,	though	he	was	vaguely	conscious	of	 the	train	rumbling
over	 the	Saltash	Bridge	a	 little	 later,	 and	knew	 that	he	was	 in	Cornwall.	He	was	 finally
wakened	 by	 the	 attendant	 at	 a	 few	 minutes	 to	 four,	 and	 informed	 that	 they	 were
approaching	Truro,	where	he	had	to	change.
The	local	train	was	late,	and	it	was	nearly	dark	when	he	got	out	at	Redruth.	Lorrimer,
the	 manservant	 from	 the	 Abbey,	 was	 waiting	 on	 the	 platform,	 and	 greeted	 him	 with
anxious	 warmth,	 but	 not	 until	 his	 baggage	 had	 been	 stowed	 in	 the	 back	 of	 the	 elderly
Buick,	and	they	had	started	on	the	ten-mile	drive	to	Pentock,	did	Tony	ask	how	his	father
was.
“Very	bad,	I’m	sorry	to	say,	Mr.	Tony.	He	was	taken	ill	yesterday	morning,	and	the
doctor	is	very	worried.	It	was	he	that	told	us	to	send	for	you.”
“What	doctor?”	Tony	inquired.	“Old	Pellew,	from	the	village?”
“He’s	a	good	man,	Mr.	Tony,	and	there	wasn’t	time	to	go	any	further.”
“Does	he	say	what’s	the	matter?”
“He	doesn’t	rightly	know,	Mr.	Tony.	Some	kind	of	stroke,	he	thinks.”
“Stroke?	Does	he	suggest	why	my	father	should	have	had	a	stroke?	He’s	always	been
so	fit.”
Lorrimer’s	hands	tightened	on	the	wheel.	He	had	been	preparing	himself	all	day	for
these	questions,	but	now	they	were	coming	he	felt	at	a	loss	for	words.	He	was	quite	sure,
in	 his	 own	 mind,	 what	 had	 been	 the	 cause	 of	 Sir	 Anthony’s	 “stroke,”	 but	 he	 was	 not
prepared	 to	 tell	 Tony	 everything	 yet.	 He	 had	 known	 the	 young	 man	 well	 in	 the	 years
before	his	master	had	come	 to	Kestrel,	 for	he	and	his	wife	had	been	on	 the	 staff	of	 the
great	house	in	Berkeley	Square	then,	and	the	memory	did	not	encourage	him	to	take	Tony
into	his	confidence.	He	did	not	wish	to	be	laughed	at,	so	he	contented	himself	with	saying:
“He	doesn’t	know,	Mr.	Tony.	He	thinks	perhaps	some	shock	—	”
“What	sort	of	shock?”
“I	couldn’t	say,	sir.	The	Abbey’s	a	queer	place,	you	know,	Mr.	Tony.	Enough	to	get
on	anyone’s	nerves.”
“Does	it	get	on	your	nerves,	Lorrimer?”
“Well,	 sir,	 I	can’t	 say	 that	 it	does,	not	 to	any	extent;	 though	 there’s	a	queer	 feeling
about	the	place	sometimes.	Not	quite	natural,	as	you	might	say.”
Tony	grunted;	he	knew	quite	well	what	the	servant	meant.
“How	is	Mrs.	Lorrimer	standing	it?”	he	asked.
“She	thinks	as	I	do,	Mr.	Tony,	that	we	shouldn’t	bother	our	heads	over	such	matters.
We’re	God-fearing	 people,	 and	we	 don’t	 believe	 that	 any	 harm’ll	 come	 to	 us.	 Besides,
we’ve	our	duty	to	Sir	Anthony.”
“My	 father	 is	 lucky	 to	 have	 you	 two.	No	 local	 people	would	 have	 stuck	 it	 for	 so
long.”
The	other	snorted:
“They’re	 a	 poor	 lot,	 these	Cornish	 folk,	Mr.	 Tony.	 Superstitious,	 ignorant	 lot.	 The
maid	gave	notice	this	morning,	sir.	At	a	time	like	this,	too!”
“Did	she,	begad?	Why?”
“Said	 she	heard	 something.	But	 I	 took	no	notice.	Brought	her	over	when	we	came
across	this	morning.	A	good	riddance,	if	you	ask	me,	sir.”
There	was	silence	between	them	for	a	while,	during	which	Tony	turned	these	things
over	in	his	mind.	He	could	smell	the	sea	now,	and	knew	they	were	nearing	Pentock.	The
deep,	narrow	lane,	with	its	high,	furze-topped	banks,	white	with	the	dust	of	the	road,	was	a
tunnel	of	light	in	the	bright	beams	of	their	headlamps.
The	car	came	over	the	brow	of	a	hill,	and	in	the	cleft	below	lay	a	few	scattered	lights.
In	front	was	the	sea,	a	vast	expanse	of	vague	greyness.	Tony	stared	out	eagerly,	but	there
was	no	moon,	and	Kestrel	was	invisible.
The	 road	 became	 very	 steep	 and	 tortuous,	 and	 Lorrimer	 slowed	 until	 the	 car	 was
going	 scarcely	 faster	 than	 walking	 pace.	 A	 cottage,	 lamplight	 glimmering	 from	 its
window,	 slipped	 by;	 they	 were	 in	 a	 narrow	 street,	 bumping	 over	 cobbles.	 At	 a	 larger
building,	 with	 glowing	 red	 blinds,	 and	 a	 swinging	 sign	 of	 the	 Three	 Fishermen,	 they
stopped.
Lorrimer	got	out	and	held	the	door	of	the	car	open	for	Tony.
“I	took	the	liberty	of	ordering	a	meal	for	you,	Mr.	Tony,”	he	said.	“We	have	to	wait
for	the	tide	before	we	can	cross.”
As	they	entered	the	bar	the	hum	of	conversation	ceased	abruptly,	and	the	pair	became
the	cynosure	of	all	eyes.	The	landlord	hurried	forward,	wiping	his	hands	on	the	apron	tied
round	 his	 capacious	 paunch,	 and	 greeted	 them	 respectfully.	 He	 led	 Tony	 through	 the
smoky	atmosphere	into	the	splendid	solitude	of	the	back	parlour,	where	his	wife	was	ready
to	serve	a	meal,	which	the	young	man	found	very	welcome.
The	good	woman,	after	briefly	expressing	her	sorrow	at	Sir	Anthony’s	illness,	lapsed
into	a	strained	silence	from	which	Tony	was	unable	to	draw	her.
He	was	ensconced	before	the	roaring	fire,	smoking	a	cigarette	and	finishing	his	beer,
when	Lorrimer	reappeared	with	the	announcement	that	the	launch	was	now	ready.
They	made	their	way	to	the	dark,	silent	harbour,	and	down	the	slippery	steps	to	the
waiting	boat.	Tony	was	profoundly	thankful	for	the	electric	torch	which	Lorrimer	carried,
for	 he	was	 by	 no	means	 used	 to	 this	 sort	 of	 thing;	 but	 at	 last	 he	 found	 himself	 safely
aboard.	The	boatman,	Tom	Tregellis,	a	part-time	servant	at	the	Abbey,	greeted	him	with	a
nod	and	an	unintelligible	murmur.	The	luggage	had	been	brought	from	the	car,	and	they
cast	off	at	once.
The	night	was	very	calm,	but	black	as	pitch,	and	Tony	wondered	how	Tregellis	knew
where	the	island	lay;	but	he	had	made	the	trip	so	often	that	it	was	almost	instinctive	with
him,	 and	within	 twenty	minutes	 the	 searchlight	 in	 the	 bows	 had	 picked	 up	 the	 narrow
entrance	to	the	tiny	harbour,	and	the	black	bulk	of	the	island	was	looming	overhead.
The	 launch	 scraped	 gently	 along	 the	 rock	 landing-stage.	 Lorrimer	 jumped	 out	 and
helped	Tony	off	 the	boat,	 leaving	Tregellis	 to	deal	with	 the	baggage	at	his	 leisure.	Then
began	the	breath-taking	climb	up	the	seemingly	endless	flight	of	worn	stone	stairs	to	the
Abbey,	and	once	more	the	torch	proved	indispensable.
At	last	they	reached	the	top,	and	Lorrimer	unlocked	a	wicket	in	the	enormous	iron-
studded	door	beneath	the	archway.	Beyond	this	a	courtyard	separated	the	outer	wall	from
the	irregular	mass	of	buildings	which	was	the	Abbey	itself.	When	Tony	heard	the	wicket
clang	to	behind	him	he	had	a	sudden	wild	feeling	of	panic,	and	his	heart	was	hammering
as	they	mounted	the	steps	to	the	main	door.
Even	 as	 they	 reached	 this	 it	 was	 flung	 open,	 and	Mrs.	 Lorrimer	 appeared	 on	 the
threshold,	framed	in	a	flood	of	golden	light.	Tony	found	the	relief	almost	overwhelming,
and	stood	speechless	for	a	moment,	scarcely	hearing	her	warm	welcome.
It	was	fully	 ten	years	since	he	had	been	 in	 that	place	before,	and	he	could	scarcely
believe	it	was	the	same.	Then	it	had	been	a	cold,	empty	barrack,	peopled	only	by	dust	and
echoes.	Now	it	welcomed	him	with	warmth	and	light.	The	great	hall	was	lit	by	means	of
incandescent	 paraffin	 lamps,	 hung	 by	 brackets	 round	 the	 walls;	 and	 in	 the	 cavernous
hearth	a	great	fire	of	logs	roared	and	spluttered.	In	front	of	the	blaze	a	bearskin	rug	made
an	 island	 of	 comfort	 on	 the	 stone	 floor.	 Round	 it	 stood	 easy	 chairs	 and	 a	 settee,	 from
which	a	little	grey-headed	man	got	up	and	came	towards	him,	hand	outstretched.
“This	is	Dr.	Pellew,	Mr.	Tony,”	said	Mrs.	Lorrimer.	“He’s	staying	with	us	while	Sir
Anthony’s	badly.”
Tony	took	the	bony	hand.
“It’s	very	good	of	you,	Doctor,”	said	he.	“How	is	my	father	now?”
The	doctor’s	eyes	slipped	sideways	from	Tony’s	face.
“He’s	resting	quietly,	Mr.	Lovell,”	he	answered,	“but	he	is	very	weak.”
“Can	I	see	him	now?”
“Of	course.	But	you	mustn’t	stay	too	long.	He	must	not	be	excited.”
Lorrimer	 took	 Tony’s	 hat	 and	 coat,	 and	 he	 walked	 with	 the	 doctor	 towards	 the
magnificent	staircase	which	sprang	from	the	far	end	of	the	hall	to	a	gallery	running	across
beneath	the	roof.
“Your	father	has	had	a	very	severe	shock,	Mr.	Lovell,”	the	doctor	remarked	as	they
climbed	the	stairs.
“So	Lorrimer	told	me.	But	what	sort	of	shock,	Doctor?”
“I	can’t	say,”	the	other	said	shortly.	“That	happened	before	I	was	summoned.”
Tony	 sensed	 the	 opposition	 and	 gave	 up	 the	 attack.	At	 the	 top	 of	 the	 staircase	 the
doctor	 turned	 to	 the	 right	 and	 led	 the	way	 down	 the	 gallery,	which	 stretched	 the	 entire
breadth	of	the	building.	They	passed	a	number	of	closed	doors	and	stopped	at	another.	Dr.
Pellew	looked	sideways	at	Tony,	and	said:
“Again	I	must	warn	you:	no	excitement,	and	no	questions,	please.”
The	young	man	nodded,	and	they	went	in.
It	was	not	a	large	room,	but	the	solitary	candle	burning	beside	the	great	canopied	bed
made	it	seem	enormous	with	its	flickering	shadows.	The	remains	of	a	fire	smouldered	on
the	hearth.
Sir	Anthony	Lovell	 lay	motionless	 upon	 his	 back,	 his	 eyes	 half	 closed.	His	 sparse
grey	 hair	 was	 disordered,	 and	 the	 bones	 of	 his	 face	 showed	 sharply	 white	 through	 the
tight-stretched,	yellow	skin.	He	looked	pitifully	old.
Tony	 caught	 his	 breath	 and	 went	 swiftly	 to	 the	 bedside,	 heedless	 of	 the	 doctor’s
warning	hand.
“Father!”	he	gasped.
The	grey	head	turned	painfully	towards	him,	and	the	dim	eyes	sought	his	face.	There
was	a	long	silence,	broken	only	by	the	soft	rustle	of	the	fire.	Very	slowly	recognition	crept
into	the	empty	eyes,	the	pupils	of	which	showed	like	black	pinpricks	in	the	faded	blue.	A
whisper,	very	faint	and	far-away,	came	from	the	pale	lips:
“Tony,	my	boy	—	I	knew	you’d	come.”
Then,	 in	 a	 moment,	 extinguishing	 that	 little	 spark	 of	 reason,	 black	 horror	 came
welling	up	into	his	eyes,	and	the	old	man	sat	upright,	his	features	dreadfully	contorted,	and
a	scream	gathering	on	his	lips.
Tony	 felt	 himself	 pushed	 unceremoniously	 aside	 as	 the	 doctor	 sprang	 forward,	 a
hypodermic	 needle	 glittering	 in	 his	 hand.	 There	 was	 a	 brief,	 futile	 struggle,	 and	 Sir
Anthony	sank	back,	breathing	heavily.
Without	a	word	Dr.	Pellew	gripped	Tony	by	the	arm	and	led	him	out.
In	the	gallery	he	paused,	and	carefully	fitted	the	syringe	into	its	case.	Tony	watched
him,	trembling	from	head	to	foot.	At	last	he	found	words.
“What	is	it,	Doctor?	What	is	it?”
“I	 don’t	 know,	 my	 boy,	 and	 that’s	 the	 simple	 truth.	When	 I	 came	 yesterday	 your
father	was	practically	 insane;	 through	sheer	 terror,	 I	 judged.	If	I	had	been	much	later	he
would	 have	 been	 either	 a	 dead	man	 or	 a	 lunatic.	He	 has	 been	 under	 the	 influence	 of	 a
hypnotic	 drug	 ever	 since.	 The	 sight	 of	 you	 awakened	 his	 memory,	 and	 for	 a	 moment
overcame	the	effect	of	the	drug.”
“But	what	can	be	done?	Will	he	recover?”
“I	don’t	know.	I	hope	so.	Frankly,	 I	am	at	a	 loss.	The	obvious	course	 is	 to	get	him
away	from	here,	but	I	dare	not	risk	moving	him.	His	heart	has	been	badly	strained,	and	it
might	well	prove	fatal.”
“Oh,	but	it’s	horrible!	Something	must	be	done.”
“I	know,	my	boy;	I’m	doing	all	I	can.	Now	come	downstairs	and	have	a	drink.	Then
we	can	talk	this	over	quietly.”
Tony	suffered	the	doctor	to	lead	him	away,	and	when	they	were	sitting	before	the	fire
once	more	he	managed	to	get	a	grip	on	himself.
The	Lorrimers	had	retired	 to	 their	own	quarters,	and	he	and	 the	doctor	were	alone.
The	great	hall,	which	so	short	a	while	before	had	seemed	a	haven	of	light	and	warmth,	was
now	a	place	of	menacing	shadows,	which	the	flaring	lamps	did	nothing	to	disperse.	Tony’s
glass	was	empty	before	he	spoke	again.	Now	he	said:
“How	long	can	this	go	on,	Doctor?”
“Not	more	than	a	week,	I’m	afraid.	If	I	fail	to	administer	the	drug	every	twelve	hours
he	will	remember,	and	lose	his	reason;	but	I	doubt	if	his	heart	will	stand	more	than	a	dozen
further	injections.”
“But	there	must	be	some	other	way!”
“I	only	wish	there	were.	But	we	cannot	erase	his	memory.”
Tony	looked	up	sharply.
“We	can’t;	you	or	I.	But	there	are	those	who	can.”
“Hypnotism,	you	mean?	No,	Mr.	Lovell;	I	may	be	an	old	man,	and	out	of	touch	with
modern	thought,	but	I	can’t	believe	that.”
“At	 least	we	can	 try,”	Tony	 insisted.	“I	cannot	stand	and	see	my	father	die	without
making	some	effort	to	prevent	it.”
“As	you	will,”	the	doctor	shrugged.	“But	I	must	decline	to	be	associated	with	the	case
if	you	call	in	a	professional	hypnotist.”
“You’ll	stay	until	he	comes	if	I	do?”	Tony	inquired	anxiously.
“Naturally.	But	 not	 afterwards.	 I	may	be	old-fashioned,	 but	 I	will	 not	work	with	 a
charlatan.”
Tony	stood	up.
“I’m	sorry,	Dr.	Pellew,”	he	said,	“but	I	see	no	other	way.	There’s	a	telegraph	office	at
Portreath,	isn’t	there?”
The	doctor	nodded	gloomily,	and	Tony	went	on:
“Very	well,	 I	 shall	 send	Tregellis	across	 first	 thing	 in	 the	morning	with	a	wire	 to	a
friend	of	mine,	asking	him	to	send	down	the	best	man	in	town.”

Chapter	III	
I	
John	 Hamilton	 propped	 Tony’s	 wire	 against	 the	 coffee	 pot	 and	 lit	 his	 pipe
thoughtfully,	his	eyes	still	on	the	brief	message:
Get	best	psychotherapist	in	London	stop	send	him	to	Kestrel	immediately
stop	Tony.
His	 keen	 brain	 was	 rapidly	 filling	 in	 the	 gaps	 which	 Tony	 had	 left	 in	 that	 urgent
appeal.	 He	 noted	 the	 careful	 use	 of	 “psychotherapist”	 instead	 of	 “psychiatrist,”	 and
understood	that	Sir	Anthony	Lovell	was	suffering	from	no	ordinary	disease	of	the	brain,
but	from	a	deep-seated	malady	of	the	soul.	Remembering	the	strange	tale	which	Tony	had
told	 him	 on	 their	 last	 evening	 together,	 he	 could	 guess	 that	 yet	 another	member	 of	 the
unhappy	family	had	fallen	under	the	influence,	real	or	imaginary,	of	the	alleged	curse.
At	last	he	went	to	his	telephone	and	rang	up	an	acquaintance	on	the	staff	of	one	of	the
great	“dailies”	to	which	he	himself	contributed.	This	man	covered	medical	subjects	for	his
paper,	and	was	able	to	supply	an	address	in	Harley	Street.
Taking	a	taxi	thither,	Hamilton	soon	found	himself	in	the	consulting-room	of	one	of
the	greatest	mind-doctors	in	Europe.
He	gave	a	brief	outline	of	the	case,	so	far	as	he	was	able,	and	showed	Tony’s	wire	to
the	 great	man.	The	 latter	was	manifestly	 interested,	 but	 regretted	 that	 he	was	 unable	 to
leave	his	practice	at	a	moment’s	notice.	However,	he	advised	Hamilton	to	consult	a	certain
Dr.	Nicholas	Gaunt,	at	an	address	in	Hampstead.	This	gentleman,	he	said,	was	a	brilliant
psychotherapist,	 though	 he	 was	 not	 at	 all	 well	 known	 and	 had	 no	 regular	 practice.	 He
explained	that	Dr.	Gaunt	would	see	no	one	without	a	personal	introduction,	but	promised
to	telephone,	and	prepare	him	for	Hamilton’s	visit.
Half	 an	 hour	 later	 Hamilton	 was	 ringing	 the	 bell	 of	 a	 large,	 gloomy	 house
overlooking	the	Heath.
A	manservant	admitted	him,	led	him	to	a	sombre	waiting-room,	and	took	his	card	to
the	doctor.
There	was	no	fire	in	the	room,	and	after	ten	minutes	Hamilton	began	to	feel	both	cold
and	 impatient.	 He	 was,	 in	 fact,	 debating	 whether	 to	 retreat	 forthwith	 and	 try	 his	 luck
elsewhere,	when	 the	 servant	 reappeared,	 saying	 that	 the	 doctor	would	 see	 him	now.	He
was	conducted	across	 the	hall	and	shown	 into	a	 small,	barely	 furnished	study.	Behind	a
desk	sat	Dr.	Gaunt,	writing.	He	looked	up	as	Hamilton	came	in	and	smiled.
“A	 thousand	 apologies	 for	 keeping	 you	waiting,	Mr.	Hamilton.	 I	 have	 been	 on	 the
telephone	with	our	mutual	friend,	and	he	has	told	me	all	about	you.”
Hamilton’s	vague	annoyance	was	instantly	swept	away	by	the	other’s	overwhelming
personality.	 He	 had	 a	 swift	 impression	 of	 a	 tall,	 lean	 figure;	 a	 pale,	 handsome	 face,
crowned	with	dark,	silver-streaked	hair;	and	a	pair	of	the	most	amazing	eyes	he	had	ever
seen.	He	took	the	outstretched	hand,	and	was	surprised	at	the	strength	of	the	slim,	delicate
fingers	which	gripped	his.	Taking	the	chair	which	was	offered	him,	he	sat	down,	facing	the
doctor	across	the	desk.
“Now,”	 the	 latter	went	 on,	 “let	me	 hear	 all	 you	 know	of	 the	 case,	 from	your	 own
lips.”
For	the	second	time	that	morning	Hamilton	related	the	history	of	the	Lovells,	telling
what	 little	he	knew	of	Sir	Anthony,	and	 revealing	his	own	 intimate	knowledge	of	Tony.
While	he	talked	Dr.	Gaunt’s	piercing	grey	eyes	never	left	his	face.	When	he	had	done	the
doctor	said:
“Excellent,	Mr.	Hamilton.	You	 tell	your	story	well.	A	writer	by	profession,	are	you
not?	I	have	read	some	of	your	work	with	profound	admiration.”
Hamilton	murmured	a	polite	disclaimer,	and	the	other	continued:
“I	have	formed	my	own	opinion	of	the	case	already.	I	imagine	that,	as	in	the	case	of
your	young	friend,	this	ancient	tale	of	the	family	curse	has	gradually	taken	possession	of
Sir	 Anthony’s	mind,	 until	 now	 at	 last,	 possibly	 by	 some	mischance	 or	 accident,	 it	 has
suddenly	developed	 into	 an	overwhelming	obsession,	 and	put	his	health,	 if	 not	his	very
life,	in	jeopardy.	You	could	not	have	done	better	than	to	come	to	me,	though	I	speak	with
all	 humility,	 for	 I	 have	 had	much	 experience	 of	 these	 complexes,	 and	 their	 treatment.	 I
shall	be	delighted	to	take	up	the	case.	Exactly	where	is	this”	—	he	referred	to	the	telegram
before	him	—	“this	Kestrel,	and	how	may	I	reach	it?”
“It’s	not	too	easy	to	get	at,	in	the	ordinary	way,	Doctor,”	Hamilton	told	him.	“It’s	an
island,	a	couple	of	miles	off	the	north	coast	of	Cornwall,	and	the	nearest	inhabited	spot	is	a
little	fishing	village	called	Pentock,	half-way	between	Portreath	and	St.	Agnes’s	Head	—
quite	off	 the	map.	But	 I’ll	wire	Tony	you’re	coming,	and	he’ll	meet	you	with	 the	car	at
Redruth.	You	can	get	that	far	by	train.”
Gaunt	smiled.
“It	sounds	most	intriguing.	I	like	unusual	places,	don’t	you,	Mr.	Hamilton?	I	will	go
down	tomorrow.”
When	the	details	had	been	settled	Hamilton	departed,	going	at	once	to	wire	Tony.	He
was	highly	delighted	with	the	success	of	his	mission,	and	much	impressed	by	the	doctor.
The	latter,	when	his	visitor	had	gone,	made	his	way	to	another	room,	very	different
from	 those	 which	 Hamilton	 had	 seen:	 a	 large,	 comfortable	 room,	 lined	 with	 packed
bookshelves	and	littered	with	strange	apparatus.
In	the	centre	stood	a	long	table,	pinned	to	which	was	a	great	sheet	of	parchment,	on
which	 a	 man	 was	 tracing	 an	 intricate	 diagram	 in	 coloured	 inks.	 He	 was	 short,	 and
immensely	fat,	with	a	massive,	hairless	head,	which	he	turned	slowly	in	Gaunt’s	direction.
“Well?”	he	asked,	his	thick	lips	scarcely	moving.
The	doctor	came	up	to	the	table,	rubbing	his	hands	together.
“Very	well,	Simon,”	he	replied	with	a	chuckle.	“You	have	heard,	no	doubt,	of	Kestrel
Isle,	and	the	accursed	family	of	Lovell?”
“Who	has	not	amongst	us?”
“I	am	invited	to	go	there,	to	attend	Sir	Anthony	Lovell	in	my	professional	capacity.”
“What?”	The	other	was	on	his	feet,	his	lethargy	gone,	his	narrow	eyes	wide	open,	his
loose	mouth	working	with	excitement.
“Exactly!”	smiled	the	doctor.	“This	may	well	be	the	opportunity	for	which	we	have
waited	centuries.	If	it	is	so,	then	the	tide	has	turned	at	last.”
“You	—	you	will	take	me	with	you,	Doctor?”
“Not	yet.	I	shall	go	alone,	and	—	er	—	treat	Sir	Anthony.	When	the	first	step	is	taken
I	will	send	for	you.	As	you	know,	in	spite	of	everything,	not	one	of	us	has	set	foot	on	the
island	for	nearly	four	hundred	years.	The	conditions	may	not	be	altogether	favourable	—
at	first.	I	go	tomorrow;	meanwhile,	prepare	such	things	as	I	shall	need.	See	to	it.”
“Very	well,	Doctor.”
As	Gaunt	went	out	the	other	stared	after	him,	gripping	the	table-top	with	both	hands.
His	heavy	body	was	 shaking	 like	a	 jelly.	Sinking	 to	his	knees,	he	buried	his	 face	 in	his
hands.
“O	Lord,”	he	whispered,	“let	it	be	so,	even	as	we	hope.	Thy	Kingdom	come…	Thy
Kingdom	come…
II	
After	Tom	Tregellis	had	left	for	the	mainland	with	his	wire	to	Hamilton,	Tony	spent	a
restless	day.	He	had	breakfast	and	luncheon	with	Dr.	Pellew,	but	since	that	gentleman	did
not	 seem	 disposed	 to	 stir	 from	 the	 fireside,	 nor	 to	 discuss	 the	 vexed	 question	 of	 Sir
Anthony’s	illness,	Tony	passed	the	time	refreshing	his	knowledge	of	the	geography	of	the
Abbey,	and	of	the	island	generally.
The	 latter	 was	 roughly	 triangular,	 being	 perhaps	 a	 quarter	 of	 a	 mile	 across	 at	 its
widest	point.	The	south-western	apex	rose	to	a	height	of	four	or	five	hundred	feet	above
the	sea,	and	on	this,	the	highest	point,	the	Abbey	was	built,	its	grey	walls	merging	with	the
perpendicular	cliffs	on	two	sides.	Here	the	granite	was	naked,	but	on	the	opposite	side	of
the	island,	facing	the	mainland,	the	ground	fell	away	steeply,	forming	a	depression,	filled
with	a	riot	of	gorse	and	coarse	grass.	At	the	foot	of	the	low	cliff	at	this	point	was	a	narrow
beach	 of	 sand	 and	 shingle,	 terminated	 beneath	 the	Abbey	 by	 a	wall	 protecting	 the	 tiny
harbour,	whose	other	sides	were	formed	from	the	natural	rock.
A	device,	similar	to	that	found	at	Polperro,	had	been	adopted	to	close	completely	the
narrow	harbour-mouth	in	the	event	of	severe	storms.	Slots	were	cut	in	the	rock	on	one	side
and	 the	 wall	 on	 the	 other,	 and	 a	 water-gate,	 made	 of	 great	 baulks	 of	 timber,	 could	 be
lowered	across	the	channel.
From	the	harbour	a	steep	rock	stairway	zigzagged	up	the	face	of	the	cliff	to	the	one
gate	in	the	massive	outer	wall,	which,	quite	bare	and	windowless,	completely	surrounded
the	Abbey	buildings.
The	Abbey	itself	was	extremely	severe	in	design,	and	looked	far	more	like	a	fortress
than	its	name	implied.	Indeed,	the	original	structure	had	been	much	modified	by	the	early
Lovells,	whose	minds	had	turned	to	more	war-like	purposes	than	had	those	of	the	monks
who	first	built	it.	The	main	building	was	a	rough	oblong,	with	a	square	tower	at	either	end.
Narrow,	slit-like	windows,	over-shadowed	by	the	outer	wall,	accounted	for	the	perpetual
gloom	of	the	ground	floor.
Tony,	muffled	 to	 the	eyes	against	 the	bitter	wind,	was	pacing	along	a	narrow	walk
within	the	parapet	of	the	courtyard	wall.	What	strange	whim,	he	wondered,	had	possessed
those	old	monks	to	build	their	home	in	such	a	place?	Perhaps	an	act	of	defiance	against	the
inhuman,	godless	sea	which	beat	ceaselessly	upon	it;	perhaps	a	great	act	of	devotion	to	the
God	 of	 all	 things	 and	 all	 places.	 Had	 they	 felt	 nearer	 to	 Him	 here	 than	 in	 the	 restless
haunts	of	men?	If	solitude	had	been	their	wish,	they	had	it	here.
He	leaned	against	the	crenellated	battlement	and	gazed	over	the	sea	to	the	mainland,
where,	less	than	three	miles	away,	he	could	make	out	the	tiny	village	of	Pentock,	clear	in
the	pale	sunlight.	It	looked	so	near!	It	was	near,	and	yet,	in	truth,	how	far	away!	This	place
was	a	little	world	apart.
Difficult	as	it	was	to	understand	the	monks	first	building	the	Abbey,	how	much	more
difficult	to	understand	why	his	ancestors	had	remained	here	at	all,	once	they	had	robbed	it
of	its	treasures!	Yet	he	could	not	deny	its	fascination.	Far	off	in	London,	he	had	cursed	it,
vowing	never	to	return;	but	now	that	he	was	brought	back	against	his	will	he	felt	quite	at
home,	ready	to	stay	indefinitely,	 letting	the	world	slip	by	unheeded.	And	this	 in	spite	of
the	unhappy	circumstances	of	his	return,	and	the	dark	mystery	which	overshadowed	all.
Tony’s	 thoughts	 took	 a	 gloomier	 turn,	 and	 he	 found	 himself	 bitterly	 regretting	 the
estrangement	which	had	come	between	himself	and	his	father	when,	after	his	wife’s	death,
the	old	man	had	closed	their	London	home	and	retired	to	the	solitude	of	Kestrel.	That	was
five	years	ago,	and	now	his	father	might	never	know	him	again.
He	 fell	 once	more	 to	wondering	what	 it	 could	 have	 been	 that	 had	 terrified	 the	 old
man	 so	 that	 his	 very	 reason	 was	 tottering.	 Was	 it	 only	 some	 dark	 imagining,	 bred	 of
loneliness	 and	 superstition,	 or	was	 there	 indeed	 some	 abominable	 thing	hidden	 away	 in
that	great	pile	of	stone?	Tony	shivered,	and,	since	 the	sunlight	was	 fading	from	the	sea,
made	his	way	down	the	spiral	stair	in	the	gateway	turret	and	back	to	the	fire	in	the	great
hall.
There	he	found	Dr.	Pellew	asleep	in	an	armchair	beside	the	blaze,	and,	not	wishing	to
disturb	 him,	 he	 crept	 silently	 away	 and,	 going	 down	 the	 passage	 beyond	 the	 great
staircase,	 found	his	way	 to	 the	kitchen.	He	knocked	on	 the	door,	entered,	and	asked	 the
surprised	and	embarrassed	Lorrimers	if	he	might	join	them.
Mrs.	 Lorrimer	 gave	 him	 a	 chair	 beside	 the	 great	 range,	 nervously	 dusting	 the	 seat
before	he	sat	down,	and	then	bustled	off,	saying	she	would	make	some	tea.	Her	husband
stood	awkwardly	until	Tony	besought	him	to	be	seated,	when	he	perched	himself	on	the
edge	of	a	sofa	near	by.	Tony	was	well	aware	that	his	unconventional	intrusion	had	made
the	two	servants	feel	most	uncomfortable,	but	he	was	determined	to	find	out	more	about
his	father’s	illness,	and	this	seemed	the	best	way.	He	began	by	asking	how	his	father	had
spent	his	time	on	the	island.
“Sir	Anthony	 lived	very	quiet,	Mr.	Tony,”	Lorrimer	 replied;	 “he	only	used	 the	hall
and	the	library,	and	his	own	room;	everywhere	else	is	locked	up.”
“I	see.	I	suppose	you	and	your	wife	have	rooms	over	here?”
“Yes,	sir,	we’ve	our	own	stairs.	The	maid	slept	in	a	little	room	next	ours.	Tregellis	is
staying	there	now	that	we’re	short-handed;	he’s	a	useful	man	to	have	about	the	place.”
“So	I	should	imagine.	I	suppose	my	father	spent	most	of	his	time	indoors?”
“Yes,	Mr.	Tony.	He	used	the	library	a	good	deal,	reading	and	such.	He’d	go	out	now
and	again,	when	the	weather	was	fair,	and	walk	round	the	courtyard,	or	maybe	down	to	the
beach.	And	every	Sunday	Tom	would	take	him	across	to	church.	He	was	friendly	with	Mr.
Bennett,	the	rector,	and	he’d	often	stay	to	lunch	with	him.	He	scarce	went	anywhere	else.”
At	this	point	Mrs.	Lorrimer	appeared	with	the	tea,	and	when	each	had	a	steaming	cup
in	 his	 hands	 the	 first	 feeling	 of	 restraint	 passed	 off	 to	 some	 extent.	 Lorrimer	 began	 to
wriggle	in	his	seat,	and	at	last,	after	clearing	his	throat	noisily,	he	blurted	out:
“I	know	what	you	want	to	know,	sir,	and	I	think	you	should	be	told	—	No,	my	dear,
don’t	 interrupt”	—	 this	 to	 his	wife,	who	had	 turned	 sharply	 towards	 him	—	“	 ’tis	 only
right	that	Mr.	Tony	should	know	the	truth.	You	won’t	laugh	at	me,	though,	will	you,	sir?
That’s	all	I’ve	been	afraid	of.”
Tony	assured	him	that	he	had	never	felt	 less	 inclined	for	mirth,	and	the	old	servant
began	his	tale.
“It’d	be	about	a	week	ago,	sir,	that	Sir	Anthony	first	asked	for	a	lantern.	Said	he	was
going	down	into	the	crypt	to	have	a	look	round.	I	wanted	to	go	with	him,	but	he	wouldn’t
have	it.	‘Give	me	a	lantern,	Lorrimer,’	he	says,	‘and	don’t	argue!’	So	I	finds	him	one,	and
down	he	goes.	The	entrance	is	under	one	of	the	flagstones	in	the	hall,	you	know,	sir,	back
of	the	staircase.
“He	 was	 gone	 about	 an	 hour,	 sir,	 and	 when	 he	 came	 up	 he	 looked	 a	 bit	 pale,	 I
thought,	 and	 asked	 for	 a	 drink.	But	 he	 said	 nothing.	 The	 next	 two	 days	 he	went	 down
again,	sir;	once	he	was	gone	for	nearly	two	hours,	and	the	missus	and	me	got	the	wind	up
a	bit,	but	he	came	back	all	right,	looking	white	as	a	sheet,	and	trembling	he	was.	I	asked
him	straight	 then	what	he’d	been	up	to,	but	he	wouldn’t	say.	So	I	begged	him	not	 to	go
again.	‘There	are	some	things	as	we’re	not	meant	to	know,’	I	 told	him.	He	looked	at	me
queerly,	and	said,	‘Lorrimer,	you	may	be	right.	I’ll	think	about	it.’	But	that	self-same	night
it	happened,	sir.”
“What	happened?”	Tony	leant	forward,	gripped	by	a	horrible	excitement.
“Now	 don’t	 upset	 yourself,	 Mr.	 Tony,”	Mrs.	 Lorrimer	 interjected,	 “or	 I	 shan’t	 let
James	tell	you	any	more.”
“All	right!	But	go	on,	man!”	Tony’s	throat	was	so	dry	he	could	scarcely	speak.
“Well,	you	see,	sir,	before	this	Sir	Anthony	had	only	gone	down	in	the	daytime;	this
time	he	went	at	night.	Perhaps	that	made	a	difference.	Anyway,	about	three	in	the	morning
the	missus	woke	me.	 ‘What’s	 that?’	 she	 says.	 I	 listens.	 Then	 I	 hears	 it	 too.	 Somebody
screaming,	a	long	way	off.	Now,	I’m	no	coward,	Mr.	Tony,	as	Missus’ll	bear	me	out,	but	I
didn’t	want	to	leave	my	bed	that	night.	But	I	 told	myself	that	God	wouldn’t	let	no	harm
come	to	me;	so	I	gets	up,	puts	on	my	dressing-gown,	takes	my	torch	and	a	poker	and	goes
to	see	what’s	the	matter.”
“That	was	a	brave	thing	to	do,	Lorrimer.”
“Well,	Mr.	Tony,	you	see,	I	knew	your	father	was	in	trouble	—	there	was	no	one	else
to	scream	—	at	least,	I	hoped	not	—	and	I	couldn’t	fail	him,	could	I?	Well,	when	I	got	to
the	hall	I	found	him.	Lying	beside	the	way	to	the	crypt	he	was,	in	a	dead	faint.	The	trap
was	open,	Mr.	Tony,	so	I	shut	it	quick	and	bolted	it.”
“Why	did	you	do	that,	Lorrimer?”	Tony	strove	heroically	to	keep	his	voice	steady.
The	other	hesitated,	then	he	swallowed,	and	replied	in	a	low	voice:
“As	 God’s	my	witness,	Mr.	 Tony,	 there	 was	 something	 down	 there.	 I	 don’t	 know
what,	and	I	hope	I	never	shall.”
“Did	you	see	anything?”
“No,	it	was	pitch	black.	But	I	heard	it,	Mr.	Tony.	Breathing,	it	was.	Panting,	as	you
might	say,	like	a	beast	after	the	chase.”
“Good	God!”
“Yes,	Mr.	Tony,	and	I	reckon	He’s	about	the	only	one	as	can	help	us	in	this.	Then	I
picks	up	Sir	Anthony	—	he’s	not	a	heavy	man,	but	if	he’d	weighed	twenty	stone	I	don’t
believe	I’d’ve	noticed	it	then	—	and	I	carried	him	back	to	this	kitchen,	where	the	missus
was	waiting	for	me.	We	got	him	up	to	our	own	bed,	Mr.	Tony,	and	after	a	bit	he	came	to.	It
was	awful,	sir	—	awful	it	was.	He	kept	crying	out	that	It	was	after	him,	and	other	things
which	I	won’t	repeat,	if	you’ll	excuse	me,	sir.
“We	 thought	his	mind’d	go,	and	we	didn’t	know	what	 to	do,	 so	we	kept	on	giving
him	neat	brandy.	He	drank	it	down	as	if	it	was	water,	and	with	no	more	effect,	seemingly,
till	all	of	a	sudden,	when	the	bottle	was	nigh	empty,	he	went	under.	Dead	drunk,	sir,	and
the	best	thing	that	could’ve	happened,	for	he	lay	like	that	for	hours,	and	we	were	able	to
get	hold	of	Dr.	Pellew.	Now	you	know	it	all,	sir.	We	hadn’t	meant	to	tell	you,	but	with	you
coming	 to	 us,	 so	 friendly	 like,	 we	 couldn’t	 keep	 it	 from	 you	 any	 longer,	 could	 we,
Missus?”
“No,	James,”	his	wife	replied,	“you’re	right	there.	Mr.	Tony	had	got	to	know	sooner
or	later.	But	don’t	take	it	too	hard,	sir.	James	may	have	imagined	a	lot	of	it;	I	never	heard
or	saw	anything.	And	even	if	it	is	all	true,	we	must	trust	in	God,	mustn’t	we,	sir?”
“Yes	 —	 I	 suppose	 that’s	 all	 we	 can	 do,	 Mrs.	 Lorrimer.	 You	 have	 both	 been
marvelous.	How	you	can	stay	on	after	all	that	is	beyond	me.”
“We’ve	our	duty	to	Sir	Anthony,	sir,	and	to	you.	We’ve	been	in	his	service	nigh	on
twenty	years.	And	we’ve	our	faith.”
“The	maid	left	at	once,	I	suppose?”
“Yes,	Mr.	Tony.	She	slept	through	the	first	part	of	the	commotion,	but	she	heard	Sir
Anthony	crying	out	in	our	room	afterwards,	and	that	finished	her.	Just	packed	her	bags	and
went.	Feckless	hussy!”
A	bell	jangled	over	their	heads,	and	Lorrimer	stood	up.
“That’ll	be	Tregellis,	Mr.	Tony,”	said	he,	“back	from	Portreath.”
A	few	minutes	later	Tony	was	reading	Hamilton’s	wire	announcing	the	coming	of	Dr.
Nicholas	Gaunt	on	the	following	day.

Chapter	IV	
I	
Tony	was	walking	 up	 and	 down	 the	 platform	 at	Redruth,	 smoking	 a	 cigarette,	 and
wondering	what	manner	of	man	this	Dr.	Gaunt	would	turn	out	to	be.	Dr.	Pellew	had	never
heard	of	him,	but	then	Dr.	Pellew	himself	confessed	that	he	was	not	in	touch	with	modern
psychology.	Tony	knew	that	he	could	rely	on	Hamilton	to	do	his	best,	but	he	was	rather
doubtful	about	the	outcome	of	this	forlorn	hope.
His	conjectures	were	presently	interrupted	by	the	distant	rumble	of	the	train,	and	he
ceased	his	perambulations	and	stood	beneath	a	lamp.	The	engine	roared	by	in	a	flurry	of
steam,	the	brakes	screamed	harshly,	and	the	train	came	to	a	grinding	standstill.	A	number
of	 people	 descended,	 amongst	 whom	 was	 a	 tall,	 thin	 figure	 in	 a	 dark	 overcoat,	 who
glanced	 up	 and	 down	 the	 platform	 uncertainly.	 Seeing	 Tony	 obviously	 waiting,	 he
approached,	 hat	 in	 hand,	 and	 asked	 if	 he	 had	 the	 pleasure	 of	 addressing	Mr.	 Anthony
Lovell.	Tony	acknowledged	his	identity,	and	the	doctor	introduced	himself.	Gripping	the
firm,	cool	hand	held	out	 to	him,	and	gazing	 into	 those	wonderful	eyes,	Tony	felt	all	his
doubts	vanish.	If	this	man	could	not	cure	his	father,	he	told	himself,	no	one	could.
The	 doctor’s	 luggage	was	 collected	with	 the	 help	 of	 a	 porter	 and	 bestowed	 in	 the
waiting	 car.	 Tony	 took	 the	 wheel,	 and	 soon	 they	 were	 threading	 their	 way	 out	 of	 the
narrow	streets	of	the	straggling	industrial	town	into	the	dusky	lanes	leading	to	the	coast.
The	 doctor	 had	 expressed	 a	 wish	 to	 see	 the	 patient	 before	 discussing	 the	 case,	 in
order	 that	 he	might	 not	 form	 any	 preconceived	 opinions,	 so	 they	 conversed	 on	 general
topics	during	the	drive.	Tony	found	his	first	impression	confirmed	at	every	point,	for	Dr.
Gaunt’s	conversation	was	both	charming	and	exceedingly	well	informed;	and	by	the	time
they	reached	Pentock	the	two	were	firm	friends.
They	did	not	stop	at	the	Three	Fishermen	for	a	meal,	as	Tony	had	done,	for	the	doctor
insisted	 that	 every	moment	was	 precious,	 and	 that	 he	must	 see	Sir	Anthony	 as	 soon	 as
possible.	Tregellis	was	found	in	the	bar,	and	sent	down	to	prepare	the	boat;	the	car	was	put
away,	and	in	a	very	short	time	they	were	in	the	launch	and	heading	for	the	island.
Strange,	Tony	 thought,	 as	 they	 climbed	 up	 to	 the	Abbey,	 silently	 for	 very	want	 of
breath,	how	different	this	was	from	his	first	coming	to	Kestrel,	two	days	ago.	Then	he	had
felt	 desolate,	 unhappy	 at	 the	 thought	 of	 his	 father’s	 strange	 affliction,	 oppressed	 by	 the
dark	threat	of	the	fortress-like	pile	above	them;	a	prisoner	being	led	to	his	doom.	Now	he
was	 confident,	 happy	 almost,	 secure	 in	 the	 genial	 comradeship	 of	 the	man	 beside	 him,
bringing	hope	and,	he	believed,	salvation	to	this	father.
Lorrimer	met	 them	at	 the	 inner	door,	 and	 respectfully	welcomed	 the	man	who	had
come	 to	 save	his	master.	His	wife	was	hovering	 in	 the	background,	and,	as	 soon	as	 she
was	able,	bore	off	the	visitor	to	his	room,	smiling	all	over	her	homely	features.
As	soon	as	Gaunt	had	disappeared	up	the	staircase	Dr.	Pellew	came	out	of	the	library,
and	listened	gloomily	to	Tony’s	panegyric	of	the	newcomer’s	virtues.
“As	I’ve	said	before,	my	boy,”	he	stated,	“if	anyone	can	do	more	for	your	father	than
I’ve	done,	he’s	welcome	to	try,	but	for	my	part,	I	don’t	believe	it’s	possible.”
But	when	Gaunt	 reappeared,	 and	Tony	 introduced	 the	 two	doctors,	he	was	 secretly
amused	to	note	how	Dr.	Pellew’s	hardly	veiled	animosity	disappeared	before	 the	other’s
tact	and	courtesy.
“My	 dear	 sir,”	 Gaunt	 said,	 “you	 G.P.s	 are	 the	 backbone	 of	 our	 profession.	 Your
general	knowledge	 is	profound.	You	yourself,	 for	 instance,	 could	deal	with	hundreds	of
cases	in	which	I	should	be	worse	than	helpless.	Obstetrics,	for	example,	a	subject	of	which
I	 know	practically	 nothing,	whereas	 you	 bring	 dozens	 of	 children	 safely	 into	 the	world
every	 year:	 a	most	 admirable	 achievement.	But	 in	 this	 realm	 of	 the	mind	 strange	 cases
occur	once	in	a	while,	and	that	is	where	I	and	my	fellow	psycho-practitioners	come	in.	We
have	the	special	knowledge	necessary	to	deal	with	matters	right	outside	ordinary	medical
practice.”
Dr.	Pellew,	beaming	with	simple	pleasure,	replied:
“You	are	perfectly	right,	Doctor.	Never	in	all	my	experience	have	I	seen	a	case	like
Sir	Anthony’s.	My	 villagers	 indulge	 in	 a	 variety	 of	 complaints,	 but	 their	minds	 are	 too
simple,	bless	’em,	to	go	astray	as	his	has	done.”
After	 outlining	 his	 diagnosis	 and	 treatment	 of	 the	 case	 so	 far	 Dr.	 Pellew	 took	 his
colleague	up	to	see	the	patient,	leaving	Tony	alone.
Sir	 Anthony	 lay	 as	 he	 had	 done	 since	 his	 last	 outburst,	 the	 solitary	 candle	 by	 the
bedside	 throwing	his	angular	 features	 into	sharp	 relief.	Gaunt	approached,	 took	 the	 lean
wrist,	and	felt	his	pulse.	Then	he	peered	narrowly	into	the	half-closed	eyes	and	shook	his
head.	Motioning	Dr.	Pellew	to	accompany	him,	he	left	the	room.	Once	outside,	he	said:
“I	can	do	nothing	until	the	effect	of	your	last	injection	has	worn	off.	That	will	be	at
about	noon	tomorrow,	will	it	not?”
The	 other	 assented,	 and	 they	 went	 down	 the	 broad	 staircase	 to	 where	 Tony	 was
anxiously	waiting	in	the	hall	below.
“There	 is	 absolutely	 nothing	 to	 worry	 about,	 Mr.	 Lovell,”	 Dr.	 Gaunt	 told	 him.	 “I
cannot	commence	my	 treatment	until	Sir	Anthony	has	 recovered	 from	 the	effects	of	 the
drug	 which	 Dr.	 Pellew	 has,	 quite	 rightly,	 been	 using.	 Tomorrow	 will	 be	 soon	 enough.
Leave	everything	to	me.”
Shortly	after	dinner	Dr.	Pellew	retired	for	the	night,	saying	that	he	wished	to	leave	the
island	early	in	the	morning	and	return	to	his	neglected	practice	at	Pentock.
“Not	that	anything	urgent	will	have	happened,	you	know,	except	possibly	for	a	few
cuts	 and	bruises.	 I’m	expecting	no	babies	 this	month,”	 he	 said	with	 a	 smile	 as	 he	bade
them	good	night.
When	he	had	gone	Dr.	Gaunt	gave	Tony	his	private	opinion.
“We	must	not	delude	ourselves,	Mr.	Lovell.	Your	 father	 is	desperately	 ill	—	 in	his
mind.	 Admittedly	 Pellew’s	 treatment,	 the	 only	 possible	 one	 for	 a	 man	 of	 his	 limited
knowledge,	would	have	infallibly	killed	Sir	Anthony	within	a	few	days.	But	the	only	real
trouble	lies	in	this	mind.	My	first	step	will	be	to	induce	a	state	of	hypnosis,	when	he	will
be	quite	safe	for	an	indefinite	period.	Then	I	shall	endeavour	to	find	out	what	caused	this
abnormal	state	of	terror,	and	afterwards,	if	necessary,	erase	it	utterly	from	his	memory.”
“And	you	can	do	this,	Doctor?	You’re	certain	of	it?”
“Absolutely.	I	have	treated	many	similar	cases	—	some	far	worse	than	your	father’s.
Trust	in	me.”
“I	do,	Doctor	—	without	any	hesitation.”
They	fell	silent	for	a	while,	and	Tony	let	his	eyes	wander	round	the	great	hall,	with	its
lofty,	timbered	roof	and	stone	walls,	bare	for	the	most	part	except	for	an	occasional	piece
of	arras,	or	a	trophy	of	arms	catching	the	light	upon	its	polished	steel.	When	his	absent-
minded	gaze	fell	upon	the	staircase	at	 the	farther	end	he	suddenly	remembered	the	trap-
door	which	lay	beneath	it,	beside	which	his	father	had	been	found	five	days	ago.	Recalling
the	 strange	 and	 dreadful	 story	 which	 Lorrimer	 had	 told,	 he	 at	 once	 began	 to	 wonder
whether	he	should	tell	it	to	the	doctor.
The	latter	was	sitting	at	his	ease	in	a	corner	of	the	deep	settee,	which	stood	in	front	of
the	 fire	 at	 right	 angles	 to	 the	 easy	 chair	 which	 Tony	 occupied.	 He	 was	 gazing	 at	 the
glowing	embers,	apparently	lost	in	reverie;	his	lean,	hawk-like	profile,	firm	lips,	and	level
brows,	beneath	which	the	brilliant	eyes	were	now	half	veiled,	still	as	a	bronze	statue	in	the
ruddy	light.
The	young	man	broke	the	silence	with:
“Doctor,	I’ve	something	to	tell	you.”
“I’ve	been	waiting	for	it,	Tony.	I	knew	you	had.”
At	the	easy	use	of	his	Christian	name	Tony	felt	a	queer	little	glow	of	warmth	about
his	 heart.	 Eagerly	 he	 plunged	 into	 the	 tale,	 repeating	 Lorrimer’s	 story	 almost	word	 for
word.
Gaunt	heard	it	through	without	comment,	his	long,	sensitive	fingers	held	tip	to	tip	on
his	knee.	Only	when	Tony	had	finished	did	he	turn	his	head	and	regard	him	steadily.
“So,”	he	said,	“there	is	more	in	this	than	I	at	first	suspected.	Your	father’s	terror	has
infected	his	 servant	 also.	But	we	must	 not	 have	you	under	 its	 influence	 as	well.	Come,
have	you	a	torch?”	He	rose	to	his	feet.
Tony	stood	up	slowly,	trembling.	The	telling	of	the	weird	tale	had	reawakened	all	his
slumbering	fears.
“Why,	Doctor?	What	are	you	going	to	do?”
“If	you	have	a	portable	lamp	of	any	kind	you	and	I	are	going	down	into	that	crypt,
and	I	am	going	to	show	you	that	there	is	nothing	there	to	be	afraid	of.”
“No,	Doctor,	no!	I	couldn’t	—	don’t	ask	me…!”	Tony’s	voice	rose	to	a	high	note	and
his	lips	quivered.
With	one	stride	Gaunt	was	beside	him,	gripping	both	his	hands.
“Look	into	my	eyes,”	he	commanded.
Almost	unwillingly	Tony	obeyed,	and	as	his	own	faltering	gaze	met	the	doctor’s	level
stare	the	tide	of	panic	which	had	threatened	to	overwhelm	him	sank	and	passed	away.	As
if	in	a	dream	he	heard	the	words:
“Cast	out	fear.	So	that	your	soul	be	not	afraid,	 there	 is	no	 thing	in	Heaven	or	earth
shall	 harm	 you.”	 And	 with	 the	 words,	 courage	 such	 as	 he	 had	 never	 known	 filled	 the
young	 man’s	 heart,	 and	 without	 another	 word	 he	 turned	 to	 a	 heavy	 chest	 beside	 the
fireplace	and	took	out	a	small	electric	torch.	He	looked	back	at	Gaunt,	who	nodded,	and
they	crossed	the	stone	flags	together,	passing	under	the	great	staircase.
Here	they	paused	beside	one	of	the	flagstones,	which	differed	from	the	rest	in	that	it
had	 an	 iron	 ring	 at	 its	 centre	 and	 a	 bolt	 at	 its	 edge.	 Tony	 released	 the	 bolt	 and	with	 a
mighty	 heave	 swung	 the	 ponderous	 trap	 up	 on	 its	 pivot,	 revealing	 a	 square	 well	 of
blackness.	Taking	his	 torch	he	 flashed	 the	beam	downwards,	 lighting	 the	 top	of	 a	 steep
flight	of	spiral	stairs.	With	just	a	little	effort	of	will	he	began	to	descend,	Gaunt	following
close	behind.
At	 the	 bottom	 of	 the	 steps	 they	 found	 themselves	 in	 a	 vaulted	 chamber,	 which
stretched	away	far	beyond	the	limits	of	the	torch’s	beam.
“I’ve	never	been	down	here	before,”	Tony	whispered.	“Which	way	shall	we	go?”
“Straight	ahead,	down	that	 line	of	pillars,”	Gaunt	replied,	 in	a	voice	so	normal	 that
Tony	was	almost	shocked.
They	followed	the	direction	which	the	doctor	had	suggested	until	they	reached	a	wall
of	natural	rock.	This	they	followed	round	until	they	came	to	the	foot	of	the	staircase	once
more.	Another	circuit	of	the	place	convinced	Tony	that	there	was	no	other	exit,	and,	since
there	was	nothing	to	be	seen	save	the	bewildering	lines	of	pillars	supporting	the	low	roof,
looking	 for	 all	 the	world	 like	 trees	 in	 a	 petrified	 forest,	 there	was	 nothing	 for	 it	 but	 to
return	the	way	they	had	come.
After	he	had	lowered	the	trap	into	place	Tony	shot	the	bolt	once	more;	but	if	Gaunt
noticed	the	action	he	made	no	comment.
When	 they	were	 back	 beside	 the	 fire,	 consuming	 brandy-and-soda,	which	Tony,	 at
least,	felt	that	he	had	earned,	the	doctor	spoke:
“You	see,	Tony,	there’s	nothing	down	there	to	be	afraid	of.”
“No,	 there	 certainly	doesn’t	 seem	 to	be.	Was	 it	 all	 imagination,	 then?	On	both	my
father’s	part	and	Lorrimer’s?”
“Very	probably.	Remember,	Lorrimer	saw	nothing.	What	he	heard	was	probably	the
wind.	 It’s	 very	 calm	 tonight,	 but	 when	 it	 does	 blow	 I	 should	 imagine	 it	 makes	 itself
heard.”
“That’s	 very	 true,	 Doctor.	 In	 a	 high	 wind	 you	 can	 hardly	 hear	 yourself	 speak
sometimes.”
Soon	afterwards	they	retired	to	their	respective	rooms.
Had	Tony	not	been	sleeping	soundly	he	might	have	heard	Gaunt	leave	his	room	some
three	hours	later	and	pass	along	the	gallery	outside.	He	might,	but	even	that	 is	doubtful,
for	the	doctor	was	wearing	felt-soled	shoes,	and	moved	with	infinite	caution.	He	carried	a
flash-lamp,	with	which	he	lit	his	way	down	the	staircase,	the	stone	treads	of	which	must
have	rejoiced	his	heart,	had	he	ever	attempted	to	descend	wooden	steps	in	silence.
It	 took	 him	 quite	 five	minutes	 to	 raise	 the	 trap,	 so	 intent	was	 he	 upon	making	 no
sound;	but	when	it	was	open	he	wasted	no	more	time,	but	passed	swiftly	down	the	spiral
stairs	and	straight	along	 the	centre	of	 the	crypt.	Half-way	across	he	paused,	consulted	a
pocket	compass,	and	struck	off	towards	the	east.	Twenty	paces	brought	him	to	the	place	he
was	 seeking,	 at	 a	 point	 which	 he	 and	 Tony	 had	 never	 touched	 in	 their	 perambulations
round	 the	walls.	Here,	 in	 an	open	 space,	where	 one	of	 the	 pillars	would	normally	 have
been,	stood	a	great	oblong	block	of	stone,	raised	upon	three	low	steps.	This	was	nothing
less	 than	 the	 ancient	 crypt	 altar	 of	 the	 Abbey,	 and	 for	 a	 few	 moments	 Gaunt	 stood
regarding	it	with	satisfaction.
Then	he	mounted	the	steps	and	shone	his	lamp	upon	its	upper	surface.	As	he	did	so
he	noticed	a	curious	thing.	The	five	small	crosses	which	must	have	been	incised	upon	it
when	 it	was	 consecrated	 had	 been	 carefully	 removed,	 leaving	 depressions	 in	 the	 stone.
Nodding	to	himself,	as	if	at	the	confirmation	of	some	theory,	he	set	his	torch	carefully	on
the	step	beside	him	and,	seizing	the	edge	of	the	single	block	of	granite	which	formed	the
altar-top,	heaved	violently	upwards.	Nothing	happened;	and	after	some	minutes	of	futile
struggling	he	desisted	and	sat	down	on	the	upper	step,	wiping	the	sweat	from	his	face,	for
it	was	very	close	in	that	silent	place.
After	a	while	he	got	up	and,	taking	his	torch,	began	to	go	carefully	round	the	edge	of
the	 slab.	At	 a	 point	 on	 the	 back	 he	 stopped	 and	 inserted	 a	 probing	 finger.	There	was	 a
sharp	click,	and	he	stood	up	with	a	faint	sigh	of	satisfaction.	Once	more	he	essayed	to	lift
the	 stone,	 and	 this	 time	 he	was	 successful,	 for	 the	 entire	 altar-top	 swung	 upwards	 on	 a
pivot,	revealing	a	yawning	cavity	within.
A	rush	of	foul	air	blew	in	Gaunt’s	face	as	he	peered	over	the	side,	flashing	his	lamp
within,	 but,	 apparently	 undismayed,	 he	 swung	 a	 leg	 over	 and	 lowered	 himself	 into	 the
depths.
Perhaps	 an	hour	passed	before	he	 reappeared,	 dripping	with	 sweat	 and	gasping	 for
breath;	but	he	was	smiling	as	he	gently	lowered	the	counterbalanced	slab	into	place.
Tony	did	not	hear	the	doctor	go	back	to	his	room,	for	he	was	still	asleep;	and	if	Sir
Anthony	heard,	he	never	told,	though	he	lay	awake	staring	at	the	canopy	of	his	bed	with
drug-clouded	eyes.
When	 the	 grey	 dawn	 came	 creeping	 through	 the	 narrow,	 mullioned	 windows	 of
Gaunt’s	room	the	doctor	was	sleeping	like	a	child,	but	on	his	lips	there	was	still	a	smile,
which,	in	the	circumstances,	was	a	curious	thing.
II	
A	week	later	Hamilton	received	a	long	letter	from	Tony.	It	was	post-marked	Pentock,
and	ran	thus:
Kestrel,
c/o	P.O.,	Pentock,
Cornwall.
April	15th.
My	dear	John,
Thanks	so	much	for	finding	Dr.	Gaunt	for	me	and	sending	him	down	here.
He’s	an	awfully	decent	fellow,	and	we	all	like	him	immensely.
The	 Lorrimers	 can’t	 do	 enough	 for	 him.	 He	 knows	 his	 job	 too;	 the
improvement	in	Dad’s	condition	is	simply	amazing.	As	you	must	have	gathered,
he	was	in	a	pretty	bad	way	when	I	came	down	here.	The	local	G.P.	—	one	of	the
best,	 if	 a	 trifle	 antique	—	 couldn’t	 make	 him	 out	 at	 all.	 He’d	 had	 an	 awful
shock,	 that	 was	 evident,	 and	 it	 threatened	 to	 send	 him	 off	 his	 rocker,	 so	 the
beggar	could	think	of	nothing	better	to	do	than	to	dope	him	with	some	infernal
concoction	which	would	 have	 killed	 him	 in	 a	week.	But	Gaunt’s	 changed	 all
that.
He	waited	 till	 the	 last	dose	had	worn	off	and	 then	he	spent	an	hour	with
Dad,	alone.	I’ve	no	idea	what	he	did,	but	when	he	fetched	me,	there	was	the	old
chap,	 sitting	 up	 in	 bed,	 still	 very	 weak,	 of	 course,	 but	 as	 sane	 as	 you	 or	 I,
drinking	beef-tea	like	a	two-year-old,	and	as	happy	as	can	be.
He’s	getting	up	for	a	while	 tomorrow,	and	we	expect	he’ll	be	quite	 fit	 in
another	week	at	the	outside.
Of	 course,	 he	 doesn’t	 remember	 what	 happened	 to	 him;	 that’s	 part	 of
Gaunt’s	 treatment	—	he’s	washed	out	 the	memory	somehow.	But	personally	 I
don’t	think	that	anything	did	happen,	outside	his	own	imagination.
Lorrimer	found	him	beside	the	entrance	to	the	crypt,	and	I	fancy	he’d	been
poking	round	down	there	and	lost	his	lamp	or	something,	and	then	got	the	wind
up	and	bolted.	Gaunt	 thinks	 so	 too.	We	went	down	 there	 the	other	night,	 and
there’s	 nothing	 alarming	 at	 all.	Bit	 creepy,	 of	 course,	 and	 I	 can	well	 imagine
Dad	having	a	fit	of	the	horrors,	without	a	light.
As	 for	me,	 I’m	 feeling	awfully	 fit,	 and	 seriously	 thinking	of	 taking	your
advice	 and	 staying	 here.	 It’s	 a	 delightful	 spot,	 and	 in	 the	 summer	 it	 will	 be
superb.	You	must	come	down	for	a	week	or	two,	John,	or	as	long	as	you	like.
We	could	get	as	much	bathing	and	fishing	as	you	want.
Gaunt’s	staying	on	for	a	while	until	Dad’s	quite	fit.
Do	write	 and	 let	 me	 know	 if	 you	 can	 come,	 and	 when.	 How’s	 London
looking?	Pretty	grim,	I	guess.
Yours,
Tony.
Hamilton	 folded	 the	 letter	 with	 a	 smile.	 Dear	 old	 Tony!	 Never	 the	 same	 for	 two
consecutive	 minutes.	 Now	 he’d	 forgotten	 all	 his	 fears,	 and	 was	 in	 love	 with	 his	 old
nightmare!
Not	a	bad	idea,	though,	to	go	down	and	see	him	when	the	summer	came.	He	sat	down
and	wrote	to	his	friend,	telling	him	he’d	come	in	a	couple	of	months’	time.	Holiday	jaunts
at	a	moment’s	notice	were	not	for	hard-working	fellows	like	himself,	he	thought.	But	he
was	glad	Tony	was	happy	again.

Chapter	V	
The	 weeks	 passed	 by,	 and	 life	 on	 Kestrel	 pursued	 its	 even	 tenor.	 Sir	 Anthony,
restored	 to	 his	 former	 health	 and	 vigour,	with	 all	 recollection	 of	 his	 terrible	 experience
erased	 from	 the	 tablets	 of	 his	 memory,	 was	 very	 happy	 in	 the	 newly	 discovered
companionship	of	his	son,	who	found	his	own	life	beginning	anew	in	the	ancient	home	of
his	family.
Dr.	Gaunt	was	still	with	 them,	 for	Sir	Anthony	had	 taken	a	great	 fancy	 to	 the	man
who	had	saved	his	reason,	if	not	his	very	life,	and	insisted	that	he	must	stay	with	him	as	a
sort	of	resident	physician.	Tony	was	only	too	pleased	with	this	arrangement,	for	 the	two
were	firm	friends.
They	spent	much	of	their	time	in	the	open,	clambering	about	the	island,	bathing	from
the	 sheltered	 beach,	 fishing	 in	 the	 launch,	 and	 making	 occasional	 trips	 across	 to	 the
mainland.	And	when	outdoor	 activities	 began	 to	pall	 they	 ransacked	 the	 library,	 and,	 in
company	 with	 Sir	 Anthony,	 spent	 many	 an	 hour	 delving	 into	 that	 treasury	 of	 ancient
learning.	 Gaunt’s	 knowledge	 of	 all	 subjects	 was	 profound,	 and	 in	 this,	 as	 in	 every
occupation,	he	proved	a	delightful	companion.
Tony’s	manservant,	Johnston,	had	come	down	from	London	at	his	master’s	bidding,
and	with	 this	 addition	 to	 their	 staff,	 as	well	 as	Tom	Tregellis,	 the	Lorrimers	 found	 they
could	serve	the	little	party	right	royally.
The	Abbey	 itself	 seemed	 to	 respond	 to	 the	 happiness	within	 its	walls,	whose	 very
outlines	appeared	to	soften	their	ancient	grimness	and	put	on	a	new	coat	of	mellow	beauty
under	the	glorious	sunshine	of	that	early	Cornish	summer.	The	gulls	flashed	white	about
the	rugged	 towers,	dark	against	 the	flawless	blue	above,	and	 the	waves	 lapped	gently	at
the	foot	of	the	tremendous	cliffs.
It	was	a	happy	time,	and	when	stark	tragedy	came	bursting	in	upon	it	the	shock	was
all	the	greater.
Gaunt	and	Tony	had	been	out	on	a	fishing	expedition,	and	as	they	climbed	the	long
stairway	 to	 the	Abbey	 they	were	 talking	breathlessly	of	 their	day’s	 sport.	Tony	was	 just
saying,	 “You	 should	 have	 seen	 the	 one	 that	 got	 away!”	 and	 the	 doctor	was	 laughing	 at
him,	when	Tom	Tregellis	burst	out	of	 the	wicket	 in	 the	great	gate	 above	him	and	came
running	headlong	down	the	worn	steps,	shouting	as	he	came:
“Mr.	Tony!	Doctor!	Come	quick!	The	master…”
He	 reached	 them	babbling	 something	 incoherent	 about	 the	 library.	Without	waiting
for	further	explanation	they	both	began	to	run,	Gaunt	easily	outstripping	the	younger	man.
When	Tony	came	to	the	library,	a	long,	low	room	beyond	the	great	hall,	he	found	the
doctor	bending	over	the	crumpled	figure	of	his	father.	Lorrimer	was	standing	by	the	table,
a	 blood-stained	 cloth	 in	 his	 hand,	 and	 his	 wife	 was	 near	 by,	 wringing	 her	 hands	 and
weeping	silently.	An	overturned	step-ladder,	and	a	heap	of	books,	fallen	from	a	gap	in	one
of	the	upper	shelves,	told	their	own	story.
“Is	he	badly	hurt,	Doctor?”	Tony	gasped.
Gaunt’s	delicate	fingers	were	exploring	the	dreadful	bloody	patch	on	the	back	of	the
grey	head.	He	did	not	look	up.
“The	skull	is	fractured;	badly,	I	fear,”	he	said	gravely.	“He	must	have	hit	the	table	in
falling.	Come,	help	me	get	him	upstairs.”
Gently	 they	 carried	 the	 limp	 figure	 up	 the	 great	 staircase	 and	 laid	 him	on	his	 bed.
Then	the	doctor	asked	for	hot	water,	and,	when	it	was	brought,	sent	them	all	away	while
he	worked.
Tony	went	 sadly	down	 the	 stairs	 and	back	 to	 the	 library,	where	he	 found	Lorrimer
gathering	up	the	fallen	books.	The	servant	turned	a	piteous	face	to	the	young	man.
“I	heard	the	crash,	Mr.	Tony,	and	came	running,	and	there	he	lay,	quite	still,	his	poor
head	all	bleeding	and	a	book	in	his	hand.”
“What	book?”	Almost	unconsciously	the	question	came.
Lorrimer	took	from	the	table	a	small	volume,	bound	in	decayed,	tattered	leather,	and
handed	it	to	him.	Tony	opened	it	and	saw	a	title-page,	written	in	manuscript,	the	ink	faded
and	brown	with	age:	The	Curse	of	the	Lovels.
He	looked	sharply	at	Lorrimer.
“I’ve	never	seen	this	before,”	he	said.
“No	more	have	I,	Mr.	Tony.”
Tony	turned	the	stiff,	mildewed	pages.	A	passage	caught	his	eye:
then	 the	 abbott,	 raising	 his	 hands	 aloft,	 cried	 in	 a	 loud	 voice,	 saying:
“Anthony	Lovel,	ere	we	leave	this	island	home	of	ours	for	ever,	we	have	a	word
for	thee.	At	the	bidding	of	thy	profligate	master,	thou	didst	come	hither	to	seize
our	 treasures	 for	 the	Crown,	 and,	 casting	 us	 out,	 to	 hold	 this	 island	 for	 thine
own.	If	that	were	all,	we	yet	might	leave	thee	to	the	sure	justice	of	high	heaven,
but	that	is	not	all,	by	far.	Not	content	with	forcing	an	entrance	here,	thou,	and
thy	 men-at-arms,	 didst	 slay	 remorselessly	 those	 brethren	 who	 did	 valiantly
oppose	 their	 naked	 hands	 to	 thy	 keen	 swords	 and	mail	 of	 proof.	 Their	 blood
crieth	out	for	vengeance,	nor	shall	it	cry	it	vain.
“Nor	is	that	the	greatest	of	thine	iniquities,	for,	finding	the	sub-prior	before
the	 altar,	 celebrating	 the	 Holy	 Mysteries,	 since	 he	 would	 not	 heed	 thine
importunities,	 thou	 didst	 cut	 him	 down,	 and	 his	 blood	 floweth	 darkly	 in	 the
sanctuary,	mingling	with	 the	Most	 Precious	Blood	 of	Christ,	 spilled	 from	 the
chalice	in	his	nerveless	grasp.
“For	this	most	awful	sacrilege,	hear	then	the	doom	of	Holy	Church,	for	we
yet	have	power	to	bind,	and	loose,	though	Henry	sits	on	England’s	throne:
“I,	 Stephen,	 mitred	 abbott	 of	 Kestrel	 Isle,	 do	 pronounce	 thee,	 Anthony
Lovel,	excommunicate	and	accursed,	and	this	island	under	interdict.
“Not	thou	alone,	Anthony	Lovel,	shalt	suffer	for	this	day,	but	all	thy	cursed
seed	 that	 follow	after	 thee	 as	 lord	 of	Kestrel	 shall	 feel	 the	weight	 of	 our	 just
vengeance,	and	see	hell-gate	yawn	for	them	at	the	last.
“And	this	little	isle,	which	for	so	long	has	been	the	dwelling-place	of	God
His	 servants,	 shall	 become	 an	 abode	 of	 demons,	 an	 ante-room	 of	 hell;	 foul
fiends	 from	 the	 nether-most	 pit	 shall	 wander	 in	 this	 dark	 sanctuary;	 and	 no
human	head,	 least	of	 all	 a	Lovel’s,	 shall	 rest	 in	peace	upon	 this	 soil.	Yet	wilt
thou	dwell	here,	and	thine	heirs,	never	at	peace,	but	bound	by	the	iron	chains	of
destiny.”
At	which	saying,	enraged	beyond	measure,	Sir	Anthony	smote	the	abbott
with	his	sword,	and	slew	him,	and	so	—
Fascinated,	Tony	had	not	heard	the	door	open,	and	shut	the	book	quickly,	almost	in
terror,	as	he	heard	Gaunt’s	voice:
“Tony,	old	boy,	I	am	very	sorry	to	have	to	tell	you,	but	your	father	is	dying.	He	is	still
unconscious,	but	he	may	be	able	to	speak	to	you	just	before	the	last.”
Lorrimer,	standing	near	by,	caught	his	breath	and	turned	away.	Tony	said	huskily:
“When	will	that	be,	Doctor?”
“Probably	in	a	few	hours’	 time.	It	 is	a	miracle	 that	he	is	still	alive,	but	nothing	can
save	him.	I	will	stay	with	him;	you	had	better	rest.	I	will	call	you	if	there	is	any	change.”
Tony	nodded	silently,	and	Gaunt	went	back	to	his	patient.	As	the	door	closed	behind
him	Tony	spoke	to	Lorrimer.
“You	may	go	now.	I	shall	be	here	if	you	want	me.”
The	old	servant	went	out	with	the	tears	he	did	not	attempt	to	conceal	trickling	down
his	wrinkled	cheeks.
Tony	sat	down	by	the	table	and	reopened	the	book.	So	far	as	he	could	make	out	in	a
perfunctory	examination,	it	merely	went	on	to	tell,	with	a	wealth	of	superfluous	detail,	the
story	of	his	 family’s	misfortunes,	which	he	already	knew	too	well.	There	was	a	passage
concerning	the	infamous	James	Lovell	which	interested	him,	however:
Then	came	James	Lovel,	nephew	to	Anthony.	He	had	learned	the	black	art
in	Florence	in	his	youth,	and	was	not	dismayed,	nay,	was	delighted	even,	by	the
evil	 which	 dwelt	 on	 Kestrel.	 It	 is	 said	 that	 he	 and	 his	 associates	 turned	 the
ancient	crypt	into	a	pagan	temple,	and	celebrated	the	blasphemous	mysteries	of
the	 black	mass	 on	God’s	 altar	 there.	Many	 helpless	 infants	were	 stolen	 away
from	 their	 cradles	 in	 that	 time,	 and	 perished	 at	 his	 hands,	 sacrifices	 to	 the
Demon.
During	his	 lifetime,	 the	curse,	 from	a	formless	cloud	of	evil,	grew	into	a
monstrous	 thing	 having	 material	 shape,	 which	 at	 length	 overthrew	 his
dominion,	and	destroyed	him.
And	now	it	dwells	 in	the	bowels	of	 the	abbey	rock,	drawing	its	 life	from
the	accursed	family	which	dwells	there,	until	one	shall	be	found	strong	enough
to	overcome	it,	and	drive	this	monster	from	the	fair	face	of	earth.
When	the	fading	light	at	last	rendered	the	crabbed	writing	illegible	Tony	closed	the
book	and	sat	staring	into	the	dusk.
Was	 it	 true?	 he	 asked	 himself.	 Since	 his	 father’s	 recovery,	 and	 during	 the	 happy
weeks	 they	had	 spent	 together,	 the	 story	of	 the	 curse	had	been	 relegated	 to	 the	 lumber-
room	 at	 the	 back	 of	 his	mind;	 but	 now	 it	 sprang	 out	 again,	 panoplied	 in	 all	 its	 hellish
significance.	Once	more	he	asked	himself	the	age-old	question:	can	such	things	be?
Presently	Lorrimer	came	 in	and	 lit	 the	 lamp,	but	neither	spoke,	each	respecting	 the
other’s	sorrow.	Later	Mrs.	Lorrimer	entered,	her	eyes	red	with	weeping,	and	quietly	set	a
tray,	with	sandwiches	and	decanter,	on	the	table;	but	Tony	could	not	eat,	and	only	drank	a
little	wine.
The	 hours	 crept	 by	 and	 outside	 the	wind	 began	 to	 rise,	 wailing	mournfully	 in	 the
chimneys	and	spattering	drops	of	rain	upon	the	glass.	Upstairs	a	Lovell	lay	a-dying,	and	it
seemed	that	all	Kestrel	wept	for	him.
During	those	sad	hours	of	waiting	a	great	resolve	was	born	in	Tony’s	heart.	When	his
father	died,	and	he	himself	was	lord	of	Kestrel,	he	told	himself	that	he	would	not	rest	until
the	 ancient	 mystery	 was	 settled,	 once	 for	 all.	 Gaunt	 would	 help	 him,	 with	 his	 wide
knowledge,	which,	once	or	twice	during	their	friendship,	had	hinted	at	things	not	known	to
ordinary	men.
It	there	were	nothing	in	the	hidden	parts	of	the	Abbey	but	dust	and	shadows,	and	the
unquiet	wind,	 then	the	horrid	fable	must	be	exploded.	It	 there	were	more	—	and	Tony’s
mind	balked	at	 the	possibility	—	then	 it	must	be	utterly	cast	out.	For	a	moment	he	saw
himself	and	Gaunt,	like	knights	of	old	chivalry,	clad	in	shining	armour,	riding	out	to	fight
the	dragon.	So	the	hours	crept	by.
The	pile	of	cigarette-ends	and	ash	was	overflowing	the	tray	at	Tony’s	elbow	when	at
last	he	heard	a	quick	step	outside,	and	the	door	opened.	Gaunt,	haggard	and	brilliant-eyed,
stood	on	the	threshold.
“Come,	Tony,	he	is	going.”
As	 if	 in	 a	 dream,	 Tony	 followed	 him	 along	 the	 passage	 to	 the	 hall,	 mounted	 the
staircase,	and	passed	down	the	gallery	to	his	father’s	room.	He	had	a	swift	vision	of	the
servants	clustered	around	the	door;	then	he	was	inside	and	on	his	knees	by	the	great	bed.
The	old	man	lay	very	still,	his	grey	hair	hidden	by	the	swathing	bandages,	his	eyes
closed.	He	hardly	seemed	to	breathe.
Outside	 the	 wind	 howled	 like	 a	 soul	 in	 torment,	 and	 the	 rain	 lashed	 the	 window-
panes.
Tony	watched	his	 father’s	 face	with	breathless	attention.	Would	he	pass	out	so	 into
the	unknown,	without	a	word?	No,	the	pale	lips	parted	with	a	little	moan,	and	the	eyelids
fluttered.	With	something	of	a	shock	Tony	found	himself	gazing	into	the	faded	blue	eyes,
full	of	 intelligence,	which	were	immediately	fixed	upon	him.	A	thin	hand	crept	out	over
the	 coverlet,	 and	he	 caught	 it	 in	his	own	warm	grasp.	Faintly,	 as	 from	a	great	distance,
came	his	father’s	voice:
“My	 boy.	Don’t	 worry…	 everything	 is	 all	 right…	 I	 have	 remembered…	 the	 good
doctor	 made	 me	 forget…	 but	 that	 book…	 in	 the	 library…	 I	 remembered	 again…
everything	went	black…	I	suppose	I	fainted…	and	fell…	Silly	of	me!	But	I’m	not	afraid
any	more…	I’m	going	now…	out	of	reach	of	that	dark	thing	down	there…	in	the	crypt…
the	crypt,	Tony…	the	altar…	inside…	steps…	down…	down…	and	then…	the	Thing!	It	is
our	responsibility,	Tony…	never	forget	that…	ours.	We	brought	it	into	the	world…	and	we
must	keep	it	here…	safe…	away	from	everybody.	Keep	it…	safe…	safe…”
His	 voice	 trailed	 away	 into	 silence.	 Tony’s	 face	 was	 only	 a	 few	 inches	 from	 his
father’s,	 the	 amazing	 likeness	of	 the	 two,	one	old,	 the	other	young,	 standing	out	with	 a
significance	almost	awful.
Gaunt	 stood	 at	 the	 foot	 of	 the	 bed,	 his	 hands	 gripping	 the	 posts	 on	 either	 side,
trembling	from	head	to	foot.	His	eyes,	glowing	with	a	strange	radiance	of	their	own,	were
fixed	on	the	old	man	with	an	intensity	which	was	truly	terrific.	Small	drops	of	sweat	stood
on	his	brow.	Tony	never	looked	at	him.
Suddenly	Sir	Anthony	opened	his	eyes	again,	gripped	his	son’s	hand	with	surprising
strength,	and	sat	up,	staring	full	at	Gaunt.	Loud	and	strong	his	voice	came:
“Tony!	I	see	it	all	—	I	see	it	now	—	the	whole	abominable	thing.	Beware!	Beware	of
—	But	his	voice	was	strangled	in	his	throat,	his	free	hand	clawed	the	air,	and	he	fell	back
in	 the	 last	 agony.	He	gave	 a	great	 sigh,	 and	his	 limbs	 relaxed.	Gently	Tony	disengaged
himself	and	folded	the	thin	waxen	hands	on	the	still	breast.	Gaunt	turned	away	with	a	sigh,
which,	in	any	other	place,	might	have	been	taken	for	one	of	relief.
At	that	moment	the	whole	Abbey,	from	foundation	stone	to	turret-top,	quivered	as	if
from	a	tremendous	blow,	and	a	dreadful	yelling	sound,	deep-throated	and	inhuman,	came
bellowing	up	from	some	great	depth	below.
Tony	 felt	 as	 though	 an	 icy	 hand	 had	 closed	 about	 his	 heart.	White	 to	 the	 lips,	 he
sprang	up,	crying:
“In	Heaven’s	name,	what	was	that?”
But	the	doctor	replied	quietly:
“Only	the	wind;	the	wind	and	the	waves.”

Chapter	VI	
I	
The	 wretched	 business	 of	 the	 inquest	 was	 soon	 over,	 the	 coroner	 finding	 that	 Sir
Anthony	had	died	from	misadventure,	and	on	a	beautiful	June	morning	he	was	laid	to	rest
in	the	family	vault	in	the	little	churchyard	on	the	hillside	above	Pentock.
As	Tony	stood,	bareheaded,	by	the	door	of	the	vault,	listening	to	the	voice	of	the	old
rector	as	he	read	the	infinitely	moving	words	of	the	Burial	Service,	he	lifted	his	eyes	and
looked	over	the	sea	to	where	Kestrel	lay,	with	the	dark	shape	of	the	Abbey	crouched	upon
its	back.
“He’s	safe	from	you	now,”	he	thought,	but	he	knew	that	upon	his	own	shoulders	the
burden	 of	 that	 ancient	 tyranny	 now	 rested,	 and,	 bowing	 his	 head,	 he	 accepted	 the
responsibility.
When	 it	was	all	 over,	 and	 the	 iron	gates	were	 shut	upon	all	 that	was	mortal	of	his
father,	the	rector	came	to	him	and	laid	a	hand	upon	the	young	man’s	arm.
“I	knew	your	father,	my	boy,”	he	said,	“and	I	hope	to	know	you	better.	Never	hesitate
to	come	to	me	if	you	think	I	can	be	of	any	help.	God	be	with	you!”
After	 the	funeral	Tony	had	to	go	up	to	London	to	see	his	solicitor,	and	to	attend	to
many	matters	 connected	with	 the	 estate.	He	 left	Gaunt	 at	Kestrel,	 for	 he	 had	 asked	 the
doctor	to	stay	on	for	a	while,	though	he	had	not	yet	opened	his	heart	to	him	on	the	matter
of	the	curse.
Curiously	 enough,	 it	 never	 occurred	 to	 him	 to	 visit	 Hamilton	 while	 he	 was	 in
London.	Indeed,	he	found	the	whole	business	exceedingly	wearisome,	and	as	soon	as	he
possibly	could	he	went	back	to	Cornwall.	The	dominant	thought	in	his	mind	was	that	he
must	return	to	Kestrel	and	start	upon	the	great	task	which	he	had	set	himself,	with	Gaunt’s
help.	Nothing	must	 interfere	with	 that,	 and	within	 half	 an	 hour	 of	 his	 return	 he	was	 in
conference	with	the	doctor,	in	the	ill-fated	library	where	they	had	found	Sir	Anthony	little
more	than	a	week	before.
“Doctor,”	he	began,	“you	and	I	have	been	great	friends,	and	we	must	be	frank	with
each	 other.	 In	 the	 past	 you	 have	 always	 scouted	 any	 suggestion	 that	 the	 curse	 of	 the
Lovells	had	any	basis	upon	 fact.	 In	view	of	my	 father’s	 last	words,	and	 the	phenomena
which	accompanied	his	death,	do	you	still	hold	to	that	opinion?”
Gaunt	 did	 not	 reply	 at	 once,	 but	 lit	 a	 cigarette	 and	 inhaled	 thoughtfully.	When	 he
spoke,	his	musical	voice	was	unusually	grave.
“Tony,	 I	 have	 never	 held	 that	 opinion	 in	 my	 own	 mind.	 If	 I	 have	 been	 guilty	 of
deception	 you	 must	 forgive	 me.	 It	 was	 only	 because	 I	 did	 not	 think	 you	 were	 strong
enough	 to	bear	 the	 truth;	 in	 fact,	you	were	definitely	not	when	I	 first	came	here.	Now	I
think	the	time	has	come	when	you	must	know.
“Your	 father	 was	 perfectly	 right.	 There	 is	 something,	 something	 which	 the	 world
calls	supernatural,	hidden	beneath	us.	Now,	I	know	that	there	is	no	supernatural,	but	I	also
know	that	there	are	phenomena	which	apparently	contradict	the	usually	accepted	laws	of
nature,	but	which,	nevertheless,	are	governed	by	quite	definite	 laws	of	 their	own.	Let	us
call	them	supernormal.	Your	family	curse	falls	into	this	category.
“When	 the	 last	 abbot	 of	Kestrel	 laid	 the	 curse	 upon	 your	 ancestor	 he	 had	 no	 idea
what	he	was	doing.	His	words,	uttered	in	the	heat	of	the	moment,	prompted	by	a	very	real
wrong	 which	 had	 been	 done	 to	 him,	 released	 a	 certain	 force	 which	 was	 pent	 up	 here.
Whether	 or	 no,	 as	 the	 legends	 say,	 a	 necromancer	 of	 great	 power	did	dwell	 here	 in	 the
remote	past,	I	do	not	profess	to	know;	but	certainly	there	was	an	evil	entity	lying	dormant
at	this	point	in	the	space-time	continuum.	Or,	if	you	prefer,	at	this	spot	the	veil	of	tangible
matter	was	worn	 thin,	 and	his	words	 and	 intention	 served	 to	 rend	 it	 for	 a	moment,	 and
some	creature	of	the	outer	darkness	sprang	through	the	gap.
“Certainly	 all	 the	 accumulated	 ‘grace’	—	 to	 use	 a	 theological	 term	—	which	 had
resulted	 from	 the	many	 holy	 lives	 spent	 here	 in	 accordance	with	 the	Church’s	 law,	 the
countless	prayers	which	had	continually	ascended,	and	the	hundreds	of	Masses	which	had
been	 said	within	 the	Abbey	walls,	 vanished	 in	 a	 flash,	 and	 the	 island	 became	 intensely
vulnerable	to	the	dark	powers.	We	in	Europe	are	so	accustomed	to	living	in	an	atmosphere
saturated	 with	 grace	 that	 we	 do	 not	 realize	 the	 continual	 assaults	 of	 the	 powers	 of
darkness,	which	are	a	commonplace	in	remote,	pagan	lands.
“At	 any	 rate,	 explain	 it	 how	 you	 will,	 the	 fact	 remains:	 some	 supernormal
monstrosity	 slipped	 through	 into	 the	world,	 fortunately	becoming	attached	 to	 this	place,
and	also,	unhappily	for	you,	to	the	family	which	dwelt	here.	I	say	fortunately	because,	had
it	been	loosed	upon	the	world	at	large,	it	would	have	infallibly	wreaked	incalculable	harm.
“The	 gross	 and	 immoral	 conduct	 of	 the	 first	 Sir	 Anthony	 probably	 increased	 its
power,	 and	 the	 black	 arts	 practiced	 by	 his	 successor	 undoubtedly	 had	 a	 much	 greater
effect.”
Tony	had	been	staring	at	 the	doctor	with	steadily	growing	amazement,	and	now,	at
last,	unable	to	contain	himself	any	longer,	he	broke	in	with:
“Doctor,	 do	 you	 seriously	 believe	 all	 this?	 It’s	 incredible!	 I	 didn’t	 think	 anyone
believed	in	such	things	any	more.	And	a	man	of	your	intelligence	—	“
“That’s	just	it,”	came	the	quick	reply:	“the	more	a	man	learns,	the	more	he	realizes
that	 there	 is	 a	 vast	 realm	 of	 knowledge	 almost	 untouched	 by	 the	 human	 mind	—	 the
average	human	mind,	I	should	say.	Tony,	we	must	face	facts	now	or	we	are	lost.	There	are
such	things!	This	material	world	of	ours,	so	fair	and	seemingly	substantial,	is	but	a	painted
veil	which	 hangs	 between	our	 eyes	 and	 the	 great	 unknown.	And	 that	 unknown	 is	 often
wonderfully	 beautiful,	 as	 the	mystics	 know,	 and	 sometimes	 incredibly	 horrible,	 as	 such
manifestations	as	this	one	prove.”
Strangely	shaken,	Tony	said:
“The	 foundations	 of	 my	 world	 are	 crumbling.	 What	 am	 I	 to	 believe?	 Is	 it	 all	 a
dream?”
“It	is	but	a	dream,	Tony.	And	beyond	the	dream	are	great	realities.”
“Show	them	to	me,	Doctor.	Help	me!”
“I	can	if	you	will	put	yourself	unreservedly	into	my	hands.”
“I	can’t	do	anything	else.	I	must	trust	you,	Doctor.	What	shall	I	do?	When	my	father
died	I	swore	an	oath	that	I	would	not	rest	until	this	horror	was	rooted	out.”
“It	will	be	a	long	and	painful	task,	Tony.	Great	ends	are	only	attained	through	mighty
labour.	First	of	all,	with	your	permission,	I	will	send	to	London	for	an	associate	of	mine,	a
Mr.	Simon	Vaughan,	who	knows	more	 about	 these	 things	 even	 than	 I	 do.	He	 is	 a	 great
student	of	 supersensual	phenomena,	 and	he	will	 know	exactly	what	 course	 to	 take	with
this	one.”
“Send	for	him	quickly,	then!”
“He	will	be	here	at	dawn.”
“How?”
“By	road.”
“So	soon?	How	will	you	let	him	know?”
“I	have	means	of	communication	at	my	disposal	which	are	not	available	to	most	men.
Come,	I	will	show	you.”
Together	 they	went	 up	 to	Gaunt’s	 room,	 and	 the	 doctor	 gave	 Tony	 a	 chair	 by	 the
window.	Then	he	 lit	 the	 lamp	which	stood	on	a	small	 table	beside	his	bed.	Unlocking	a
suitcase,	he	took	out	an	object	wrapped	in	black	velvet.	This	proved	to	be	a	small	crystal
sphere,	 mounted	 on	 a	 brass	 disk,	 round	 the	 edge	 of	 which	 curious	 characters	 were
engraved.
He	placed	the	crystal	on	the	table	beside	the	lamp	and	oriented	it	carefully	with	the
aid	of	his	pocket	compass.	Then	he	sat	down	by	the	table,	rested	his	head	on	his	hands,	an
elbow	either	side	of	the	crystal,	and	gazed	fixedly	into	the	opalescent	depths	of	the	shining
sphere.
To	Tony,	watching,	it	seemed	that	the	sphere	began	to	glow	with	an	internal	radiance,
which	 lit	 the	 intent	 face	above	 it	with	a	pale	 light.	The	doctor	began	 to	 speak	 in	a	 low,
clear	voice:
“Simon	Vaughan!	Simon	Vaughan!	Are	you	listening?	Come	at	once	to	Kestrel.	Your
friend	has	need	of	you.	Nicholas	Gaunt	has	need	of	you.	Come	quickly!”
There	was	silence	 for	a	 space,	while	 the	glow	faded	 from	 the	crystal.	When	 it	was
dull	and	opaque	once	more	Gaunt	looked	up:
“He	is	coming,	Tony.	All	will	be	well.”
Tony	put	a	hand	to	his	bewildered	head,	and	the	doctor,	with	a	gentle	smile,	rose	and
touched	his	shoulder,	saying:
“All	this	is	very	strange	and	new	to	you,	Tony.	To	me	it	is	just	commonplace.	Come
down	again	and	I	will	try	and	explain	it	a	little.”
When	they	were	comfortably	ensconced	in	 the	library,	 their	cigarettes	alight,	Gaunt
began:
“All	 phenomena	 connected	 with	 thought-transference,	 clairvoyance,	 mind-reading,
and	the	like,	depend	upon	the	existence	of	a	state	or	dimension	known	as	the	astral	plane.
This	is	somewhat	similar	to	the	imponderable	aether	of	the	nineteenth-century	physicists.
It	is	a	realm	which	is	outside	space	and	time,	and	yet	is	very	close	to	us.	In	this	respect	it	is
not	unlike	the	fourth	dimension,	beloved	of	science-fiction	writers.
“Almost	any	human	mind	can,	when	properly	trained,	attain	a	state	of	consciousness
wherein	 this	 astral	 plane	 is	 reached,	 and	 since	 the	 limitations	 of	 space	 are	 non-existent
thereon,	 two	 minds	 can	 have	 free	 intercourse,	 irrespective	 of	 the	 intervening	 distance,
however	great.	Similarly	the	past	is	accessible,	and,	to	a	less	extent,	the	future,	since	time
is	without	significance	on	that	plane.	Do	I	make	myself	clear?”
“Admirably,”	Tony	answered	with	a	wry	smile,	“if	I	accept	all	your	premises.	And	I
have	no	choice.	But	I	suppose	I	myself,	for	instance,	could	not	attain	to	this	astral	plane
for	lack	of	the	special	training?”
“Not	unaided.	But	I	can	demonstrate	it	to	you	if	you	wish.”
“Please	do,	Doctor.	It’s	amazingly	interesting.”
“Very	well.	Look	at	me,	 and	make	your	mind	as	 empty	 as	possible.	Give	me	your
hands.”
Tony	did	as	he	was	bid	and	looked	into	the	doctor’s	brilliant	eyes.	For	a	few	moments
he	was	only	aware	of	the	unwinking	stare	of	the	black	pupils	with	their	rings	of	grey	iris;
then	 he	 had	 a	 vivid	 impression	 of	 his	 material	 surroundings,	 the	 soft	 feel	 of	 the
upholstered	chair	under	him,	the	firm	grip	of	Gaunt’s	hands.	The	doctor	said	something	he
couldn’t	understand,	and	simultaneously	he	seemed	to	fall	headlong	into	the	dark	pool	of
the	other’s	eyes,	which	miraculously	widened	until	 they	covered	all	else.	He	 felt	a	 faint
tingling	all	over	his	body	and	at	once	lost	all	consciousness	of	it,	becoming	a	discarnate
mind.	Everything	was	black,	and	he	was	alone	in	the	blackness.	He	felt	very	lonely,	and
his	mind	turned	towards	Hamilton.
Instantly	there	was	a	room	about	him,	a	vaguely	familiar	room,	full	of	blue	tobacco-
smoke	and	 the	clattering	of	a	 typewriter.	 John	Hamilton	sat	at	his	desk,	pounding	away,
pipe	in	mouth.	Behind	him	the	window	stood	open	to	the	cool	night	breeze,	and	the	roar	of
Knightsbridge	came	pulsing	in.	Tony	tried	to	speak	to	his	friend,	to	step	forward	and	touch
him,	but	he	could	neither	move	nor	make	a	sound.	It	was	like	a	nightmare.	Hamilton	came
to	the	bottom	of	a	page,	whipped	it	out,	and	sat	reading	it	through.	Feverishly	Tony	tried
to	attract	his	attention,	and	for	a	moment	thought	he	had	succeeded,	for	the	other	raised	his
eyes	from	his	work	and	looked	full	at	him,	speculatively.	But	he	only	took	another	sheet,
wound	it	into	the	machine,	and	set	to	work	again.
The	 room	 faded,	 like	 a	 dissolving	 “cut”	 in	 a	 film,	 and	Tony	was	 in	 darkness	 once
more.	He	thought	of	Kestrel,	and	Gaunt,	and	immediately	felt	 the	doctor’s	hands	on	his.
Clutching	at	them	like	a	drowning	man,	he	struggled	to	the	surface	and	lay	gasping	in	his
chair.
“Satisfied?”	smiled	the	doctor.
Tony	nodded	dumbly.	A	thought	struck	him.
“But	was	it	real,”	he	asked,	“or	did	you	just	suggest	it	to	me?”
“It	was	real	enough.	Your	mind	turned	to	your	friend	and	went	to	him	at	once.	Write
and	ask	him	what	he	was	doing	at	this	hour,	if	you	like.	There	was	no	deception.”
“It’s	amazing,	Doctor.	Simply	amazing.”
“The	 powers	 of	 the	 human	mind	 are	 always	 amazing	 to	 those	 who	 know	 little	 of
them.	I	could	show	you	things	far	more	astonishing	than	that.	I	will,	but	not	tonight.	We
must	be	up	early	in	the	morning	to	meet	my	friend	Vaughan	at	Pentock.”
II	
At	just	after	nine	o’clock	next	morning	Tony	and	Gaunt	climbed	the	harbour	steps	at
Pentock	and	made	their	way	to	the	Three	Fishermen.	Outside	the	inn	they	found	a	small
crowd	of	villagers,	standing	round	a	 long	grey	car,	piled	with	 luggage	and	covered	with
dust.	The	men	made	way	 respectfully	 for	 them	as	 they	 approached,	 touching	 their	 caps
and	greeting	the	new	master	of	Kestrel	with	a	“Good	morning	to	’ee,	zur!”	Tony	returned
the	 salute	 and	he	 and	Gaunt	 passed	 inside,	where	 they	 encountered	 the	 landlord’s	wife,
polishing	the	brass	rail	of	the	bar.
She	answered	Tony’s	query	as	 to	whether	anyone	had	arrived	for	 the	Abbey	with	a
nod	of	her	head	towards	the	back	parlour.
“He’s	in	there,	Sir	Anthony,	having	his	breakfast.	He	came	about	half	an	hour	ago.”
From	 her	 tone	 of	 voice	 Tony	 gathered	 that	 the	 newcomer	 had	 not	 created	 a	 good
impression,	but	he	thanked	her	and	followed	Gaunt	into	the	other	room.
At	the	table	was	an	enormously	fat	man,	of	repellent	appearance,	making	short	work
of	 a	 large	 plate	 of	 bacon	 and	 eggs.	 He	 got	 up	 as	 they	 appeared	 and	 shook	 hands	with
Gaunt,	who	turned	to	Tony,	saying,
“This	is	Mr.	Simon	Vaughan,	Tony,	of	whom	I	told	you.”
Tony	 took	 the	 flabby	 cold	 hand	with	 a	 faint	 feeling	 of	 disgust.	The	man	 reminded
him	 of	 a	 toad	 he	 had	 once	 seen,	 sitting	 in	 a	 dark	 hole	 in	 the	 rocks.	 The	 same	 sleepy,
watchful	eyes;	the	same	wide	mouth	and	flat,	hairless	head.	He	was	vaguely	surprised	by
the	courteous	greeting	he	was	given,	but	his	tone	was	very	cold	and	formal	as	he	said:
“How	do	you	do,	Mr.	Vaughan?	You	had	a	good	run	down,	I	hope?”
“Excellent,	thank	you,	Sir	Anthony.	I	must	have	averaged	close	on	forty	all	the	way.
The	car	goes	very	well,	Doctor.”
Gaunt	nodded.	“She’s	a	good	car.	Mine,	Tony.	Care	to	have	a	look	at	her	while	Mr.
Vaughan	finishes	his	breakfast?”
They	went	out	into	the	sunshine;	Tony,	at	least,	with	a	definite	feeling	of	relief.	As	he
was	examining	the	Bentley	with	keen	interest	the	doctor	spoke	of	his	colleague.
“Don’t	be	put	off	by	first	impressions,	Tony.	Vaughan	is	a	charming	fellow	really,	and
has	an	amazing	mind.	His	appearance	is	against	him,	I	know,	but	when	you	get	to	know
him	you	will	like	him	as	much	as	I	do.	He	is	probably	the	only	man	in	England	qualified
to	deal	with	our	particular	problem.”
Naturally	Tony	denied	that	he	had	received	any	bad	impression,	but	in	his	own	heart
he	knew	that	his	first	reaction	to	Vaughan	had	been	one	of	repulsion.	However,	he	allowed
that	he	might	be	mistaken.
The	subject	of	his	thoughts	presently	joined	them,	smoking	a	long,	thin	cheroot,	and
wearing	a	great	traveling-coat	lined	with	fur.	They	took	the	car	as	near	to	the	jetty	as	was
possible	 and	 spent	 a	 strenuous	 five	 minutes	 transferring	 the	 three	 huge	 trunks	 to	 the
launch.
“Apparatus	which	I	shall	need	for	my	investigations,	mainly,	Sir	Anthony,”	Vaughan
explained,	“not	personal	effects!”
The	 Bentley	 was	 finally	 stabled	 at	 the	 inn,	 beside	 the	 old	 Buick	 belonging	 to	 the
Abbey,	which	looked	even	more	elderly	and	dilapidated	beside	its	new	companion.	Tony
drove	the	launch	across	to	the	island,	mentally	thanking	Providence	for	a	calm	day,	for	the
gunwales	were	within	three	inches	of	the	water.	However,	the	passage	and	the	unloading
at	 the	 Abbey	 harbour	 were	 accomplished	 without	 mishap,	 Lorrimer	 and	 Tregellis
assisting.
Gaunt	went	with	 the	newcomer	 to	his	 room	and	remained	with	him	for	some	 time,
while	Tony	interviewed	Mrs.	Lorrimer	about	the	domestic	arrangements.
A	 fire	was	 crackling	on	 the	hearth	 in	 the	great	 hall,	 for	 the	place	was	never	 really
warm,	even	at	the	height	of	summer,	and	Tony	was	sitting	beside	it	when	the	others	came
down.
Vaughan	lowered	himself	cautiously	into	a	chair,	saying:
“Well,	 Sir	 Anthony,	 the	 doctor	 has	 been	 telling	 me	 about	 your	 trouble.	 A	 very
interesting	case,	I	must	say.”
“Do	you	think	you	will	be	able	to	do	anything	about	it,	Mr.	Vaughan?”	asked	Tony,
handing	him	the	cigarettes,	which	he	passed	on	to	Gaunt	without	taking	one.
“Yes,	I’m	almost	sure	I	shall.	But	I	must	have	your	help,	and	Gaunt	tells	me	you’re
quite	new	to	these	matters.	Almost	a	sceptic,	I	believe?”
“I	was	until	a	few	days	ago,	but	I’m	not	now.	Certainly	I	know	very	little	about	it.”
“The	doctor	shall	teach	you	all	you	need	to	know	while	I	go	about	my	preparations.	I
think	we	may	say	that	there	is	little	doubt	but	that	the	seat	of	the	manifestations	is	in	the
crypt,	eh,	Gaunt?”
The	doctor	nodded.	“No	doubt	at	all,”	he	said.	“Nothing	has	ever	been	seen	up	here,
has	it,	Tony?”
“Not	so	far	as	I	know,	Doctor.	The	rooms	we	don’t	use	are	all	shut	up,	but	I	suppose
we	can	 rule	 them	out.	Everything	points	 to	 the	 crypt,	 and	yet	when	you	 took	me	down
there	we	didn’t	find	anything	unusual.”
“No,	 but	we	must	 have	missed	 something.	There	must	 be	 another	 exit.	 The	whole
place	will	have	 to	be	searched	 thoroughly.	Our	examination	was	of	a	 rather	perfunctory
nature,	you	must	admit.”
“We	will	start	our	investigations	there,”	said	Vaughan	in	a	decided	tone;	“if	they	yield
nothing	of	note,	then	we	must	try	elsewhere.	But	first	there	is	an	old	book,	isn’t	there?	A
history	of	the	curse.	The	doctor	told	me	of	it.”
“Yes,	I’ll	get	it	for	you.	It’s	in	the	library.”	And	Tony	fetched	the	ill-fated	volume.
Vaughan	took	it,	saying:
“Thank	you,	Sir	Anthony.	Now	if	you	and	the	doctor	will	take	a	little	walk	I’ll	read
this	through	and	get	my	facts	in	order.”
Outside,	in	the	bright	sunshine	which	warmed	half	the	courtyard,	Tony	asked	Gaunt:
“What	will	he	do	first,	Doctor?”
“I	cannot	say	for	certain.	He	has	his	own	methods.	But	I	should	imagine	that	he	will
first	endeavour	to	find	the	exact	spot	from	which	this	evil	influence	operates.	Then	he	will
proceed	 to	 administer	 some	 corrective	 treatment,	 the	 exact	 nature	 of	which	will	 depend
upon	 the	 class	 to	 which	 this	 being	 belongs.	 That	 is	 the	 usual	 procedure	 with	 haunted
houses.”
“And	are	all	haunted	houses	occupied	by	an	evil	influence	such	as	this?”
“By	no	means.	Many	so-called	ghosts	are	nothing	more	than	impressions	caused	by
past	 events	 of	 great	 significance,	 which	 at	 the	 time	 of	 their	 happening	 became
photographed,	as	it	were,	upon	the	spiritual	fibre	of	their	surroundings,	and	which	can	be
perceived	by	a	sensitive	mind.”
“Then	do	the	spirits	of	the	dead	never	return	to	earth,	Doctor?”
“It	depends	what	you	mean	by	spirits,	Tony,”	the	doctor	replied,	sitting	down	upon	a
garden	seat	against	the	outer	wall.	Tony	joined	him	and	lit	a	cigarette.
“Explain,	please,”	he	said.
Gaunt	marshaled	his	thoughts	and	began	once	more.
“The	human	being	is	composed	of	three	individual	parts,	each	with	a	life	of	its	own;
there	is	the	material	body,	which	ceases	to	live	at	the	moment	of	corporal	death;	there	is
the	astral	body,	or	vital	principle,	called	by	the	old	Egyptians	the	Ka,	or	Double;	and	there
is	 the	 ego,	 the	 soul	 itself.	 At	 the	 moment	 of	 death	 these	 last	 two	 are	 released.	 What
happens	to	the	immortal	soul,	the	personality,	each	must	answer	for	himself	in	the	light	of
his	own	faith.	But	the	astral	body,	which,	unlike	the	soul,	is	a	replica	of	the	material	body,
although	composed	of	immaterial	substance,	may	remain	near	the	corpse,	or	on	the	scene
of	 its	 death,	 for	 varying	periods	 of	 time.	 It	 has	 no	 separate	 intelligence	 of	 its	 own,	 and
without	the	guidance	of	the	mind,	which	has	gone	with	the	soul,	it	may	wander	aimlessly
about,	or	re-enact	the	circumstances	of	the	corporal	death	perpetually.	Here	you	have	the
explanation	of	another	class	of	hauntings.	Incidentally,	it	is	possible	for	a	trained	mind	to
project	this	astral	shell	from	the	body	during	life,	and,	moving	on	the	astral	plane,	to	visit
distant	places	and	effect	material	results	through	its	agency.”
“I	take	it,	then,	that	our	particular	haunting	belongs	to	neither	of	these	classes?”	put
in	Tony.
“No.	Here	we	 have	 an	 example	 of	 an	 inhuman	 entity,	 a	 being	 or	 spirit	 which	 has
never	 occupied	 a	 bodily	 form,	 and	 never	 will.	 Such	 are	 often	 called	 elementals,	 or
elemental	spirits.	Generally	they	are	moderately	harmless,	and	not	particularly	intelligent.
They	are	responsible	for	the	so-called	poltergeist	phenomena	—	aimless	throwing	about	of
furniture	 and	 crockery.	 In	 such	 cases	 they	 often	 operate	 through	 a	 medium	 of	 low
mentality	—	a	half-witted	servant	girl,	say.
“This	curse	of	yours,	however,	seems	to	operate	without	the	proximity	of	a	medium,
unless	 I	 am	mistaken,	 and	 that	 in	 itself	 distinguishes	 it	 from	 the	more	 ordinary	 type	 of
elemental.	 Also	 it	 is	 definitely	 evil,	 and	 probably	 very	 powerful.	 I	 suspect	 that	 it	 is
actually	a	monstrosity	from	the	Outer	Darkness	—	a	sentient	being	from	the	chaos	which
exists	behind	the	veil	of	created	matter.	If	I	am	right	in	this	assumption,	then	our	task	of
expelling	it	presents	enormous	difficulties	and	fearful	danger.”
Tony	sat	still,	absorbing	this	as	best	he	could.	When	he	spoke,	he	said:
“Tell	me,	Doctor:	where	did	you	learn	all	 this?	And	again	—	you	keep	referring	to
the	unlimited	power	of	properly	trained	minds.	Where	can	such	training	be	had?”
Gaunt	smiled	enigmatically	and	looked	up	at	the	sky,	against	which	a	solitary	seagull
was	 sailing,	 its	motionless	white	wings	 against	 the	 blue	 vying	 for	 purity	with	 the	 rare,
fleecy	clouds	far	above.	He	seemed	to	be	weighing	something	in	his	mind,	for	a	faint	line
appeared	 between	 his	 brows	 and	 his	 lips	 compressed	 themselves.	 After	 a	 couple	 of
minutes	he	came	to	a	decision,	and,	looking	back	towards	Tony,	said:
“That	 is	 a	 question	which	 I	may	 not	 answer	 in	 detail.	 I	 am	 bound	 by	 oath	 not	 to
reveal	the	source	of	my	training,	but	let	it	suffice	that	ever	since	the	world	began	there	has
been	this	secret	knowledge,	handed	down	from	generation	to	generation	amongst	a	chosen
few.	There	have	been,	 and	 there	 are	 still,	 secret	 societies	 formed	 to	 safeguard	 it,	 and	 to
train	initiates.	The	Rosicrucians	were	one,	and	still	are,	for	that	matter,	though	they	do	not
advertise	in	the	newspapers.
“There	are	other	so-called	secret	societies	in	existence	today	which	used	to	have	the
secret	wisdom,	but	which	have	lost	all	but	the	outward	symbolism.	I	can	think	of	one	at
this	moment	—	I	will	not	mention	its	name,	though	you	must	know	to	what	I	am	referring
—	which	 with	 great	 wisdom	 has	 wrapped	 its	 true	 nature	 in	 so	 many	 veils	 that	 only	 a
minute	proportion	of	its	members	ever	reach	the	inner	mysteries.	By	an	ingenious	system
of	degrees	and	grades,	only	the	most	earnest	seeker	after	knowledge	is	ever	permitted	to
attain	to	complete	initiation.	Most	of	its	members	remain	in	the	lower	orders,	practically
ignorant	 of	 the	 possibilities	 which	 are	 open	 to	 them,	 content	 with	 philanthropy	 and
symbolism.
“In	bygone	centuries	the	mysteries	of	Crete	and	Samothrace,	the	Egyptian	priests	of
Isis,	the	Druids	—	all	knew	the	ancient	wisdom.	In	this	modern	world	of	ours,	so	insistent
upon	material	things,	these	high	spiritual	matters	are	still	more	closely	guarded.	One	day
the	world	will	learn,	in	bitterness	and	desolation,	that	matter	is	not	all,	and	that	machinery
cannot	do	everything,	and	it	will	cry	out	for	guidance	in	the	great	dark,	and	we	who	keep
the	Mysteries	will	come	back	into	our	own.”
The	 doctor	 spoke	 quietly,	 and	 yet	with	 such	 seriousness	 and	 tremendous	 authority
that	Tony	could	not	doubt	his	words.	Turning	 them	over	 in	his	mind,	he	 realized	at	 last
what	he	had	longed	for	unconsciously	for	so	many	years:	a	meaning	in	life;	a	purpose	in
existence.	His	 soul,	 drugged	with	material	 things,	 suddenly	 awoke,	 and	 finding	 itself	 in
darkness,	began	to	cry	out	in	a	still,	small	voice	for	light.	In	the	last	few	days	his	whole
world	had	turned	upside	down,	all	values	had	strangely	altered,	and	he	felt	that	he	could
not	go	on	 in	 ignorance	any	 longer.	A	great	 thirst	 for	knowledge	sprang	up	 in	his	breast,
and,	his	mind	reeling,	he	mentally	prostrated	himself	at	Gaunt’s	feet.
“Doctor,	help	me!	I	want	to	know	—	so	much.	What	death	is	—	and,	more,	what	life
is.	What	is	it	all	for?	What	does	it	mean?	I’ll	do	anything	you	say,	only	help	me!”
Gaunt	 studied	 the	 eager	 face	 and	 burning	 blue	 eyes	 which	 gazed	 at	 him	 so
beseechingly,	and	his	own	lean	features	softened.
“That’s	what	they	all	say,	Tony.”	His	voice	was	gentle,	but	infinitely	sad.	“The	Way	is
long,	and	strewn	with	many	pitfalls.	Have	you	the	courage	of	heart	and	the	strength	of	will
to	face,	it	may	be,	years	of	seemingly	fruitless	effort?”
Tony	bowed	his	head.
“I	do	not	think	I	have	the	courage	to	face	my	empty	life	without	it.”	The	words	were
almost	inaudible,	“Show	me	the	Way!”
The	doctor	smiled	tenderly,	and	laid	his	hand	on	the	young	man’s	arm.
“Very	well,	 then,”	he	said;	“I	must	first	apply	to	my	superiors	for	permission,	but	I
don’t	anticipate	any	difficulty	there.	I	will	begin	your	pre-initiation	training	at	once.”

Chapter	VII	
When	Tony	and	the	doctor	went	in	to	lunch	they	found	that	Vaughan	had	acquainted
himself	with	 the	whole	of	 the	contents	of	 the	book,	and	professed	himself	 ready	 to	start
work	that	afternoon.	The	meal	was	served	in	the	library,	as	usual,	and	afterwards	all	three
descended	into	the	crypt,	both	Gaunt	and	his	colleague	carrying	powerful	electric	torches.
The	place	was	quite	as	dark	by	day	as	by	night,	but	the	lamps	were	greatly	superior	to
that	 which	 Tony	 had	 used	 on	 his	 last	 visit	 with	 the	 doctor,	 and	 threw	 a	 beam	 quite	 a
hundred	 yards	 long.	 Consequently	 Gaunt	 was	 able	 to	 pretend	 to	 discover	 the	 altar,	 the
whereabouts	 of	 which,	 of	 course,	 he	 knew	 perfectly	 well,	 without	 arousing	 Tony’s
suspicions	in	the	slightest	degree.
At	 sight	of	 the	altar	Vaughan	became	greatly	excited,	 and	 ran	up	 the	 steps	with	an
agility	surprising	 in	one	of	his	bulk.	He	bent	over	 the	upper	slab,	examining	 it	minutely
with	his	torch,	uttering	low	grunts	of	satisfaction.	The	other	two	left	him	at	it,	and	returned
to	 the	hall	 above	 to	carry	down	 two	of	his	 trunks,	which	had	been	deposited	beside	 the
trap-door	at	his	instructions.
This	proved	 to	be	an	exceedingly	difficult	 task,	since	 the	stairway	was	narrow,	and
the	boxes	both	 large	 and	heavy.	 It	 took	quite	 ten	minutes’	 strenuous	 labour	 before	both
trunks	were	finally	deposited	near	the	altar,	which	Vaughan	was	still	examining	closely.	At
last	he	turned	to	the	others.
“There	is	no	doubt,	Sir	Anthony,”	he	said	in	his	thick	voice,	“but	that	this	has	been
used	for	purposes	other	than	that	which	its	builders	intended,	and	I	think	we	shall	find	that
this	is	the	source	of	the	phenomena	connected	with	the	curse.	There	must	be	some	way	of
raising	this	stone,	but	I	cannot	find	it	at	present.	Have	you	any	ideas,	Gaunt?”
The	 doctor	 joined	 him,	 and	 spent	 some	minutes	 pretending	 to	 look	 for	 the	 catch.
After	much	fumbling	he	released	it,	with	an	exclamation	of	surprise,	and	together	the	two
lifted	the	altar-stone	on	its	counterpoised	pivot.
Tony	uttered	a	cry	of	astonishment	as	the	great	block	of	granite	swung	upwards,	and
darted	forward	eagerly,	only	to	recoil	as	the	foetid	stench	from	the	depths	blew	in	his	face.
“What	a	ghastly	smell!”	he	exclaimed,	half	choking.
“No	ventilation,”	remarked	Vaughan,	“and	perhaps	—	something	else,	eh,	Gaunt?”
The	doctor	nodded,	and	addressed	Tony.
“Are	you	game	to	go	down	with	us?”	he	asked.
Without	a	deal	of	enthusiasm	Tony	assured	him	that	he	was	ready	for	anything.	He
followed	 readily	 enough,	 however,	 as	 Gaunt	 clambered	 over	 the	 side,	 and	 began	 to
descend	the	steep	stone	steps	within,	shining	his	lamp	cautiously	before	his	feet.	Vaughan
brought	up	the	rear.
The	 steps,	which,	 though	 not	worn,	were	 damp	 and	 slippery,	 led	 steeply	 down	 for
some	twenty	feet,	and	were	continued	by	a	long	corridor,	cut	in	the	solid	rock.	The	air	was
very	close	and	hot,	but	Tony	thought	the	smell	a	little	less	unpleasant	than	at	first,	though
he	was	perhaps	merely	growing	more	accustomed	to	it.
The	tunnel	led	them	downwards,	at	a	slight	incline,	for	a	short	distance,	then	turned
abruptly,	ran	level	for	a	little	way,	and	finally	divided	into	three.
At	 this	point	 the	party	paused,	uncertain	which	way	 to	 take,	until	Gaunt	 suggested
that	 they	should	 try	 the	middle	passage.	After	 following	 this	 still	downwards	 for	a	 long
distance	 they	 found	 their	 progress	 blocked	 by	 a	wooden	 door,	much	 decayed,	 and	 held
together	by	 rusted	 iron	bands.	There	was	a	crude	bar	 securing	 this,	 and	a	 short	 struggle
released	it,	whereupon	the	door	opened	unwillingly,	with	a	nerve-shaking	scream	of	rusty
hinges,	and	they	felt	a	breath	of	sweet	salt	air	on	their	faces.
Beyond	the	door	another	flight	of	steps	led	them	still	further	downwards,	until	they
became	aware	of	a	faint	grey	 light	ahead.	The	 tunnel	narrowed	abruptly,	and	became	so
low	that	they	were	obliged	to	bend	almost	double,	Vaughan	puffing	and	wheezing	with	the
effort.	 Thirty	 yards	 of	 this	 uncomfortable	 progress	 brought	 them	 to	 a	 natural	 cave.
Gratefully	 standing	 upright	 on	 the	 sandy	 floor,	 they	 approached	 the	 opening,	 through
which	poured	a	flood	of	dazzling	sunlight.
Here	was	a	narrow	ledge,	wet	with	spray	from	the	waves,	which	were	breaking	only	a
couple	of	yards	below.	Outside	the	open	sea	stretched	empty	to	the	horizon.	Tony	judged
that	 this	must	be	 the	side	of	 the	 island	opposite	 to	 that	upon	which	the	harbour	 lay,	at	a
point	never	approached	by	boat	owing	to	the	sheer	cliffs	and	dangerous	rocks.
They	 stayed	 there	 in	 the	 sunlight	 for	 a	while,	watching	 the	 gulls	 and	 enjoying	 the
fresh	air,	until	Gaunt	suggested	that	they	should	retrace	their	steps	and	try	one	of	the	other
passages.	Somewhat	reluctantly	Tony	agreed,	and	the	three	made	their	way	back	into	the
close	darkness,	barring	the	ancient	door	behind	them.
When	they	reached	the	division	of	the	ways	once	more	Gaunt	spun	a	coin,	and	chose
the	left-hand	tunnel.	This	led	steeply	down	into	the	very	bowels	of	the	island,	twisting	and
turning	bewilderingly.	They	passed	the	mouths	of	three	other	passages,	and	it	occurred	to
Tony	that	this	place	must	be	a	veritable	honeycomb,	and	profoundly	unpleasant	to	be	lost
in	without	 a	 light.	 The	 floor	was	 very	 uneven,	 and	 strewn	with	 fallen	 rocks;	 and	 great
patches	of	slime	on	the	walls	glistened	in	the	torchlight.	It	seemed	that	they	must	actually
be	below	sea-level	when	the	passage	turned	sharply	to	the	right,	and	they	emerged	into	a
great	open	space.	Gaunt,	who	was	still	in	front,	stopped	with	a	sharp	cry	of	warning,	and
the	others	stood	rooted	in	their	tracks,	Tony’s	heart	going	like	a	trip-hammer.	The	doctor
directed	his	torch	downwards,	and	they	could	see	the	reason	for	his	warning.
He	stood	on	the	very	edge	of	an	abyss,	for	the	ledge	upon	which	the	tunnel	opened
formed	a	rocky	platform	high	up	on	the	wall	of	a	vast	cavern,	like	the	nave	of	some	great
cathedral.	Further	investigation	revealed	an	irregular	pathway	leading	down	the	wall	to	the
floor	 of	 the	 place,	 at	 least	 a	 hundred	 feet	 below.	 This	 they	 descended	 carefully,	 and
eventually	stood	on	the	level	ground.	The	stench	was	appalling,	and	the	air	was	very	hot,
but	 there	was	 no	 sign	 of	 anything	 supernatural,	 though	 the	 profound	 silence	 seemed	 in
itself	a	menace.	Even	Gaunt’s	voice	was	hushed	as	he	said:
“This	 place	 cannot	 be	 other	 than	 natural	—	 volcanic	 action,	 possibly,	 though	 the
rocks	are	not	igneous.	No	race	we	know	of	could	have	fashioned	it.”
He	walked	 slowly	 out	 into	 the	middle	 of	 the	 cavern	 floor,	which	was	 surprisingly
smooth	and	regular.	The	others	followed;	and	the	three	stood	together,	turning	the	beams
of	their	torches	first	this	way,	then	that.	Powerful	though	the	lamps	were,	their	light	only
just	reached	the	walls,	and	quite	failed	to	penetrate	the	gloom	overhead,	where	the	mighty
vault	of	the	roof	supported	the	hundreds	of	tons	of	rock	above	it.	Under	any	circumstances
it	 would	 have	 been	 an	 awe-inspiring	 place,	 but,	 seeking	 what	 they	 sought,	 the	 empty,
echoing	vastness	was	truly	horrific.	Tony	fully	expected	some	nightmare	creature	to	come
rushing	out	at	them	at	any	moment,	but	nothing	stirred.	There	were	no	other	entrances,	no
other	caves	opening	out,	no	dark	corners	where	anything	could	be	hidden.
“It	must	be	here,”	Vaughan	whispered	huskily,	“but	where?”
All	 at	 once	 Tony	 realized	 that	 he	was	 right:	 there	was	 something	 here,	 something
besides	 themselves,	 something	not	of	 this	world.	A	dreadful	 sensation	of	being	watched
began	to	grow	in	his	mind.	Something	monstrous	and	terribly	powerful	was	aware	of	these
intruders	in	its	lair;	soon	it	would	strike.	A	feeling	of	gradually	mounting	tension,	like	that
before	 the	 breaking	 of	 a	 thunderstorm,	was	 piling	 up	 around	 them.	 The	 shadows	 grew
deeper;	the	beams	of	the	torches	seemed	to	waver	and	grow	dim.	A	breath	of	icy	cold	air,
in	 frightful	 contrast	 to	 the	 prevailing	 heat,	 stirred	 Tony’s	 hair,	 and	 a	 faint	 shudder	 ran
through	the	rock	beneath	their	feet.
“Come,	we	must	 get	 out	 of	 this!”	Gaunt’s	voice	 cut	 the	 silence	 like	 the	 crack	of	 a
whip.	 He	 began	 to	 run	 towards	 the	 foot	 of	 the	 pathway	 leading	 up	 to	 the	 tunnel	 from
which	they	had	come.	Vaughan	seized	Tony	by	the	arm	and,	half	dragging	the	young	man,
followed	him.	By	 the	 time	 they	 reached	 the	 side	of	 the	cavern	Tony	had	shaken	off	 the
lethargy	which	had	seemed	to	dull	his	brain,	and	as	hurriedly	as	was	possible	in	safety	the
three	 clambered	 up	 to	 the	 ledge.	 Tony	 would	 have	 lingered	 there,	 but	 Gaunt	 and	 his
colleague	both	caught	his	arms	and	rushed	him	up	the	passage.
“We	dare	not	stop	another	moment,”	the	doctor	insisted	as	they	went;	“in	a	few	more
seconds	 it	would	 have	materialized;	 and	 to	wait	 for	 that,	 unprotected	 as	we	 are,	would
have	been	madness.”
Tony	himself	failed	to	see	what	all	the	excitement	was	about,	but	he	allowed	that	his
companions	knew	more	about	these	matters	than	he	did,	and	he	did	not	argue.	As	last	they
reached	the	steps	leading	up	into	the	altar,	and	climbed	out	into	the	crypt	above.	Before	he
shut	the	pivoted	slab	Gaunt	pointed	to	a	curious	design	chiseled	on	the	under	side	of	the
stone.
“I	 don’t	 suppose	 it	 often	 leaves	 the	 great	 cave,”	 he	 said,	 “but	 if	 it	 did,	 that	would
prevent	it	getting	any	farther.”
Tony	peered	at	the	interlaced	triangles	and	shook	his	head.
“It’s	too	deep	for	me,”	he	admitted.
The	doctor	smiled.
“You	will	understand	one	day,”	he	said.
After	dinner	Tony	asked	what	the	next	step	would	be,	and	Vaughan	answered	him:
“The	 doctor	 and	 I	 will	 have	 to	 go	 down	 again,	 after	 taking	 suitable	 measures	 to
protect	ourselves.	It	is	absolutely	necessary	that	we	see	the	thing	in	action	before	we	can
set	 about	 the	 task	 of	 destroying	 it.	 We	 do	 not	 yet	 know	 what	 form	 it	 takes	 when
materialized,	 even.	 Later	 you	 will	 have	 to	 help	 us,	 but	 you	 will	 have	 to	 learn	 how	 to
protect	yourself	also	before	you	can	do	that.	Gaunt	will	teach	you,	if	you	will	only	follow
his	instructions	absolutely.”
Tony	 assured	 him	 that	 he	 was	 only	 too	 eager	 to	 begin	 his	 studies;	 and	 shortly
afterwards	they	retired	for	the	night.
While	 he	 was	 undressing	 it	 occurred	 to	 Tony	 how	 completely	 he	 had	 misjudged
Vaughan	 when	 he	 had	 first	 met	 him	 that	 morning.	 The	 man	 was	 charming:	 his
conversation	brilliant,	and	his	manners	gentle.	The	gross	exterior	was	soon	forgotten	in	the
light	of	his	 true	personality.	Telling	himself	not	 to	be	so	hasty	 in	 future,	 the	young	man
climbed	into	bed,	blew	out	his	candle,	and	soon	fell	asleep.	His	nerve-raking	experiences
in	 the	caves	did	not	 trouble	him	at	 all;	 in	 the	new	wisdom	he	was	 learning	 from	Gaunt
they	appeared	to	be	quite	natural,	and	he	felt	wonderfully	secure	in	the	hands	of	his	wise
and	experienced	friend.
The	clock	 in	 the	hall	below	was	striking	 two	when	Gaunt’s	door	opened	softly	and
the	doctor	passed	silently	down	the	gallery,	disappearing	into	Vaughan’s	room.	Both	were
wearing	 felt-soled	 shoes	when	 they	emerged,	 and	Gaunt	was	 carrying	his	 torch,	but	 the
light	was	unnecessary	as	they	went	down	the	staircase,	for	the	moon	was	shining	through
the	high,	narrow	windows	of	 the	hall.	Beneath	 the	staircase	 the	moon	did	not	penetrate,
and	the	crypt	was	as	black	as	ever	when	they	reached	it.
Gaunt	set	his	torch	on	the	altar	steps	while	his	companion	unlocked	one	of	the	trunks
which	 had	 been	 carried	 down	 that	 afternoon.	Out	 of	 the	 capacious	 interior	 he	 extracted
two	neatly	folded	white	bundles,	one	of	which	he	handed	to	the	doctor.	These	proved	to	be
long	garments	of	 linen,	not	unlike	priests’	albs,	which	covered	the	wearers	from	neck	to
ankle,	being	girt	about	the	middle	with	a	scarlet	cord.	Round	the	hem	of	the	skirt	and	the
cuffs	cabalistic	symbols	were	embroidered	in	red	silk.	When	they	had	attired	themselves
in	these	Vaughan	went	again	to	the	trunk	and	took	out	various	other	articles,	which	he	set
upon	the	altar.	There	were	two	circlets	of	lead,	curiously	engraved;	two	metal	rods,	which
glittered	oddly	in	the	dim	light;	and	a	glass	vessel	containing	a	dark	liquid.
“You	performed	the	consecration	properly?”	Gaunt	asked	in	a	low	voice.	“Our	lives
depend	upon	it.”	To	which	the	other	replied,	his	thick	lips	trembling:
“Nothing	has	been	forgotten.	I	know	the	danger.	Now	the	ointment”;	and,	taking	up
the	 glass	 vessel,	 he	 proceeded	 to	 anoint	 the	 doctor’s	 head	 and	 hands,	 muttering	 some
formula	 the	 while.	 When	 he	 had	 done	 Gaunt	 performed	 a	 like	 service	 for	 him,	 and
returned	the	vessel	to	the	trunk.	Then	they	set	the	leaden	circles	on	their	heads	and	took
the	rods	in	their	left	hands.
“We	must	 leave	 the	 torch;	we	dare	not	show	a	 light,”	said	Gaunt,	as	 they	 lifted	 the
altar-stone.	 Vaughan	 nodded	 silently,	 and	 they	 passed	 down	 the	 slippery	 steps,	 feeling
their	 way	 in	 the	 thick	 darkness,	 and	 almost	 choking	 with	 the	 appalling	 smell,	 now	 far
worse	than	it	had	been	in	the	afternoon.
It	was	slow	going	in	the	dark,	and	their	clinging	robes	did	not	help	them,	but	at	last
they	reached	the	division	of	the	ways.	After	some	groping	they	found	the	left-hand	tunnel,
and	continued	cautiously	along	it.	Suddenly	Gaunt	stopped,	and	caught	his	companion	by
the	sleeve.
“Do	you	hear	it?”	he	whispered.
Vaughan	listened,	shivering	slightly.	From	the	pitchy	blackness	in	front	came	a	low
breathing	sound,	something	like	the	wind,	but	more	regular.	A	long,	slow	breathing,	like	a
great	animal	asleep.
Even	more	cautiously	than	before	the	two	crept	forward,	hugging	the	rough	wall	on
their	right.	Once	they	crossed	the	mouth	of	a	side	tunnel,	and	had	to	stumble	unaided	for	a
few	 feet.	 Their	 felt	 shoes	 were	 saturated	 with	 the	 slime	 underfoot,	 and	 made	 little
squelching	 sounds	 as	 they	 walked.	 The	 heat	 grew	 intense,	 and	 great	 drops	 of	 sweat
trickled	from	beneath	the	lead	bands	on	their	foreheads.	Their	lungs	laboured	in	the	foul
air.
The	 breathing	 sound	 in	 front	 stopped.	Gaunt’s	 fingers	 tightened	 on	 his	 colleague’s
arm	as	they	stood	still,	waiting.	A	slight	vibration	ran	through	the	rock	beneath.
“It	is	awake,”	the	doctor	whispered,	his	tongue	rustling	like	paper	in	his	dry	mouth.
Vaughan’s	great	body	was	quivering	 like	a	 jelly,	but	he	strove	manfully	 to	remain	calm.
Silently	they	pressed	forward	once	more.
Presently	 they	 became	 aware	 of	 a	 faint	 greenish	 glow	 in	 the	 darkness	 ahead,	 and
almost	before	they	knew	it	they	were	at	the	bend	of	the	passage.	Here	Vaughan’s	courage
well-nigh	failed	him	altogether,	and	he	would	have	fallen	but	for	Gaunt’s	arm.	The	doctor
turned	upon	him	fiercely.
“Have	you	forgotten	the	oath?”	he	whispered	hoarsely.	“Shall	it	be	said	that	only	they
have	 courage?”;	 and,	 dragging	his	 unwilling	 companion,	 he	 turned	 the	 corner,	 and	 they
came	out	upon	the	ledge	in	the	great	cavern.
It	was	very	different	 from	when	 they	had	 last	 looked	upon	 it.	Now	 the	whole	vast
space	was	permeated	by	 a	 strange	green	 radiance,	which	 appeared	 to	 emanate	 from	 the
rock	of	the	floor	far	below.	The	walls	around,	the	domed	roof	above,	were	plainly	visible;
and	the	strangely	attired	pair	on	the	ledge	could	see	each	other	clearly	in	the	weird	light.	A
monstrous	silence	pressed	 like	an	 invisible	cloud	upon	their	heads,	and	waves	of	almost
intolerable	heat	beat	upon	their	pallid	faces.	The	stench	was	abominable.
Vaughan	found	words.
“Where	—	where	is	it?”	he	gulped.
Gaunt	 pointed	 downwards	with	 the	 rod	 in	 his	 hand,	 and	 the	 other	 peered	 fearfully
over	the	brink.	Then	he	too	saw.
The	whole	rocky	floor,	acres	in	extent,	was	in	motion.	Ever	so	slight	it	was,	like	the
stirring	of	molten	metal,	the	heaving	of	that	seemingly	solid	surface,	but	horrible	in	a	way
that	nothing	else	could	be,	so	contrary	was	it	to	the	laws	which	hold	this	world	together.
From	it	beat	 the	pale-green	light;	and	to	and	fro	over	the	surface	thin	vapours	came	and
went.
Vaughan	stared	at	the	appalling	sight	in	silence	for	some	minutes,	his	eyes	protruding
from	their	sockets,	so	fascinated	that	even	the	trembling	of	his	limbs	was	stilled.	Then,	as
they	watched,	the	movement	ceased,	except	for	one	spot	at	the	centre,	where	the	solid	rock
began	to	belly	upwards	in	a	mound,	like	a	great	tumour.	It	reached	a	height	of	perhaps	ten
feet	before	 its	 summit	 fissured,	and	 from	 the	crack	a	black	substance	came	welling	out,
flowing	down	on	to	the	floor	around	in	an	inky	pool.	At	the	same	instant	the	frightful	heat
lessened	 and	passed	 away,	 to	be	 replaced	by	 a	wave	of	 unearthly	 cold,	which	 froze	 the
sweat	upon	the	livid	faces	of	the	watchers	on	the	ledge.
As	the	black	liquid	oozed	on	to	the	floor	of	the	cave,	so	it	thickened	into	a	jelly-like
substance,	not	spreading	out,	but	piling	up	into	a	solid	mass,	which	quivered	and	writhed
incessantly	with	horrid	life.	Suddenly	Vaughan,	who	had	begun	to	shudder	violently	once
more,	 buried	his	 face	 in	Gaunt’s	 linen	 sleeve,	 shutting	out	 the	 sight	 he	 could	no	 longer
endure.	The	doctor	shook	him	off	angrily,	saying:
“Be	still,	you	fool!	It	knows	you	are	afraid.	Look!”
For	 the	unholy	 thing	below	was	flowing	across	 the	rocky	floor	 towards	 the	wall	of
the	 cavern	 upon	which	 they	were	 perched.	 It	was	without	 form,	 and	 changed	 its	 shape
continually	as	it	moved,	but	that	it	was	sentient	was	undeniable,	and	Vaughan	had	a	vivid
impression	of	a	Personality,	veiled	in	the	darkness	of	its	substance,	which	silently	mocked
the	two	feeble	human	creatures	opposed	to	it.
In	a	moment	the	great	bulk	of	the	thing	was	massed	at	the	foot	of	the	cliff	beneath;
then	 it	 began	 to	 climb,	 flowing	 up	 the	 rock	 as	 easily	 as	 it	 had	 crossed	 the	 level	 floor.
Vaughan	uttered	 a	 strangled	 cry,	 like	 a	 stricken	 animal,	 and,	 turning,	 fled	 up	 the	 tunnel
behind	 them.	Gaunt	 hesitated	 for	 a	 second,	 then	 let	 him	go,	with	 a	muttered	 oath,	 and,
stepping	to	 the	very	brink,	coolly	faced	the	abomination	crawling	up	towards	him.	As	it
came	he	felt	the	icy	cold	which	emanated	from	it	freezing	his	very	limbs,	but	his	hand	was
perfectly	 steady	as	he	pointed	 the	metal	 rod	he	held	downwards	at	 it.	Concentrating	his
will	to	the	uttermost,	he	began	to	recite	certain	ritual	words	in	a	firm	voice,	softly	at	first,
then	more	loudly,	until	the	tremendous	Latin	echoed	round	the	great	dome	above.
The	 effect	 was	 immediate.	 The	 thing	 ceased	 its	 upward	 movement	 and	 stopped,
clinging	to	the	face	of	the	wall	like	a	gigantic	limpet.	It	had	no	visible	eyes,	but	the	doctor
could	feel	its	cold	regard	searing	into	his	brain,	and	it	was	only	by	a	mighty	effort	that	he
was	able	to	withstand	the	frightful	power	which	beat	against	him.	Even	now	he	knew	he
could	not	hold	it	off	indefinitely,	and	so,	still	chanting	in	a	high,	clear	voice,	he	began	to
walk	slowly	backwards	up	the	passage.	It	was	slow,	painful	progress,	for	he	had	only	one
hand	free	to	feel	his	way	along	the	wall,	and	after	he	had	gone	fifty	paces	in	this	fashion,
since	 the	 thing	 did	 not	 appear	 to	 be	 following	 him,	 he	 reverted	 to	 the	 usual	method	 of
progression,	and	in	due	course	reached	the	steps	leading	up	to	the	crypt.	By	this	time	the
reaction	had	set	in,	and	even	his	iron	will	could	not	entirely	still	the	trembling	of	his	knees
as	he	climbed.
When	 he	 had	 closed	 the	 altar	 he	 looked	 round	 for	Vaughan.	An	 electric	 torch	 lay
burning	on	 the	 floor,	 and	by	 its	 dim	 light	 he	 could	 see	 his	 colleague’s	 figure,	 crouched
grotesquely	 on	 the	 steps,	 his	 face	 hidden	 in	 his	 hands.	 He	 was	 sobbing	 brokenly,	 and
muttering	beneath	his	breath.	As	he	strode	 towards	him	Gaunt	caught	 the	words:	“Jesu!
Mary!”	With	 an	 exclamation	 of	 disgust	 he	 launched	 a	 kick	 at	 the	 prostrate	 form,	 and
Vaughan	rolled	over,	covering	his	face	with	his	hands	and	moaning	piteously.
“Judas!”	hissed	the	doctor.	“Is	this	a	time	to	turn	your	coat	again?”
The	other	writhed	towards	him,	pawing	at	his	feet.
“Mercy,	master,	mercy!”	he	moaned.
“Why	should	I	show	you	mercy?”	the	doctor	went	on	with	withering	contempt.	“But
for	me	you	would	not	have	got	ten	yards	along	that	passage.	And	if	it	had	caught	you	—
you	know	what	the	end	would	have	been?	You	would	have	been	lost	for	ever.	I	could	well
have	spared	you,	though	your	cowardice	nearly	ruined	everything.	It	was	all	I	could	do	to
hold	 it	 back	 alone;	 you	put	my	 soul	 in	 jeopardy.	Well,	 I	 can	 forgive	 that;	 but	 almost	 to
wreck	our	plans	—	that	I	find	hard	to	overlook.”
“Forgive	me,	master!	I	will	not	fail	again,	I	swear.	I	had	never	seen	anything	like	that
before,	and	it	unnerved	me	utterly.	You	—	you	trembled	too.”
“My	poor	mortal	 flesh	may	have	quaked,	but	my	soul	was	unafraid.	Yours	was	—
that	is	the	difference.	Very	well,	Simon,	I	will	forgive	you	this	time,	but	not	again.”
“Oh,	master!	There	 shall	be	no	more	 turning	back.”	Vaughan	 rose	on	his	knees.	 “I
will	say	the	Mass	tomorrow.”
“If	it	comforts	you,	do	so.	You	have	the	accessories	here?	I	will	serve	you.”
“That	is	an	honour,	master,	which	I	shall	not	forget.”
“Very	well.	Now	get	up	and	compose	yourself.	Take	off	those	things,	and	join	me	in	a
cigarette.”
When	they	had	removed	their	vestments,	and	were	sitting	smoking	on	the	altar	steps,
Vaughan	asked:
“Did	it	follow	you?”
The	doctor	shook	his	head.
“I	don’t	 think	 it	often	 leaves	 the	great	cavern.	As	 it	was,	our	visit	woke	 it	 to	quite
unusual	activity.	I	imagine	that	it	generally	lies	dormant.”
“Are	 you	 satisfied	 that	 it	 is	 what	 we	 thought	—	 a	 true	 monstrosity	 of	 the	 Outer
Darkness?”
“I	am	sure	of	it	—	nothing	less	could	have	withstood	the	formula	I	used.	Besides,	you
felt	its	power.”
Vaughan	nodded	gloomily.
“Merlin	succeeded,	then?”	he	asked.
Gaunt	laughed	softly.
“Merlin!	What	does	that	name	mean	to	the	average	man?	A	benevolent	old	man	—	a
magician,	true,	but	with	a	soul	as	white	as	his	beard!	What	a	lot	we	have	to	thank	Mallory
and	Tennyson	for,	Simon.	Little	do	they	know	what	that	being	they	call	Merlin	was:	one	of
us,	and	perhaps	the	greatest	wizard	of	all	time.	Yes,	he	succeeded	in	doing	that	which	has
never	been	done	before	or	since:	he	made	a	gateway	through	the	Veil,	 there	in	 that	very
cavern,	and	admitted	one	of	 the	horrors	which	dwell	 in	Outer	Darkness.	 I	often	wonder
what	he	proposed	to	do	with	it.	Perhaps	he	found	it	more	intractable	than	he	had	supposed,
and,	unable	to	expel	it	again,	bound	it	to	this	place.”
“Then	it	was	here	before	the	Abbot	pronounced	his	curse	on	the	Lovells?”
“Undoubtedly.	 His	 words,	 inadvertently	 phrased	 in	 the	 form	 of	 the	 Osirian	 ritual,
coupled	with	his	intention	of	ruining	the	Lovell	family,	merely	served	to	link	their	destiny
with	it.”
“Do	you	think	we	shall	be	able	to	turn	it	to	our	purpose?”
Gaunt	frowned.
“First	it	must	be	released	from	its	bondage	to	this	family,	and	neither	you	nor	I	can	do
that.”
“Who,	then?”
“Anthony	Lovell.”
“That	young	fool?”
“No	 one	 else.	 I	 have	 already	 begun	 his	 training;	 he	 does	 not	 know	 to	 what	 end,
naturally,	nor	will	he	until	it	is	too	late.”

Chapter	VIII	
John	Hamilton	was	walking	down	Fleet	Street	one	afternoon	when	his	soul	suddenly
rebelled	against	the	tyranny	of	London.	It	was	the	second	week	in	August,	and	for	nearly	a
month	no	rain	had	fallen.	The	shortage	of	water	was	already	growing	acute,	and	there	was
talk	of	rationing	the	supplies.	Devastating	heath	fires	were	daily	reported.
In	the	city	the	heat	was	well-nigh	intolerable;	the	dust	rose	in	clouds	from	the	wheels
of	the	roaring	traffic,	drying	Hamilton’s	throat,	making	his	eyes	smart,	and	tasting	gritty	in
his	 mouth.	 His	 shoes	 seemed	 no	 protection	 against	 the	 heated	 pavement;	 life	 itself
appeared	to	be	a	refined	torture	at	that	moment.
He	thought	longingly	of	escape	from	the	Metropolis,	but	where	should	he	go?	In	the
open	country	 it	would	be	 little	better:	 the	 fields	were	burnt	brown;	 the	hedgerows	 thick
with	a	pall	of	white	dust.	Where,	then?	Yellow	sands;	a	cool	breeze	from	the	sea;	the	black
shadow	of	mighty	cliffs:	this	inviting	picture	rose	in	his	tired	brain.	There	the	sun	would
blaze	in	a	sky	of	cobalt	instead	of	vibrating	against	the	brazen	lid	of	London.
Three	months	ago	Tony	had	invited	him	to	Kestrel.	Why	should	he	not	avail	himself
of	the	invitation	now,	and	seek	a	short	respite	from	toil?	True,	Tony	had	not	mentioned	the
matter	again	in	the	brief	acknowledgment	he	had	written	in	reply	to	Hamilton’s	letter	of
sympathy	after	his	father’s	death,	but	then	he	was	probably	worried	with	other	matters	at
the	time.	So	Hamilton	told	himself,	but	he	could	find	no	similar	explanation	for	the	way	in
which	his	friend	had	completely	ignored	another	letter	he	had	written	him,	only	a	couple
of	weeks	ago,	when	the	idea	of	accepting	Tony’s	invitation	had	recurred	to	him.	In	spite	of
his	knowledge	of	his	 friend’s	casual	habits	over	 letters,	 this	silence	worried	him	a	 little,
and	 in	 response	 to	 some	 subconscious	prompting	he	had	 called	 at	Dr.	Gaunt’s	 house	 in
Hampstead	 to	 see	 whether	 they	 had	 any	 news	 from	 Kestrel.	 There	 he	 had	 found	 the
shutters	up	and	the	place	apparently	deserted.
Surmising	that	the	doctor	was	still	at	Kestrel,	Hamilton	now	began	to	wonder	if	Tony
had	fallen	ill,	in	the	same	fashion	as	his	father;	and	the	sum	total	of	his	musings	led	him	to
Paddington	next	morning,	suitcase	in	hand,	en	route	for	Cornwall.
The	train	was	insufferably	hot,	and	the	journey	seemed	interminable;	consequently	it
was	with	considerable	relief	that	he	finally	descended	from	the	local	at	Redruth.	He	had
deliberately	sent	no	word	of	his	coming	to	Tony,	making	up	his	mind	to	stay	at	Pentock,
and	find	out	for	himself	how	things	were	at	the	Abbey.	He	had	no	difficulty	in	hiring	a	car
to	take	him	to	his	destination,	and	within	three-quarters	of	an	hour	he	was	in	the	sanded
bar	of	the	Three	Fishermen,	asking	the	red-faced	landlord,	Dykes	by	name,	for	a	room.
After	removing	the	stains	of	travel	from	his	person	Hamilton	had	a	meal,	unpacked
his	suitcase,	and	then	strolled	out	into	the	cool	evening,	smoking	his	pipe.
He	walked	down	 the	 narrow	 cobbled	 street,	with	 its	 row	of	whitewashed	 cottages,
from	whose	doorways	women,	enjoying	the	sea	breeze,	eyed	him	curiously,	to	the	harbour.
A	shoal	of	pilchards	had	just	been	sighted,	and	the	boats	were	putting	out.	After	watching
the	activity	for	a	while	he	climbed	the	stepped	pathway	up	the	steep	hillside,	past	the	little
church,	with	its	squat	grey	tower,	on	to	the	cliffs.
Finding	a	spot	where	he	could	lounge	and	enjoy	his	pipe,	his	feet	only	a	few	inches
from	the	brink,	he	sank	down	on	the	short	wiry	grass	and	gazed	over	the	darkening	sea.
The	sun	was	sinking	in	a	haze	of	glory,	obscuring	the	horizon,	so	that	sea	and	sky	were
indistinguishable,	and	in	the	midst	of	the	golden	glow	Kestrel	Island	hung	between	heaven
and	earth.	In	silhouette,	the	merging	of	island	rock	and	Abbey	walls	was	quite	lost,	and	the
whole	seemed	carved	out	of	one	mighty	block	of	stone	by	some	superhuman	sculptor,	and
set	there	as	a	memorial	to	a	forgotten	past.
Hamilton’s	mind	flew	back	to	the	legend	that	it	was	the	last	remnant	of	lost	Lyonesse,
where	Merlin	built	his	faëry	castle.
“The	island	valley	of	Avilion,	where	there	is	neither	hail	nor	rain,	nor	any	snow,	nor
ever	wind	blows	loudly,”	he	quoted	softly,	and	awoke	from	his	reverie	with	a	start,	as	a
voice	behind	him	remarked:
“I	 always	 understood	 that	 the	 vale	 of	 Avalon	 was	 generally	 considered	 to	 be	 at
Glastonbury,	but	then,	I	may	well	be	wrong.”
The	 speaker	 sat	 down	 beside	 him,	 and	 Hamilton	 saw	 a	 slight	 figure	 in	 a	 shabby
cassock,	 with	 a	 gentle,	 scholarly	 face	 surmounted	 by	 a	 shock	 of	 snow-white	 hair
disheveled	by	the	breeze.
“My	name’s	Bennett,”	said	the	stranger,	“Michael	Bennett.	I’m	rector	at	St.	Martin’s
here.	You	are	a	visitor,	of	course.”
Hamilton	introduced	himself,	and	the	two	shook	hands.	The	rector	continued:
“That	smells	like	an	excellent	tobacco.	May	I	beg	a	pipeful?”
He	took	an	ancient	briar	from	his	cassock	pocket	and	began	to	fill	it	from	Hamilton’s
pouch.
“You	see,	I	am	a	poor	man,”	he	explained	simply,	“and	I	have	smoked	my	allowance
for	the	week.”
He	lit	up,	and	smoked	in	silence	for	some	minutes;	then:
“You	are	a	writer,	of	course?	A	poet,	perhaps?”
“Hack-work,	mainly,	I’m	afraid.”	Hamilton	shrugged	deprecatingly.	“I	can’t	afford	to
write	as	much	poetry	as	I	would	wish.”
“But	you	do	write	 a	 little.	 I	 thought	 as	much,	 though	 I	must	 admit	 that	 the	Abbey
looks	lovely	enough	tonight	to	awake	the	poet	in	any	man.”
“Do	you	know	Sir	Anthony?”	asked	Hamilton.
“The	present	one,	you	mean?	Not	very	well.	 I	have	spoken	 to	him	once	or	 twice.	 I
knew	his	father	well.	You	heard	of	the	tragedy?”
Hamilton	nodded.
“Tony	is	one	of	my	best	friends.”
“Ah!	You	are	visiting	him,	then?”
“No,	not	yet.	I’m	staying	at	the	Three	Fishermen	tonight.	He	doesn’t	know	I’m	here.”
“No?”	 The	 old	 man	 showed	 no	 curiosity,	 but	 Hamilton	 felt	 a	 strange	 urge	 to	 be
utterly	frank	with	this	gentle,	unassuming	creature.
“I’m	worried	about	him,”	he	went	on.	“He	didn’t	reply	to	my	last	letter	—	I	haven’t
heard	from	him	for	months.	So	I	came	down,	partly	to	see	if	he	was	all	right.”
“I	 see.	 I	 think	 I	 can	 reassure	 you	 on	 one	 point:	 he	 is	 in	 the	 best	 of	 health.	 I	 was
talking	to	one	of	the	Abbey	servants	—	a	man	named	Tregellis	—	only	this	morning.	He
comes	across	for	provisions	most	days.”
“I’m	very	glad	 to	 hear	 that.”	There	was	much	 relief	 in	Hamilton’s	 voice.	 “Do	you
know	if	there	is	anyone	else	staying	there,	sir?”
“There	are	two	guests,	Mr.	Hamilton.	There	is	Dr.	Gaunt,	who	has	been	there	since
before	 old	 Sir	 Anthony	 died,	 and	 a	 Mr.	 Simon	 Vaughan,	 who	 came	 shortly	 after	 that
unhappy	accident.”
“Oh!	Who	is	this	Mr.	Vaughan?	Dr.	Gaunt	I	know.	It	was	I	who	found	him	for	Tony.”
The	rector	blew	out	a	cloud	of	smoke	and	turned	his	head	slowly	towards	Hamilton.
“Really!”	 he	 said.	 “A	 charming	 man.	 I	 met	 him	 at	 the	 funeral.	 I	 believe	 Simon
Vaughan	 in	 a	 colleague	 of	 his	 from	London.	A	 psychic	 investigator,	 I	 am	 told	 he	 calls
himself.	I	hear	all	the	gossip,	you	see,	Mr.	Hamilton.”
“A	psychic	investigator?	What	does	it	all	mean,	sir?	What’s	going	on	over	there?”
“I	think	they	are	endeavouring	to	get	to	the	bottom	of	this	so-called	curse.	They	hope
to	destroy	it	eventually.	Or	so	I	am	told.”
Hamilton	digested	this	information.	Then	he	asked:
“What	is	your	opinion	about	it	all,	sir?	Do	you	believe	there	is	any	foundation	for	the
legend?”
“Mr.	Hamilton,	when	you	reach	my	age	you	will	learn	never	to	scoff	at	other	people’s
beliefs,	because	those	beliefs	often	come	to	have	a	real	existence,	simply	because	they	are
believed	 in.	A	great	wrong	was	 done	 on	 that	 island	 by	 the	 first	 of	 the	Lovells,	 and	 hid
descendants	have	believed	ever	since	that	they	are	suffering	for	it.	It	may	be	so,	I	cannot
say.	But	the	ways	of	the	Almighty	are	infinite,	and	should	not	be	examined	too	curiously.
If	Sir	Anthony	had	listened	to	me	he	might	have	been	alive	today.”
“Why,	sir	—	what	do	you	mean?”
“He	was	a	good	Christian	once,	and	used	to	come	over	to	church	every	Sunday.	He
would	lunch	with	me	afterwards,	and	we	had	many	long	walks	together.	He	told	me	of	his
conviction	that	somewhere	in	the	vaults	below	the	Abbey	was	hidden	the	thing,	being	—
call	it	what	you	will	—	which	was	the	embodiment	of	the	curse.	And	the	last	time	I	saw
him	alive	he	expressed	his	determination	to	seek	it	out.	I	begged	him	to	leave	ill	alone:	to
resort	only	to	prayer,	and	the	Sacraments	of	the	Church.	I	even	offered	to	go	to	the	Abbey
and	perform	the	ancient	ceremony	of	exorcism.	I	am	probably	an	old	fool,	but	I	believe	in
these	things,	you	see.
“He	would	not	heed	me;	he	did	go	down	into	that	crypt,	and	what	he	found	I	don’t
know,	for	I	never	saw	him	again.	Even	after	he	had	recovered	from	his	illness,	through	the
ministrations	of	your	Dr.	Gaunt,	he	never	came	to	see	me,	or	to	church	even.	And	I	am	not
one	to	thrust	myself	in	where	I	am	not	wanted.
“So	you	see	why	I	am	appalled	at	the	thought	of	your	friend	going	the	self-same	way
his	 father	 went.	 He	 seems	 a	 nice	 young	 fellow	—	 I	 don’t	 suppose	 he	 is	 more	 than	 a
nominal	Christian,	so	few	are	these	days,	and	he	has	not	even	that	to	support	him.	He	and
those	 friends	 of	 his	 are	 meddling	 with	 matters	 that	 should	 not	 be	 meddled	 with.	 I	 am
desperately	afraid	for	him.”
Hamilton	sat	silent	for	some	minutes	after	the	other	had	finished	speaking.	Darkness
had	 fallen,	 and	 the	 first	 stars	 were	 beginning	 to	 sprinkle	 the	 deep	 blue	 overhead.	 The
island	was	only	a	dark	blot	on	the	grey	sea.
“Thank	you	 for	 telling	me	all	 this,	 sir,”	he	 said	at	 last.	 “I	must	go	 to	him,	 and	 see
what	I	can	do.”
“God	go	with	you,	my	son,”	the	rector	replied,	getting	to	his	feet	a	trifle	stiffly,	“and
if	an	old	man’s	vapourings	prove	groundless,	forgive	me.”
Together	 they	 walked	 back	 down	 the	 steep	 path.	 The	 rectory	 stood	 close	 by	 the
church,	and	at	the	gate	the	rector	stopped.
“Are	you	a	Catholic,	Mr.	Hamilton?”	he	asked.
“I	was	brought	up	in	the	Church	of	England,”	the	other	had	started	to	reply,	but	the
old	man	broke	in:
“No,	 no!	 I	 was	 not	 referring	 to	 our	 Roman	 brethren.	 I	 mean	 —	 do	 you	 use	 the
Sacraments	of	the	Church	in	which	you	were	baptized?	Don’t	think	me	impertinent,	but	as
one	of	the	least	of	her	priests	I	have	a	right	to	know.”
“I’m	afraid	I	have	not	been	very	regular	for	some	years.	Things	slide,	you	know,	sir.”
“Yes,	I	know.	But	if	you	are	going	to	that	island,	I	would	advise	you	to	consider	these
things.	They	are	rather	important.	And	if	you	want	any	help	or	advice,	come	to	me.”
“I	will,	sir,	thank	you.	Good	night.”
“Good	night,	my	son.	God	bless	you.”
They	 shook	 hands,	 and	 Hamilton	 strode	 off	 towards	 the	 village.	 The	 rector	 stood
watching	him	for	a	moment,	then	he	crossed	himself,	murmuring:
“Sweet	Jesus,	most	strong,	most	holy!	Guard	Thy	servant,	who	goes	into	the	midst	of
so	many	and	great	dangers!”
He	opened	the	gate	and	went	into	his	own	house.
While	 he	 was	 having	 a	 nightcap	 Hamilton	 told	 the	 landlord	 that	 he	 had	 met	 the
rector:
“Ah,	old	Father	Bennett!”	exclaimed	Dykes.	“	’E’s	a	good	sort.	Bit	’Igh,	per’aps	—
incense	and	the	likes	o’	that,	if	you	know	what	I	mean,	sir	—	but	we	likes	’im,	we	does.	’E
means	no	’arm.	The	fisherfolk	love	’im	like	a	father.	Blesses	their	boats	for	’em.	’E	comes
in	’ere	for	a	glass	now	and	then,	with	 the	best	of	’em.	Could	do	with	more	parsons	 like
that,	sir.”
Hamilton	heartily	agreed	with	this	conclusion,	and	presently	went	to	bed,	with	much
to	think	upon.
He	was	awakened	early	next	morning	by	the	crying	of	the	gulls	over	the	harbour,	as
the	 boats	 came	 in,	 laden	with	 the	 fruits	 of	 the	 night’s	 toil.	After	 breakfast	 he	 began	 to
explore	the	possibilities	of	getting	to	the	Abbey.	He	particularly	wished	to	avoid	attracting
attention	by	chartering	a	boat	 to	take	him	across,	and	was	considerably	relieved	to	learn
that	Tom	Tregellis	invariably	called	at	the	inn	when	he	came	over	for	provisions.
He	was	sitting	in	the	bar	when	that	worthy	entered,	and,	hearing	the	landlord	call	him
by	 name,	 approached	 and	 offered	 him	 a	 drink.	 The	 dour	 Cornishman	 accepted	without
surprise,	 and	 they	 sat	 down	 at	 a	 little	 table	 in	 the	 corner,	 their	 tankards	 before	 them.
Hamilton	 explained	 that	 he	 was	 a	 friend	 of	 Sir	 Anthony’s,	 and	 wanted	 to	 pay	 him	 a
surprise	 visit,	 and	 after	 the	 tankards	 had	 been	 refilled	 several	 times	 Tregellis	 departed,
telling	him	to	be	at	the	harbour	in	half	an	hour’s	time.
There	 they	met,	 Hamilton	 carrying	 his	 suitcase	 and	 Tregellis	 a	 basket	 of	 assorted
groceries.	They	climbed	down	into	the	trim	launch,	and	inside	half	an	hour	were	climbing
the	worn	stairway	leading	up	to	the	Abbey.
The	wicket	in	the	outer	gate	stood	open,	and	they	passed	through,	Hamilton	staring
about	 him	 in	 amazement	 at	 the	 broad	 flagged	 courtyard,	 and	 the	 square	 bulk	 of	 the
building	 rearing	 its	 turrets	 into	 the	blue.	He	had	not	been	on	 the	 island	before,	and	was
intensely	interested	by	everything	he	saw.
Lorrimer,	who	must	 have	 been	watching	 for	 the	 launch,	 appeared	 at	 the	 door,	 and
stood	waiting,	looking	rather	doubtfully	at	Hamilton	and	his	luggage.	It	was	evident	that
uninvited	guests	were	not	a	common	feature	of	life	on	Kestrel.	Tregellis,	without	a	word
of	 explanation,	 left	 his	 companion	 to	 his	 own	 devices	 and	 departed	 with	 his	 basket
towards	the	rear	quarters.	Hamilton	addressed	Lorrimer:
“I	 don’t	 think	Sir	Anthony	 is	 expecting	me,	 but	 I	 am	 an	 old	 friend	—	my	name’s
Hamilton.”
The	servant’s	face	crinkled	into	a	smile.
“Oh,	yes,	of	course,	sir.	I’ve	often	heard	Sir	Anthony	speak	of	you.	He	told	me	some
months	ago	that	he	had	invited	you	down.	Will	you	step	inside,	sir?	I	will	tell	Sir	Anthony
you	are	here.”
Hamilton	suffered	himself	to	be	led	into	the	great	hall	and	relieved	of	his	hat	and	bag.
Lorrimer	asked	him	to	be	seated	and	retired	towards	the	library.
Left	 to	 himself,	 the	 visitor	 stood	with	 his	 back	 to	 the	 cavernous	 hearth,	 empty	 for
once,	 since	 the	 great	 heat	 had	 penetrated	 even	 these	 ponderous	walls.	He	 looked	 round
curiously,	the	least	bit	overawed	by	the	mediaeval	grandeur	of	the	place,	gloomy	in	spite
of	the	narrow	beams	of	sunlight	which	crept	in	through	the	high	windows.
He	had	not	long	to	wait,	however,	for	scarcely	had	Lorrimer	disappeared	when	Tony
came	bursting	in,	almost	running	across	the	stone	floor	to	greet	his	friend.
“John,	by	all	that’s	holy!	I	am	glad	to	see	you,	old	man!”	he	cried,	wringing	his	hand.
“Do	sit	down.	Why	ever	didn’t	you	let	me	know	you	were	coming?”
“I	 came	quite	 by	 chance,	Tony.	 I	 just	 happened	 to	 be	 taking	 a	 little	 holiday	 in	 the
neighbourhood,	and	thought	I’d	pop	over	and	look	you	up.”
“Well,	now	you’re	here	at	last,	you	must	stay	for	a	while.”
“Thanks,	 I’d	 love	 to.”	 Hamilton	 was	 studying	 his	 friend	 narrowly.	 This	 was	 a
different	Tony,	 in	 spite	 of	 the	 familiar	 exuberance	of	 his	 greeting	—	and	 even	 that	was
false.	He	was	not	glad	to	see	him,	and	didn’t	really	want	him	to	stay.	There	was	a	look	of
strain	about	his	face,	and	a	strange	depth	in	the	blue	eyes,	once	so	gay	and	careless,	that
sent	a	chill	to	Hamilton’s	heart.	His	mouth,	too,	once	the	weakest	point	of	the	whole	face,
was	now	set	in	unnaturally	firm	lines.
“Didn’t	you	get	my	last	letter,	Tony?”	he	asked	carelessly,	taking	out	his	pipe	as	Tony
lit	a	cigarette.
“Yes,	of	course;	thanks,	old	man	—	I	answered	it,	surely?”	Tony	was	intent	upon	his
cigarette.
“You	didn’t.	I	was	a	little	worried.”
“What	 a	 careless	 beast	 I	 am,	 John!	 I	 know	 I	wrote	 a	 reply.	 It’s	 probably	 still	 in	 a
pocket	somewhere.	I	am	sorry!”
“It’s	all	right,	Tony.	I	thought	you	might	be	ill,	that’s	all.”
“I	was	 never	 better	 in	my	 life.	 This	 place	 suits	me	 absolutely.	You	were	 perfectly
right	about	it,	John,	it’s	marvelous.	I	can’t	think	why	I	never	thought	so	before.”
“Is	Dr.	Gaunt	still	here?”
“Why,	 yes,	 he’s	 in	 the	 library	 now.	 You	 must	 come	 and	 meet	 him	 again.	 He’s	 a
charming	 fellow.	 There’s	 a	 pal	 of	 his	 here	 too	 —	 chap	 called	 Vaughan	 —	 sort	 of
spiritualist	johnny.	He	thinks	he	can	fix	up	the	jolly	old	curse	—	more	power	to	him!	Now
come	along	and	see	Gaunt.”
He	literally	dragged	his	friend	off	to	the	library.
As	they	entered,	the	doctor,	who	was	sitting	at	the	long	table,	strewn	with	books	and
papers,	rose	and	came	forward,	saying:
“Ah,	Mr.	Hamilton!	We’ve	met	before,	I	think.”
“Yes,	Doctor,	once.	How	do	you	do?”
They	 shook	 hands,	 and	 immediately	 Hamilton	 felt	 his	 vague	 apprehensions
concerning	Gaunt’s	 continued	 presence	 here	 disappear	 before	 his	 delighted	 personality.
This	man	could	do	no	one	any	harm,	he	told	himself.
“And	how	is	London	looking,	Mr.	Hamilton?”	the	doctor	asked.
“Terrible	in	this	heat.	I	must	confess	I	ran	away.	Couldn’t	stand	it	any	longer.”
“Wise	man!	I	think	we’re	better	off	here,	eh,	Tony?”
“Rather!	John,	you	must	stay	with	us	—	mustn’t	he,	Doctor?”
“Of	course	he	must.	Now,	Mr.	Hamilton,	as	a	medical	man,	I	prescribe	a	few	weeks
of	sea	air,	and	no	worries.”
Hamilton	laughed.
“You’re	both	very	good.	If	it’s	not	overtaxing	your	domestic	arrangements,	Tony,	I’d
like	nothing	better.”
“Mrs.	Lorrimer	will	be	able	 to	manage.	We’ve	got	 Johnston	here	as	well	now,	you
know,”	Tony	said,	pulling	the	bell-rope.
“What’s	happened	to	your	home	in	Town,	Tony?”	queried	Hamilton.
“Sold,”	the	other	replied	laconically;	“privately,	of	course.	I	didn’t	want	that	place	on
my	hands.	And	I’d	given	up	the	flat,	too.	Kestrel	is	good	enough	for	me.”
At	this	juncture	Lorrimer	appeared	at	the	door,	and	to	him	Tony	said:
“Mr.	Hamilton	will	be	staying	some	time,	Lorrimer.	Put	his	things	in	the	tower	room.
You’ll	love	that,	John,	it’s	awfully	quaint.	Perhaps	you’d	like	a	wash	before	lunch?	Show
Mr.	Hamilton	up,	Lorrimer.”
When	they	had	gone,	Gaunt	remarked	coldly:
“Most	inopportune,	your	friend’s	visit,	Tony.	He	could	scarcely	have	come	at	a	worse
time.”
“I	know.	I’m	awfully	sorry,	Doctor,	but	what	could	I	do?	I	couldn’t	send	him	away.
He	is	my	friend,	after	all.”
“We	who	 follow	 the	Way	have	 little	 time	 for	 friends,	Tony,	 and	 small	 room	 in	our
hearts	for	them.	Purge	yourself	of	all	earthly	love,	my	son.”
“I’ll	try,	Doctor,”	Tony	replied	humbly.	“Can	we	carry	on	at	all	while	he’s	here?”
“We	must.	 If	he	stays	 too	 long,	 I	will	persuade	him	 to	go,	 somehow.	Leave	 that	 to
me.”
“May	I	tell	him	something	of	what	you	are	teaching	me?”	the	young	man	asked.	“He
will	wonder	what	we	are	doing	if	I	don’t,	and	perhaps	he	too	might	want	to	join	us.”
“Missionary	zeal	already,	Tony?	No,	we	don’t	win	followers	 that	way.	But	you	can
tell	him	enough	to	satisfy	his	curiosity.	Since	you	are	not	yet	initiated,	you	cannot	reveal
the	inner	secrets.”
The	tower	room,	to	which	Lorrimer	conducted	Hamilton,	was	approached	by	a	spiral
staircase	from	the	end	of	the	long	gallery.	It	had	not	been	used	in	Tony’s	father’s	day,	and
had	only	 recently	been	prepared	 for	 just	 such	an	occasion	as	 this.	 It	occupied	 the	upper
portion	of	one	of	the	two	towers	which	surmounted	the	Abbey,	and	was	circular	in	shape,
with	four	windows,	set	in	deep	embrasures,	commanding	every	point	of	the	compass.	The
staircase	went	on	past	its	door	to	the	roof	of	the	tower.
Lorrimer	ushered	Hamilton	inside	and	set	his	bag	on	the	four-poster	bed	which	stood
in	the	middle	of	the	floor.	The	rest	of	the	furniture	was	arranged	round	the	walls.
“What	a	delightful	room,	Lorrimer!”	exclaimed	Hamilton	as	he	surveyed	it.
“Very	 pleasant	 this	 weather,	 sir,”	 the	 servant	 replied,	 “but	 a	 bit	 chilly	 in	 winter.
There’s	no	fireplace,	you	see.	Shall	I	unpack	for	you,	sir?”
“No,	thanks,	I’ll	do	it	myself.	What	time	is	lunch?”
“In	half	an	hour,	sir.	Will	that	be	all,	then,	sir?”
Hamilton	assured	him	that	he	wanted	nothing	else,	and	when	Lorrimer	had	gone	he
unpacked	 his	 suitcase	 and	 distributed	 his	 belongings	 in	 the	 drawers	 of	 the	 great	 chest
opposite	the	foot	of	the	bed.
The	task	completed,	he	washed	his	face	and	hands	at	 the	primitive	wash-stand	and,
sitting	in	one	of	the	window	recesses,	relit	his	pipe.	He	could	see	the	irregular	roof	of	the
building	below,	and	the	other	tower	beyond,	with	behind	it	nothing	but	the	sea.	Everything
was	very	still.	London,	with	all	 its	 teeming	millions,	seemed	 infinitely	 remote:	he	could
scarcely	realize	that	he	had	left	it	only	yesterday.	Already	it	was	like	a	bad	dream	in	the
morning.	 The	 charm	 of	 Kestrel	 settled	 over	 him	 in	 a	 golden	 cloud.	 All	 his	 fears	 had
vanished.	 What	 Tony	 and	 his	 friends	 were	 doing	 would	 be	 explained	 presently,	 but
everything	 was	 all	 right.	 All	 he	 had	 to	 do	 was	 to	 enjoy	 this	 short	 respite	 from	 the
humdrum	of	his	daily	existence.	How	he	envied	his	friend,	able	to	stay	in	this	enchanted
spot	for	ever	if	he	so	desired!
The	faint	note	of	a	gong	reached	his	ears,	and	he	went	down	to	lunch.	He	found	Tony
and	 the	doctor	 awaiting	him	 in	 the	hall,	 and	with	 them	a	 fat	 and	peculiarly	unpleasant-
looking	man,	who	was	introduced	to	him	as	Mr.	Simon	Vaughan.	Cocktails	were	served	by
Johnston,	Tony’s	suave	manservant,	who	recognized	Hamilton	and	gave	him	a	little	bow.
Then	they	went	to	lunch	in	the	old	dining-hall.
This	 room,	which	 lay	 at	 the	 back	 of	 the	 building,	 separated	 from	 the	 library	 by	 a
passage	leading	from	the	hall	to	the	servants’	quarters,	had	also	been	brought	into	use	after
old	Sir	Anthony’s	death.	 It	was	nobly	proportioned,	with	 a	high	peaked	 roof	 and	 richly
carved	 stone	walls.	 The	 ancient	 east	window,	with	 its	wonderful	Crucifixion	 in	 stained
glass,	miraculously	 preserved	 almost	 intact	 through	 the	 centuries,	 instantly	 betrayed	 the
original	purpose	of	 the	chamber,	and	it	gave	Hamilton	a	queer	feeling	for	a	while,	 to	sit
there,	eating	and	talking,	in	what	had	once	been	the	holy	of	holies	of	the	old	monks.	The
feeling	wore	off	gradually,	however,	and	he	was	soon	laughing	with	the	rest	at	the	doctor’s
gay	sallies.	Vaughan’s	conversation	scintillated	also,	and	Hamilton	soon	forgot	 the	gross
appearance	of	the	man,	as	Tony	had	done	long	before.

Chapter	IX	
The	same	afternoon	Tony	and	his	friend	went	for	a	stroll	down	to	the	sheltered	beach
on	 the	 landward	 side	 of	 the	 island.	Gaunt	 had	 told	 him	 that	 there	was	 no	 necessity	 for
further	 study	 that	day,	 so	 that	 he	 and	Hamilton	 could	 talk	 to	 their	hearts’	 content.	They
went	down	the	stairway	to	the	harbour,	and	then	along	a	narrow	path	over	the	wall	on	to
the	beach.	Finding	a	 spot	where	 the	 low	cliff	gave	shelter	 from	 the	sun,	 they	sat	on	 the
warm,	soft	sand	and	watched	the	little	waves	breaking	on	the	shore.
For	a	while	they	talked	of	various	unimportant	things,	of	London,	and	mutual	friends
there,	but	at	last	Hamilton	could	contain	himself	no	longer.
“Look	here,	Tony,”	he	said,	“exactly	what’s	going	on	here?	What	are	you	and	Gaunt
working	so	hard	at,	and	what’s	this	fellow	Vaughan	up	to?”
Tony,	his	hands	clasped	round	his	knees,	drew	in	a	lungful	of	smoke	before	replying.
Then	he	said:
“Gaunt	 is	 teaching	 me	 the	 ancient	 wisdom,	 and	 Simon	 Vaughan	 is	 making	 his
preparations	for	the	ultimate	expulsion	of	the	curse.”
“Oh!	You	believe	in	it	now?”
“Absolutely.	John,	there	can	be	no	shadow	of	doubt.	There	is	something	abominable
hidden	here,	and	I	feel	it	my	duty	to	put	an	end	to	it.”
“Have	you	seen	anything?”
“No,	but	they	have.	They	went	down	into	the	caves	beneath	the	crypt	one	night	when
I	was	asleep	and	actually	saw	the	thing.”
“H’m.	 Beneath	 the	 crypt,	 eh?	 I	 thought	 you	 said	 there	 was	 nothing	 there	 in	 your
letter.”
“No,	not	in	the	crypt	itself.	But	there	is	a	way	through	the	crypt	altar	into	a	perfect
maze	 of	 tunnels	 and	 passages	 in	 the	 solid	 rock.	 I	 went	 down	 once,	 with	 Vaughan	 and
Gaunt,	but	since	it	was	before	sunset	we	saw	nothing,	though	we	felt	 it,	by	Jove!	It	was
awful.	I	was	jolly	glad	to	get	out	again.”
“Felt	it?	How	do	you	mean?”
“A	 sort	 of	 beastly	 oppression	 and	 feeling	 of	 tension,	 as	 if	 something	 were	 being
wound	up.	Gaunt	 said	 that	 if	we	had	 stayed	 a	minute	 longer	 that	we	did	 it	would	have
materialized.	I’m	very	thankful	we	didn’t.”
Hamilton	looked	thoughtful.
“You	certainly	seem	convinced	that	there	is	something	out	of	the	ordinary	there,”	said
he.	“Well,	as	you	know,	I’m	no	sceptic.	I’m	quite	ready	to	admit	that	there	may	be	things
which	science	knows	nothing	of.	I	went	to	a	séance	once,	out	of	pure	curiosity,	and	some
really	extraordinary	things	happened,	though	I	imagine	that	about	seventy-five	per	cent	of
that	sort	of	thing	is	trickery.	Are	you	quite	sure	there’s	nothing	like	that	here?”
“Who	would	gain	anything	by	it?	What	good	would	it	do?	I	suppose	you	mean	Dr.
Gaunt	 and	 his	 colleague.	 No,	 John,	 you	 can	 rule	 them	 out.	 They’re	 genuine.	 Gaunt’s
shown	me	some	amazing	 things;	he	has	genuine	power.	He’s	quite	won	me	over	 to	 this
way	of	thinking.”
“So	it	seems.	And	what’s	this	‘ancient	wisdom’	he’s	teaching	you?”
“He	calls	it	‘theurgic	mysticism,’	or	the	occult	philosophy.	It	is	the	hidden	knowledge
which	has	been	handed	down	for	countless	ages	by	a	chosen	few.”
“That	sounds	very	fine,	Tony,	but	knowledge	of	what?”
“Knowledge	of	ourselves	 first,	 John,	of	 the	human	mind	and	will,	and	 the	wonders
which	 they	can	work.	Then	knowledge	of	 the	answer	 to	 the	 riddle	of	 the	Universe.	You
know,	I’ve	always	lacked	a	purpose	in	life	—	something	real	to	do.	I’ve	found	it	now.	I’ve
always	wanted	 to	 know	what	 Life	was	 all	 about	—	what	 it	 all	meant.	 I’m	 finding	 out
now.”
“Then	 I’m	very	glad,	Tony.	 If	 this	occult	business	helps	you	at	 all,	 carry	on	by	all
means.	I	know	Gaunt’s	a	sound	man,	and	you’ll	come	to	no	harm	in	his	hands.”
Tony’s	face	lit	up	with	pleasure.
“Oh,	 John.	 I’m	 so	 glad	 you	 feel	 like	 that	 about	 it!”	 he	 exclaimed.	 “I	 know	you’re
right.	I	couldn’t	have	a	better	teacher.”
“How	is	he	teaching	you?”
“First	by	training	me	in	concentration.	I	have	to	spend	hours	a	day	—	it	was	only	a
few	 minutes	 at	 first	 —	 just	 looking	 steadily	 at	 some	 object	 or	 other,	 and	 excluding
everything	 else	 from	my	mind.	 It’s	 amazing	how	one	 improves	with	 practice.	At	 first	 I
couldn’t	keep	my	attention	fixed	for	five	minutes	even	—	a	host	of	vague	thoughts	kept
intruding.	Now	I	seem	to	get	right	inside	the	thing	I’m	meditating	on,	and	see	more	in	it
than	 I	 ever	 saw	 before	 in	 a	 whole	 landscape.	 This	 month	 I’ve	 started	 learning	 to
concentrate	on	ideas	too	—	with	no	material	object	to	help	—	that’s	much	more	difficult.”
Hamilton	scratched	the	back	of	his	hand	with	his	chin.
“It	all	sounds	very	interesting,	Tony,”	he	said,	“but	where	does	it	lead	to?”
“Simply	 to	an	 increase	of	will-power	—	merely	a	means	 to	an	end.	And	when	that
end	is	achieved	there’s	scarcely	any	limit	to	the	power	of	the	human	will.”
“	‘Man	is	not	subject	to	the	angels,	nor	to	death	utterly,	save	by	the	weakness	of	his
own	 feeble	 will,’	 ”	 quoted	Hamilton.	 “That’s	 Poe,	 I	 fancy.	Well,	 then,	 what?	 First	 this
increase	of	volition,	and	afterwards…?
“Afterwards	 the	 transcendental	 business	 —	 access	 to	 higher	 planes	 of	 being	 —
ultimate	union	with	Reality;	mystical	stuff,	you	know.	However,	all	that	will	come	later;	it
means	years	of	work,	but	it’s	immensely	worth	while,	John.”
“If	you	 think	so	I	suppose	 it	must	be.	 It	 sounds	very	much	 like	common	or	garden
mysticism	to	me,	though,	and	I	somehow	hadn’t	thought	of	you	as	quite	the	mystic	type,
Tony.	 It	 needs	 a	 tremendous	 lot	 of	 faith	 to	 go	 blindly	 into	 the	 dark	 like	 this.	 I’d	 have
thought	 you’d	 wanted	 quicker	 results	 than	 the	 mystic	 way	 can	 give,	 and	 more	 certain
knowledge	of	where	you	were	going.”
A	little	frown	gathered	on	Tony’s	face.
“Oh,	 I	 don’t	 know	 about	 that,”	 he	 said;	 “I’m	 getting	 results	 already	—	 small,	 but
promising	enough.	And	I	shall	get	the	knowledge	all	right	when	I’m	initiated	—	“
“Initiated!”	exclaimed	the	other.	“There	is	some	sort	of	Order,	then?”
“Rather!	Gaunt	is	Master	of	the	London	Chapter.”
Hamilton	whistled	softly.
“There’s	more	in	this	than	I	thought,”	said	he.	“When	will	this	initiation	take	place?”
“Early	next	month.”
“So	soon?”
“Yes.	 You	 see,	 Vaughan	 wants	 me	 to	 have	 some	 sort	 of	 idea	 about	 this	 occult
business	so	that	I	can	help	him	destroy	the	curse.	And	he	wants	to	do	that	on	September
25th.”
“Why?”
“That	is	the	anniversary	of	the	day	upon	which	the	Abbot	first	pronounced	the	curse.
Apparently	it	is	particularly	suitable.”
“Well,”	 said	Hamilton,	 “that	 sounds	 reasonable.	But	 tell	me,	Tony,	 aren’t	 you	 ever
scared	 of	 all	 this	 business	 you’re	 letting	 yourself	 in	 for?	 It’s	 so	 unlike	 what	 I’ve	 ever
known	of	you	in	the	past.	You’ve	never	taken	anything	so	seriously	before.”
“I	know,	John.	That’s	been	my	trouble:	never	could	take	anything	seriously.	Well,	this
is	serious:	deadly	serious.	I’ve	got	to	smash	the	curse.	I	feel	that	I	am	the	one	to	set	Kestrel
free.	 The	 only	 way	 I	 can	 do	 it	 is	 by	 learning	 all	 I	 can	 of	 the	 inner	 workings	 of	 such
matters,	and	then	putting	myself	freely	into	the	hands	of	a	real	expert	like	Vaughan.”
“But	 that	 is	 not	 your	 only	 reason	 for	 taking	 up	 these	 occult	 studies?	 You	 are
fascinated	by	the	whole	thing?”
“Not	 altogether,	 John.	 It	 is	 fascinating,	 of	 course,	 but	 then	 it	 promises	 unlimited
knowledge	and	power.”
“I’m	not	 at	 all	 sure	 that	 they	are	desirable,	Tony.”	Hamilton’s	voice	was	quiet,	but
very	 serious.	 “I	 don’t	want	 to	 damp	 you	 ardour,	 but	 I	 suppose	 you	 know	what	 all	 this
would	have	been	called	a	couple	of	hundred	years	ago?”
“Yes,	John.	 I	know	what	you’re	going	 to	say.	Magic,	wasn’t	 it?	Odd	how	the	word
has	 deteriorated.	Nowadays	 it	means	 sleight-of-hand	 and	 conjuring	 tricks.	Rabbits	 from
top-hats.	Then	it	meant	—	what?	All	power	and	all	knowledge.	It’s	a	big	thing,	John.”
There	was	a	long	silence	after	Tony	had	finished	speaking,	while	the	two	friends	sat,
not	looking	at	each	other,	but	gazing	across	the	sea	to	the	distant	Cornish	coast.	Overhead
a	 gull	 slid	 by	 on	 motionless	 wings.	 All	 else	 was	 still	 as	 a	 painted	 picture	 in	 the	 hot
sunlight.
When	Tony	broke	the	silence	his	voice	was	almost	timid:
“John,	does	 it	 interest	you	at	all?	 I	mean	—	would	you	care	 to	 join	me?	Have	you
never	wanted	anything	more	from	life	than	just	—	just	living?”
Hamilton	smiled,	and,	taking	his	pipe	from	his	mouth,	knocked	it	out	on	a	stone.
“Just	 living	 is	good	enough	for	me,	Tony,”	he	said.	“But	 then	I’m	differently	made
from	you.	I	have,	I	suppose,	some	sort	of	artistic	sense,	insight	—	call	it	what	you	will.	At
all	 events	 I	 can	 see	 beneath	 the	 surface	 of	 life	 to	 a	 certain	 extent,	 and	 feel	 the	 grand
adventure	 of	 it	 all;	 the	 golden	 glory	 of	 success;	 the	 exquisite	 pain	 of	 ecstasy;	 the	 quiet
peace	of	happiness;	the	blood-red,	royal	road	of	agony.
“I	have	seen	something	of	 the	heroism	which	goes	on	continually	 in	other	people’s
lives	—	in	the	struggles	of	the	very	poor,	the	repressed,	the	aged,	the	forgotten.	I	try,	in	my
humble	way,	to	set	down	on	paper	a	record	of	these	things,	that	other	people	may	see	with
my	 eyes	 the	 things	 they	 cannot	 see	 for	 themselves.	Whether	 I	 succeed	 or	 not	 is	 quite
another	matter,	but	the	effort	is	there.	My	cup	of	life	is	full	to	the	brim,	Tony.	I	have	no
room	for	anything	more.	And	when	I	have	drained	it	to	the	dregs	I	will	face	the	last	and
greatest	adventure	of	all	with	a	quiet	mind.”
Tony	was	deeply	impressed	by	Hamilton’s	words,	but	all	he	said	was:
“You	are	very	fortunate,	John.	I	have	never	experienced	these	things	—	never	even
seen	 them	 in	 others.	Certainly	 I	 have	no	purpose	 like	 yours	—	at	 least,	 I	 hadn’t	 at	 one
time.	I	have	one	now,	but	it	seems	very	remote	from	your	own.	Must	our	paths	lie	apart
now,	John?	I’m	sorry.”
“I’m	sorry	too,	Tony.	There	is	no	reason	why	we	should	not	be	friends,	in	spite	of	our
different	motives.	One	last	question,	though:	do	you	believe	in	God?”
Tony	looked	sharply	at	his	friend,	a	queerly	puzzled	expression	in	his	eyes.
“I	suppose	so,”	he	answered	hesitantly;	“I’ve	never	really	thought	about	it	much.”
“Then	your	new	faith	does	not	teach	you	such	belief?”
“No.	We	 know	 that	 there	 are	 vast	 impersonal	 forces	 which	 can	 be	 tapped	 by	 the
human	will;	we	know	that	there	is	an	order	in	the	Universe;	but	we	don’t	exactly	worship
a	personal	God.	We	strive	rather,	by	analogy	and	symbolism,	as	well	as	by	direct	mystical
approach,	 to	 achieve	 union	 with	 the	 Ultimate	 Reality	 which	 lies	 behind	 the	 material
world.”
“I	 suspected	 as	much.	 That’s	 another	 point,	 then,	 upon	which	 I	 differ	 from	 you.	 I
think	I	do	believe	in	God.	I	met	an	old	priest	yesterday	—	“
“What	a	delightful	spot	for	a	chat!”	broke	in	the	cheerful	voice	of	Gaunt.	The	doctor
was	standing	at	the	edge	of	the	low	cliff	above	them,	having	presumably	walked	down	one
of	the	overland	paths	from	the	Abbey	instead	of	coming	down	the	stairway	to	the	harbour.
“Have	you	finished	gossiping?”	he	went	on.	“The	tea-bell	went	nearly	half	an	hour
ago,	and	we	thought	you	must	be	lost.”
The	 two	 friends	 laughed,	 and	 clambered	up	 to	him,	 and	 all	 three	went	 back	 to	 the
Abbey	together.
When	Hamilton	 lay	 in	 bed	 that	 night,	 smoking	 a	 last	 pipe	 before	 blowing	 out	 the
candle,	he	reviewed	the	events	of	the	day.	Though	from	a	purely	logical	point	of	view	he
found	himself	bound	to	admit	that	he	found	no	fault	with	Tony’s	new	studies,	yet	his	soul
instinctively	 rebelled	 against	 them.	The	 spectacle	 of	 his	 young	 friend,	 once	 so	 gay	 and
carefree,	 delving	 into	 these	 great	 mysteries,	 with	 the	 weight	 of	 his	 newly	 acquired
knowledge	showing	clearly	on	his	strangely	altered	countenance,	distressed	him	in	spite	of
himself.	He	 had	 no	 suspicions	 of	Gaunt,	 though	Vaughan’s	 place	 in	 the	 picture	 did	 not
seem	too	clearly	defined.	If	the	curse	really	existed	—	a	point	upon	which	Hamilton	still
entertained	grave	doubts	—	and	if	Vaughan	was	able	to	deal	with	it	effectively,	why	must
Tony	be	dragged	into	it	at	all?	If,	as	Tony	said,	his	help	was	essential,	and	he	must	have
this	 occult	 training	 before	 he	 could	 render	 that	 help,	 why	 was	 Vaughan’s	 presence
necessary?	 Tony	 himself	 had	 said	 that	 Gaunt	 was	 the	 Superior	 of	 the	 Order	 to	 which
presumably	Vaughan	belonged	also,	and	consequently	must	be	possessed	of	more	power
than	his	colleague.	The	whole	thing	didn’t	quite	fit.
What	was	he	 to	 do?	That	was	 the	question.	True,	 he	had	 agreed	with	Tony	on	 the
beach	 that	 afternoon	 that	 their	ways	must	 lie	 apart	 in	 future,	 but	he	 could	not	 reconcile
himself	 to	 abandoning	his	 friend	at	what	 appeared	 to	be	 a	great	 spiritual	 crisis	 of	 some
sort.	If	he	were	to	leave	Tony	alone	with	these	two	occultists,	studying	their	faith,	then	the
issue	would	not	be	 in	doubt:	Tony	would	 infallibly	go	 through	with	 the	whole	affair,	be
‘initiated’	—	whatever	that	might	entail	—	and	become	irrevocably	one	of	them.	Even	if
he	 changed	 his	mind	 at	 the	 last	moment,	 and	wished	 to	 draw	back,	 he	 could	 hardly	 be
expected	 to	 resist	 the	persuasion	of	 the	 two	of	 them	alone.	But	 if	he,	Hamilton,	were	 to
stay	on	for	a	while,	however	unwelcome	he	might	be,	Tony	would	at	least	have	someone
of	his	own	kind	to	turn	to,	if	the	need	arose.
Having	 reached	 this	decision,	Hamilton	knocked	 the	ashes	 from	his	pipe,	blew	out
the	candle,	and,	after	watching	the	moonlight	falling	through	one	of	his	four	windows	for
a	while,	fell	asleep.
An	hour	later	Gaunt	opened	the	door	of	Vaughan’s	room	and	slipped	quietly	in.	His
colleague,	 looking	 bigger	 than	 ever	 in	 a	 dressing-gown	 of	 blue	 silk,	 was	 sitting	 at	 the
small	table	beside	his	bed,	an	open	book	before	him.	He	raised	his	eyes	from	the	page	he
was	reading	and	watched	the	doctor	draw	up	a	chair	and	sit	down	opposite	him.	Without	a
word	he	drew	a	cigar-case	from	his	pocket	and	offered	it	to	the	other.	When	both	had	lit
one	of	 the	thin	cheroots	apiece,	and	the	blue	smoke	was	curling	up	over	 the	chimney	of
the	lamp,	the	doctor	spoke.
“Well,	Simon,	this	is	rather	awkward,”	he	said.
“Hamilton,	you	mean?”	Vaughan	did	not	trouble	to	remove	his	cigar	when	he	spoke,
and	his	thick	red	lips	scarcely	moved,	slurring	the	words.
“Precisely.	We	cannot	continue	our	plan	satisfactorily	with	him	here.	Apart	from	the
obvious	difficulty	of	finding	time	for	young	Lovell	to	continue	his	studies,	with	his	friend
to	 entertain,	 it	 is	 very	 probable	 that	 Hamilton’s	 presence	 would	 have	 the	 effect	 of
distracting	his	mind	to	such	an	extent	that	I	should	be	unable	to	keep	him	in	the	withdrawn
state	necessary	for	initiation.”
“Then	Hamilton	must	go.”
“Just	so,	but	the	question	is,	how?”
“Destruction?”	Vaughan	passed	his	tongue	over	his	lips,	rolling	his	cheroot	from	one
side	to	the	other.
“I	 think	 not.	 It	 would	 mean	 an	 enormous	 expenditure	 of	 power,	 and	 the	 Outer
Darkness	 is	 too	close	for	 that.	 It	would	be	dangerous.	Besides,	we	could	hardly	effect	 it
without	arousing	Lovell’s	suspicions.”
“Then	we	must	drive	him	out.”	There	was	a	shade	of	disappointment	 in	Vaughan’s
tone.
“That	is	my	opinion.	But	I	wanted	your	confirmation,	and	now	your	help.”
“That	is	always	at	your	service,	Doctor.”
“I	hope	so.	I	don’t	think	we	could	frighten	him	away,	do	you?”
“Definitely	not.	It	would	only	increase	his	resistance	if	we	tried,	and	if	we	succeeded
in	truly	alarming	him	he	would	take	Lovell	with	him,	willing	or	no.”
“Yes,”	 agreed	 the	 doctor,	 “I,	 too,	 am	afraid	 of	 that.	He	must	 believe	 that	 by	going
away	alone	he	is	serving	his	friend’s	interests.”
“Simple	suggestion,	then.”
“I	doubt	its	efficacy	in	his	case.	For	one	untrained	he	has	an	abnormally	strong	will.
It	is	a	difficult	problem,	Simon.”
There	was	 an	 interval	 of	 silence,	 during	which	 they	puffed	 away	 at	 their	 cheroots.
Gaunt	spoke	again:
“I	see	nothing	else	for	 it.	Direct	attack	upon	Hamilton	himself	 is	 impossible,	under
the	circumstances.	Lovell	himself	must	go	to	him	and	ask	him	to	leave.”
“He’ll	never	do	that.”
“No,	he’s	far	too	courteous	and	hospitable	to	do	it	consciously.”
“But	you	must	not	hypnotize	him,	Doctor!	It	would	destroy	all	the	strength	his	will
has	gained	during	the	past	months.	You	cannot	undo	your	work	like	that.”
“I	don’t	propose	to,	Simon.	He	is	asleep	now,	I	should	imagine.	We	can	easily	find
out.	If	so,	I	can	withdraw	his	astral	shell	without	touching	the	consciousness	or	harming
the	will.”
“I	have	never	known	it	to	be	done,	Doctor.”
“There	are	many	things	you	do	not	know,	my	friend.	This	happens	to	be	one	of	them.
Now	get	your	crystal.”
Obediently	Vaughan	heaved	himself	up	and	rummaged	in	a	trunk	until	he	found	the
fellow	 to	 the	 crystal	 Gaunt	 had	 used	 to	 summon	 him	 to	 Kestrel.	 He	 sat	 down	 again,
placing	 it	on	 the	 table	between	 them.	Gaunt	carefully	oriented	 the	 inscribed	base	of	 the
crystal	and,	 laying	his	arms	on	either	side	of	 it,	 took	Vaughan’s	hands	 in	his.	They	both
gazed	into	the	faintly	gleaming	sphere.
Presently	it	began	to	glow	with	an	interior	light,	and	the	doctor	said	in	a	low	voice:
“Yes,	Simon,	he	is	asleep.	Now	join	your	will	with	mine.	Nothing	more.	I	will	do	the
rest.”
The	silence	 in	 the	 room	grew	deeper,	 and	 the	crystal	glowed	more	 fiercely,	until	 it
seemed	 like	 a	 ball	 of	 liquid	 fire.	Gaunt	 slowly	 turned	 his	 head,	 looking	 away	 from	 the
sphere	towards	an	empty	corner	of	the	room.	Vaughan	followed	his	eyes,	and	saw,	against
the	bare	stone	wall,	a	shadow	forming.	Denser	and	denser	it	grew,	until	the	stones	in	the
wall	were	hidden,	then	suddenly	it	was	the	form	of	a	man:	the	form	of	Tony	Lovell.	The
phantasm	was	 identical	 in	every	detail	—	even	 to	 the	exotic	pyjamas	—	with	 the	figure
which	still	lay	sleeping	in	a	room	not	far	distant;	but	there	was	no	mind	behind	the	blue
eyes	blankly	regarding	them.
Used	as	he	was	to	manifestations	of	the	supernormal,	Vaughan	could	not	suppress	a
faint	shudder,	and	the	short	hairs	on	his	fat	neck	bristled.	Gaunt	spoke:
“Go	to	John	Hamilton’s	room,	walking	up	the	stairs	as	a	man	would	walk,	but	softly.
Wake	him,	and	speak	to	him	as	I	shall	command.	Go!”
Obediently	the	phantasm	turned	and	went	out	through	the	door.	The	bare	feet	padded
along	the	gallery	floor.	Gaunt	turned	back	to	the	crystal.
Hamilton	 was	 sleeping	 quietly	 when	 he	 felt	 somebody	 shaking	 him	 violently.
Drowsily	he	opened	his	eyes,	to	see,	as	he	thought,	Tony	Lovell	bending	over	him,	clear	in
the	bright	moonlight.
“John,	wake	up!	I	want	to	talk	to	you.”
“What	a	ghastly	hour	 to	choose	 for	a	chat!”	Hamilton	sat	up,	 rubbing	his	eyes	and
yawning	cavernously.	“‘Can’t	it	wait	till	morning?”
“No,	John,	it’s	vitally	important.”	‘Tony’	sat	on	the	edge	of	the	bed.
“Oh,	all	right,	Tony.	But	make	it	snappy!”
“I	will.	Look,	John,	you	know	I’d	 love	 to	have	you	here	 for	as	 long	as	you	 like	 to
stay?”
“Yes,	I	know	you	would.	But	not	now,	is	that	it?”
“Yes.	You	see,	the	job	I’m	doing	now	is	terribly	important.	It’s	the	biggest	thing	I’ve
ever	undertaken,	and	I	want	to	make	a	go	of	it.”
“I	understand,	Tony.”
“I	knew	you	would.	And	old	Gaunt’s	put	in	a	tremendous	lot	of	time	with	me.	I	can’t
let	him	down.	You	see,	I	must	finish	my	preliminary	training,	and	be	initiated	well	before
the	twenty-fifth	of	next	month,	as	I	told	you	this	afternoon.	It	means	hours	of	work	every
day	—	I	couldn’t	even	entertain	you	as	I’d	like	to	—	and	do	this	job	as	well.	I	wouldn’t
have	the	time.”
“Yes,	I	see	now,	Tony.	Of	course	I’ll	clear	out	tomorrow.	We’re	old	enough	pals	to	be
able	to	be	frank	with	each	other,	and	I’m	glad	you	told	me.”
“It’s	awfully	decent	of	you,	John,	but	 I	knew	you’d	see	my	point.	One	other	 thing:
don’t	mention	 this	 little	 talk	of	ours	 tomorrow.	Gaunt’d	be	 furious	 if	he	knew	I’d	asked
you	not	to	stay	on	account	of	him.	He’s	an	awfully	decent	blighter.”
“Okay,	Tony,	mum’s	the	word.	Good	luck,	old	son.”
“Thanks,	John.	Good	night.”
“Good	night,	Tony.”
And	that	which	was	not	Tony	went	quietly	out	as	Hamilton	turned	over	and	went	to
sleep	again.
On	the	floor	below	the	two	necromancers	were	still	sitting,	staring	into	their	crystal,
when	the	phantasm	re-entered	and	stood	motionless	by	the	door.	Gaunt	addressed	it:
“That	was	well	done.	Now	go	back	to	your	abode,	silently,	as	you	came.”
The	figure	lost	its	sharp	outlines,	softened,	blurred,	became	a	shadow,	and	suddenly
was	not.	The	light	in	the	crystal	dwindled	and	faded.	Gaunt	stood	up.
“I	fancy	that	settles	that	problem,	Simon”	he	said.
At	the	breakfast-table,	some	hours	later,	Hamilton	announced	his	intention	of	leaving
Kestrel	and	continuing	his	walking	tour	in	Cornwall.	Since	Gaunt	was	present	he	did	not
refer	 to	 his	 supposed	 talk	with	 Tony	 during	 the	 night,	 but	 apologized	 for	 changing	 his
plans	so	suddenly.
Tony,	 taken	 quite	 by	 surprise,	 for	 he	 was	 fully	 expecting	 his	 friend	 to	 stay	 at	 the
Abbey	for	some	time,	looked	quickly	across	at	the	doctor,	as	if	for	advice.	That	gentleman
nodded	almost	imperceptibly,	and	Tony	took	this	to	mean	that	he	was	to	let	Hamilton	go
without	argument.	Indeed,	he	was	not	sorry	to	do	so,	for	he	had	been	greatly	troubled	in
his	 mind	 at	 the	 conflict	 between	 loyalty	 to	 his	 friend	 and	 devotion	 to	 his	 new	 ideals,
though	he	himself	would	never	have	dreamed	of	precipitating	the	issue	in	this	manner.
So	it	came	about	that,	later	the	same	day,	Tregellis	sat	at	the	tiller	of	the	launch,	with
Hamilton	and	his	suitcase	on	board,	heading	for	Pentock.	Gaunt	had	seen	to	it	that	Tony
had	 had	 no	 opportunity	 for	 private	 conversation	 with	 his	 friend	 —	 he	 was	 taking	 no
chances	—	and	all	three	came	down	to	the	little	harbour	to	see	him	off.	The	farewells	were
very	cheerful	and	hearty,	but	Hamilton	could	not	suppress	a	queer	little	feeling	of	remorse
as	the	landing-stage	and	its	waving	figures	retreated	and	were	lost	from	view	behind	the
jutting	rock.	Was	he	doing	right,	leaving	Tony	thus?	Time	alone	would	tell.
He	lay	that	night	at	the	Three	Fishermen,	Pentock.

Chapter	X	
I	
John	Hamilton	was	climbing	the	steep	path	leading	to	the	village	church.	It	was	only
six	 o’clock,	 and	 the	 morning	 was	 delightfully	 cool	 and	 fresh.	 The	 sun	 was	 shining
brightly,	but	there	was	still	a	slight	mist	on	the	sea,	a	presage	of	the	heat	to	come.
He	had	not	forgotten	 the	rector’s	 last	words	 to	him,	and	he	was	going	to	renew	his
acquaintance	with	a	 faith	which	 the	years	had	dimmed.	 It	was	 strange,	he	 thought,	how
quickly	 one	 forgot	 those	 things	which	once	had	 seemed	 so	 important.	As	 a	 boy	he	had
been	 a	 devoted	 church-goer,	 a	 regular	 communicant.	 He	 had	 been	 an	 altar-server	 at	 a
famous	London	Anglo-Catholic	church,	with	all	 the	enthusiasm	of	youth	for	ceremonial
and	 the	 outward	 side	 of	 that	 particular	 brand	 of	 Christianity.	 He	 realized	 that	 his	 faith
could	not	have	gone	very	much	beyond	the	externals,	or	he	would	not	have	lost	touch	the
way	he	had,	engrossed	with	his	work,	and	the	new	life	he	had	perforce	to	adopt	when	his
parents	died,	both	within	a	period	of	weeks.	Anyhow,	he	would	give	the	thing	a	trial,	and
see	 if	 there	were	 really	 anything	 in	 it	 to	 awaken	 the	 old	 enthusiasm.	At	 least	 he	 could
differentiate	now	between	aesthetic	appeal	and	true	devotion.
The	bell	began	to	peal	as	he	pushed	open	the	lychgate	and	entered	the	churchyard.	It
was	not	a	beautiful	bell	—	indeed,	it	resembled	nothing	so	much	as	the	beating	of	a	tin	can
—	but	 the	sound	seemed	oddly	fraught	with	deep	significance.	The	church	itself	had	no
pretensions	to	exterior	beauty	either,	being	a	long	oblong,	somewhat	flat	in	the	pitch	of	the
roof,	with	a	squat	tower	at	the	west	end.	It	was	built	of	the	local	granite,	which	does	not
lend	 itself	 to	 rich	sculpture,	and	 the	only	break	 in	 the	horizontal	 lines	was	a	 little	porch
beneath	the	tower,	by	which	Hamilton	entered.
Once	 inside,	 he	 paused	 uncertainly,	 for	 the	 place	 was	 uncommonly	 dark	 after	 the
brilliant	morning	 light,	 but	 his	 eyes	 soon	 accustomed	 themselves	 to	 the	 gloom,	 and	 he
slipped	hastily	into	a	near-by	pew	and	knelt	down.	A	prayer	came	unbidden	to	his	lips,	and
before	 he	 knew	 it	 he	was	making	 the	 old	 familiar	 preparation	 for	 communion,	 the	 first
time	for	more	years	that	he	liked	to	remember.
When	he	had	finished	he	lifted	his	head	and	looked	about	him.	Yes,	there	it	all	was,
just	as	he	had	known	it	in	the	years	gone	by:	the	Stations	of	the	Cross	upon	the	walls;	the
rood-beam,	 with	 its	 great	 crucifix	 and	 attendant	 figures;	 the	 elaborately	 decorated
sanctuary;	 the	High	Altar,	 surmounted	 by	 six	 tall	 candles;	 the	 statues,	with	 their	 votive
lamps.	 Even	 the	 faint	 odour	 of	 incense	was	 familiar.	 It	was	 like	 coming	 home.	 Sternly
warning	himself	against	sentimentality,	Hamilton	sat	back	on	his	pew	and	continued	his
observations.
The	plain	parallelogram	of	the	exterior	was	repeated	within	the	building,	but	 it	was
brought	 into	proportion	by	 the	beautiful	 chancel	 screen	of	elvan	stone	which	divided	 it.
There	was	no	east	window	—	a	fact	which	accounted	for	a	good	deal	of	the	gloom	—	but
a	magnificently	carved	reredos	set	off	the	perfectly	proportioned	altar.	It	was	evident	that
no	effort	had	been	spared	 to	make	 the	 little	church	a	veritable	gem	of	beauty.	Hamilton
remembered	the	rector’s	admission	that	he	was	a	poor	man,	and	guessed	that	his	purse	had
furnished	most	of	the	decoration.
On	 the	 south	 side	 of	 the	 nave,	 against	 the	 chancel	 screen,	 a	 little	 altar	 had	 been
contrived,	 on	which	 stood	 the	 curtained	Tabernacle,	with	 its	white	 lamp.	Remembering
That	which	dwelt	therein,	the	young	man	fell	upon	his	knees	once	more,	overwhelmed	by
a	great	wave	of	devotion	which	came	sweeping	up	out	of	the	past.
“Adoremus	in	æternum	Sanctissimum	Sacramentum.”
The	 words	 came	 trembling	 to	 his	 lips.	 How	 could	 he	 ever	 have	 forgotten,	 ever
doubted?	Here,	after	all,	was	reality.
Two	or	three	of	the	villagers	came	in,	and	the	boy	who	was	pulling	the	bell-rope	by
the	 font	 abandoned	his	 task	and	walked	quickly	up	 the	aisle,	going	 into	 the	 tiny	vestry,
from	which	he	presently	emerged	 to	 light	 two	of	 the	altar-candles	with	a	 taper.	Then	he
returned	to	the	vestry,	coming	back	a	moment	later	with	the	missal	in	his	hands,	followed
by	the	rector,	vested,	and	bearing	the	sacred	vessels.	They	made	a	reverence	to	the	altar,
and	the	Mass	began.
When	it	was	over,	Hamilton	remained	on	his	knees,	lost	in	wonder.	His	critical	sense
quite	gone,	he	had	been	caught	up	once	more	in	the	tremendous	drama	of	the	great	act	of
sacrifice,	and	swept	unresisting	into	the	very	heart	of	faith.	The	hard	shell	of	worldliness
which	had	grown	around	his	heart	was	broken,	and	he	was	a	child	again.	Deep	humility
filled	 his	whole	 being,	 and	 a	 devout	 thankfulness	 for	 the	mercy	which	 had	 led	 him,	 all
unknowing,	 to	 this	 place.	There	were	 tears	 in	his	 eyes	 as	he	 lifted	his	head,	 to	 find	 the
rector,	now	in	his	threadbare	cassock,	standing	beside	him.
“Good	morning,	Mr.	Hamilton,”	said	the	old	man.	“Will	you	join	me	at	breakfast?”
Collecting	 himself,	 the	 other	 thanked	 him,	 and	 together	 they	 passed	 out	 into	 the
dazzling	sunshine.
From	the	churchyard	a	little	gate	led	into	the	rectory	garden,	and	within	a	couple	of
minutes	 they	 were	 sitting	 in	 the	 dining-room	 of	 the	 old	 house,	 the	 rector	 pouring	 out
coffee,	while	his	housekeeper	bustled	about	the	table.
“You	are	soon	back,	Mr.	Hamilton,”	he	remarked.
“Yes,	Father.	It	seemed	that	I	had	arrived	at	an	inopportune	moment.	Tony	is	at	a	vital
point	in	his	new	studies,	so	as	soon	as	I	decently	could	I	came	away.”
The	rector	raised	his	eyebrows.
“What	studies?”	he	asked.
“Dr.	Gaunt	is	teaching	him	some	kind	of	occult	business	—	theurgic	mysticism	was
the	term,	I	 think.	It’s	apparently	necessary	that	he	should	be	able	to	assist	Vaughan	with
the	expulsion	of	the	curse,	and	he	must	know	what	to	do.”
“I	 don’t	 quite	 like	 the	 sound	 of	 that,”	 said	 the	 priest	 slowly.	 “He	 is	 taking	 it	 very
seriously,	then?”
“Yes,	he	seems	quite	wrapped	up	in	it.	Talks	of	a	new	life,	and	so	on.”
“He	is	accepting	this	occult	teaching	as	a	philosophy	of	life,	I	take	it,	and	not	simply
as	a	means	to	an	end?”
“Evidently.	They	plan	to	attack	the	curse	on	the	day	of	its	anniversary	—	September
25th	—	but	Tony	talks	of	years	of	study	after	his	initiation.”
“Ah!”	The	 rector	 laid	down	his	knife	and	 fork	and	 leaned	 forward.	 “Initiation,	 eh?
Into	what,	I	wonder?”
“There	 is	 apparently	 a	 secret	 society,	 or	Order,	 of	which	Gaunt	 is	 the	 head	 in	 this
country,	which	preserves	this	mysterious	ancient	wisdom,”	Hamilton	explained.
The	old	man	shook	his	head.
“It’s	 a	 sad	 thing,	 Mr.	 Hamilton,”	 he	 said,	 “the	 way	 some	 people	 turn	 to	 these
outlandish	 beliefs	 as	 an	 escape	 from	 reality,	 when	 the	 Church	 can	 show	 them	 how	 to
comprehend	reality.	This	very	human	desire	to	know	has	been	the	undoing	of	many	a	man,
simply	through	his	getting	on	the	wrong	road	to	knowledge.”
“Then	there	really	is	something	in	this	occultist	stuff,	Father?”
“Oh	yes,	there’s	a	great	deal	in	it.	It	has	haunted	mankind	since	the	world	first	began.
Forbidden	fruit,	you	know.	The	Serpent	in	Eden.	It	was	enshrined	in	the	faith	of	Egypt;	it
was	the	whole	of	the	mystery	religions	which	flourished	around	the	Mediterranean.	It	has
troubled	 Christianity	 for	 centuries;	 the	 Gnostic	 heresy,	 the	 Christian	 Cabalists,	 the
Brethren	 of	 the	 Free	 Spirit,	 the	 Rosicrucians	 —	 all	 professed	 to	 have	 this	 secret
knowledge.	And	still	it	goes	on.”
“But	is	there	any	real	harm	in	it,	Father?	It’s	only	make-believe,	surely?	Just	bringing
about	an	abnormal	state	of	mind	by	an	effort	of	will:	purely	subjective.”
“I’m	not	at	all	sure	about	that,	Mr.	Hamilton.	The	limitless	power	of	the	human	will
has	always	been	acknowledged.	You	will	remember	Our	Lord’s	words:	‘If	ye	had	faith,	so
much	 as	 a	 grain	 of	mustard	 seed,	 ye	would	 say	 to	 yonder	mountain,	 Be	 thou	 removed
hence,	and	cast	into	the	sea,	and	it	would	be	so’?	“
“Yes,	but	I	always	thought	that	was	just	a	figure	of	speech.”
“That’s	the	general	comment	on	Christ’s	words,	isn’t	it?	Figures	of	speech	not	meant
to	be	 taken	 literally.	 ‘This	 is	My	Body’:	 figure	of	 speech,	 say	you!	But	 I	know	 that	 the
substance	of	the	bread	which	I	consecrated	on	yonder	altar	an	hour	ago	was	annihilated,
and	 became	 the	 very	 substance	 of	 the	 Godhead	 bodily.	 Do	 you	 believe	 that,	 Mr.
Hamilton?”
“Yes,	Father,	I	do.”	Hamilton’s	voice	was	humble.	“But	this	is	different,	surely?”
“How	different?	 If	 I,	having	been	consecrated	a	priest,	can	perform	a	miracle,	why
should	 not	 these	 others,	 by	 means	 of	 ancient	 formulae	 and	 systems,	 be	 also	 able	 to
perform	miracles:	lesser	ones	than	that,	naturally,	but	miraculous,	nevertheless?”
“But	that	would	be	magic,	Father.”
“Well,	what	of	it?	There’s	magic	everywhere.	By	ritual	words	and	gestures	water	is
made	holy,	a	man	is	made	a	priest,	bread	is	made	God.	That’s	Divine	magic	—	or,	more
strictly,	grace.	But	 there	 is	a	 lesser	kind	also.	 I	 tell	you,	Mr.	Hamilton,	 that	 the	 spirit	of
magic	 was	 never	 more	 widespread	 than	 it	 is	 today:	 Christian	 Science,	 Spiritualism,
Menticulture,	 Couéism	—	 all	magic.	 Even	 Lourdes,	 Loretto,	 and	 our	 own	Walsingham
effect	their	cures	by	a	process	akin	to	magic.”
Hamilton	rubbed	his	chin.
“I’d	never	thought	of	it	like	that,”	he	admitted.	“I	must	say	it	sounds	very	feasible.”
“It	is	feasible.	But	don’t	misunderstand	me.	Your	real	magician,	your	true	Hermetic
philosopher,	 though	he	may	be	able	 to	effect	material	 results,	does	not	 study	his	books,
and	train	his	will,	merely	to	perform	vulgar	marvels.	He	leaves	that	to	the	conjurer	on	the
variety	stage.	No,	his	is	a	real	science	of	life,	a	perpetual	striving	to	blend	the	macrocosm
with	 the	microcosm,	 to	 plumb	 all	 the	mysteries	 of	 nature	 by	 attaining	 higher	 planes	 of
being.	That’s	the	mystic	way.”
“But	there	were	Catholic	mystics,	Father.”
“Of	course:	St.	Theresa,	St.	John	of	the	Cross,	and	countless	more.	But	theirs	was	not
the	way	of	magic.	They	always	endeavoured	to	pass	the	plane	upon	which	the	magician
works	—	the	astral	plane,	I	think	they	call	it	—	going	higher	and	ever	higher,	until	at	last
they	achieved	union	with	the	ultimate	reality,	God	Himself.	No,	my	son,	the	real	danger	of
magic	is	that	it	leads	to	egotism,	and	arrogant	pride	of	one’s	own	knowledge	and	power.
Seeking	after	the	many,	it	forgets	the	One.	It	strives	to	know	instead	of	to	be.	What	said
Eliphas	Levi,	perhaps	the	greatest	of	the	Hermetic	philosophers?	‘Too	deep	a	study	of	the
mysteries	 of	 nature	 may	 estrange	 from	 God	 the	 careless	 investigator,	 in	 whom	mental
fatigue	 paralyses	 the	 ardour	 of	 the	 heart.’	And	Levi	 became	 a	Catholic	 at	 the	 last,	 you
know.”
“I’m	afraid	I	know	very	little	of	these	things,	Father.”
“The	less	the	better,	my	son.	Tell	me,	what	manner	of	man	is	this	Nicholas	Gaunt?”
They	had	finished	breakfast,	and	were	sitting	smoking	Hamilton’s	tobacco.	The	latter
thought	for	a	while	before	replying;	then:
“He’s	a	charming	man,	Father.	Brilliant;	tremendous	will-power;	amazing	knowledge
of	practically	any	 subject.	A	 fascinating	character.	Kindly,	 too,	or	 appears	 to	be.	 I	 think
he’s	honest,	and	is	really	fond	of	Tony.
“H’m.	He’s	evidently	made	a	good	impression	on	you,	at	all	events.	I	must	confess	I
liked	 what	 I	 saw	 of	 him	 at	 the	 funeral.	 And	 this	 friend	 of	 his,	 Simon	 Vaughan	—	 he
doesn’t	seem	to	have	impressed	the	Dykes	much,	from	all	accounts.”
“No,	 he	 strikes	 one	 as	 rather	 repulsive	 at	 first	 sight.	 He’s	 a	 short,	 enormously	 fat
chap;	 flabby,	 you	know.	Head	 like	 a	 toad,	 rather:	 bald	 and	 flat.	Small	 eyes,	with	heavy
lids.	 Thick	 red	 lips	 that	 scarcely	 move	 when	 he	 speaks,	 slurring	 his	 words.	 But	 after
you’ve	been	talking	to	him	for	a	while	he	is	so	polished	and	delightful	that	you	soon	forget
his	appearance	and	think	what	a	fool	you	were	to	notice	it.”
“A	brilliant	description,	Mr.	Hamilton.	 It	 stamps	you	as	a	 journalist.	 I	knew	a	man
like	 this	 Vaughan	 once:	 a	 Roman	 priest	 he	 was.	 But	 in	 his	 case	 it	 was	 his	 outward
appearance	 that	 gave	 the	 measure	 of	 the	 man	 after	 all,	 for	 he	 came	 to	 a	 sticky	 end,	 I
remember.	An	unpleasant	scandal	—	he	was	unfrocked.”
Hamilton	looked	sharply	at	the	priest’s	calm	face.
“This	couldn’t	be	the	same,	I	suppose?”	he	asked	anxiously.
“Not	 the	 least	chance,	Mr.	Hamilton.	That	was	—	what	—	forty	years	ago,	and	he
was	a	man	of	over	sixty.	How	old	is	this	Vaughan?”
Hamilton	could	barely	suppress	a	sigh	of	relief.
“Not	more	than	fifty.”
They	sat	smoking	in	silence	for	a	while.	Then	Hamilton	spoke	again.
“I	suppose	there’s	nothing	we	can	do	about	it,	Father.	I	hate	leaving	Tony	to	his	own
devices,	but	there	it	is.”
“What	are	your	plans,	my	son?”
“I	shall	continue	my	holiday,	walking	up	the	coast.	I’ve	never	been	farther	north	than
here.”
“This	 coast	 is	 very	 grand	—	more	 rugged	 altogether	 than	 in	 the	 south.	 You’ll	 get
plenty	of	scenery.	Where	will	you	make	for?”
“I	want	to	get	as	far	as	Tintagel	if	I	can.	Arthur’s	Castle,	you	know.”
The	rector	smiled.
“Still	the	romantic,	eh?	It	was	a	sorry	ruin	when	I	saw	it	last,	and	I	should	imagine
it’s	worse	now.	Most	of	the	castle	has	fallen	down	the	cliff.	If	I	were	you	I	would	take	the
coast	 road	 to	Crantock	—	 the	church	 there	 is	very	 fine.	Cut	out	Newquay	—	 it	will	 be
swarming	now	—	and	make	for	Padstow;	they’ve	dug	up	an	ancient	chapel	at	St.	Enodoc
that’s	 worth	 a	 visit.	 Cross	 the	 Camel	 at	Wadebridge,	 and	 follow	 the	 moorland	 road	 to
Tintagel.	It’s	worth	pushing	on	to	Boscastle	if	you’ve	time	—	there’s	a	lovely	valley,	and	a
curious	towerless	church	near	by.	Then	a	bit	farther	on	is	High	Cliff,	the	highest	point	on
the	whole	coast.”
“Hold	hard,	Father,”	Hamilton	laughed.	“You’ll	have	me	at	Bristol	at	this	rate.”
“Sorry,	Mr.	Hamilton.	My	enthusiasm	ran	away	with	me.	I	love	this	country	—	I	only
wish	I	could	come	with	you.”
“So	do	I,	Father.	Well,	I	must	be	off.”
“Shall	you	come	back	this	way?”
“Yes,	I’ll	leave	my	bag	at	the	Three	Fishermen,	and	take	a	haversack.	I’ll	come	back
by	rail	from	Camelford	or	Otterham	and	pick	it	up.”
“Come	and	see	me,	won’t	you?”
“Rather!	Thanks	so	much	for	everything,	Father.	Good-bye!”
“Good-bye,	my	boy.	God	speed!”
They	 shook	 hands,	 and	 Hamilton	 made	 his	 way	 back	 to	 the	 inn.	 He	 had	 come
prepared	 for	 this	 eventuality,	 and	had	packed	an	empty	haversack,	 so	 that	 it	was	only	a
matter	of	transferring	such	necessities	as	he	would	require,	and	in	less	than	an	hour	he	had
made	his	arrangements	with	the	landlord	and	set	off.
He	had	borrowed	a	sturdy	ash-plant,	his	flask	and	sandwiches	were	in	his	pocket,	and
in	spite	of	the	heat,	which	was	still	great	—	although	the	sky	had	clouded	over	since	the
early	morning	—	 it	was	 infinitely	better	 than	London,	 and	he	was	glad	 to	be	 free	 for	 a
while.	By	evening	a	fine	mist	of	rain	was	falling,	but	Hamilton	still	strode	on,	delighting
in	 the	 coolness	 it	 brought.	 Dusk	 was	 falling	 when	 he	 reached	 Crantock	 and	 found	 a
lodging	for	the	night.
II	
For	two	days	after	his	friend’s	departure	Tony	was	vaguely	distressed	over	his	loss,
for	he	could	not	regard	their	parting	as	other	than	a	clean	break	between	his	old	life	and
the	new,	but,	having	once	set	his	hand	to	the	plough,	he	was	determined	not	to	turn	back,
and	 threw	 himself	 into	 his	 studies	 with	more	 vigour	 than	 ever	 before.	 The	 doctor	 was
highly	delighted	with	his	pupil’s	progress,	and	promised	him	initiation	within	three	weeks.
Every	day	they	worked	from	breakfast	until	dinner,	taking	a	short	as	time	as	possible	over
meals,	 and	 every	 day	 Tony	 felt	 his	 grasp	 of	 the	 tremendous	 subject	 he	 had	 undertaken
strengthening.	His	will-power	deepened	amazingly,	and	before	long	he	was	able	to	induce
a	state	of	auto-hypnosis,	and	reach	the	astral	plane	unaided.	But	his	mentor	did	not	permit
such	excursions	often,	telling	him	that	he	must	conserve	his	spiritual	energy	for	the	great
act	of	initiation.
After	dinner,	and	before	going	 to	bed,	 they	usually	 relaxed,	and	passed	 the	 time	 in
conversation,	when	Vaughan	would	join	them.	The	latter	spent	most	of	his	days	down	in
the	crypt,	and	once	Tony	asked	if	he	might	see	what	he	was	doing	there.
After	a	preliminary	visit,	alone,	Gaunt	took	him	down	the	narrow	spiral	stair.
Two	of	the	vapour-lamps	from	the	hall	had	been	taken	down,	and	stood	on	the	altar,
casting	a	brilliant	pool	of	light	in	the	midst	of	the	gloomy	place.	In	the	circle	of	radiance
Vaughan	 was	 working,	 crouched	 upon	 the	 stone	 floor,	 measuring	 distances	 with	 a
surveyor’s	 tape.	 As	 they	 approached	 Tony	 could	 see	 the	 outlines	 of	 an	 immense	 and
elaborate	diagram,	traced	in	multi-coloured	paints,	on	the	stone	floor	of	the	crypt,	around
the	 altar.	 Vaughan	 stood	 up,	 and	 his	 grotesque	 shadow,	 now	 gigantic,	 added	 to	 the
weirdness	of	the	scene.
“Come,	Sir	Anthony,”	he	said,	as	Tony	hovered	uncertainly	in	the	shadows,	“you	can
walk	on	it	without	fear,	now.	It	is	not	yet	charged	with	force.”
Tony	advanced,	scanning	the	ground	with	deep	interest.	He	was	now	well	versed	in
the	mysteries	of	diagram	and	symbolism,	but	this	design	was	quite	new	to	him.	It	appeared
to	 consist	 of	 a	 series	 of	 concentric	 circles,	 radiating	 from	 the	 altar,	 with	 a	 number	 of
pentagonal	 figures	 superimposed.	 Characters,	 some	 of	 which	 he	 recognized	 as	 Hebrew
and	Greek,	were	inscribed	at	various	points.
“It	is	beautifully	done,	Mr.	Vaughan,”	he	said,	“but	what	is	it	for?”
Vaughan	laughed,	well	pleased	with	the	praise.
“For	our	great	work,	Sir	Anthony,	 the	banishment	of	 the	curse	monstrosity,	and	the
deliverance	of	this	island	and	yourself	from	its	bondage.	The	doctor	will	explain	it	all	to
you	in	good	time.”
With	that	Tony	had	perforce	to	be	content.	As	he	followed	the	converging	lines	to	the
altar	he	observed	that	that	also	had	been	embellished	with	coloured	symbols,	and	that	the
top	was	sealed	down	with	broad	white	tapes,	the	ends	of	which	were	attached	to	the	stone
with	great	blobs	of	red	wax.
“That	 is	 to	 prevent	 any	 interference	 from	 the	 monstrosity	 while	 I	 am	 at	 work,”
Vaughan	explained.	“It	is	probably	aware	that	we	are	planning	its	destruction,	and	it	might
well	endeavour	to	prevent	us.”
It	says	much	for	Gaunt’s	tuition	that	Tony	accepted	this	explanation	without	surprise,
and	presently	went	back	to	his	books,	leaving	the	doctor	with	Vaughan.	When	the	echo	of
the	young	man’s	footsteps	upon	the	stairs	had	died	away	the	latter	said:
“You	have	done	well,	Doctor.	He	questions	nothing.	Our	task	should	be	easy.”
Gaunt	smiled	grimly.
“Don’t	be	too	sure,	my	friend.	It	is	the	initiation	I	am	afraid	of.	When	he	finds	out	the
truth	he	may	well	become	intractable.	I	am	so	concerned	that	I	have	decided	to	summon	a
meeting	of	the	brotherhood,	and	take	him	up	to	London	for	the	ceremony.”
“But	I	thought	it	was	to	be	done	here,	Doctor.	If	you	can’t	initiate	him,	no	one	can.”
“True,	Simon.	But	I	think	the	effect	of	the	mass-suggestion	of	the	brethren	is	likely	to
prove	most	valuable	in	this	case.	It	will	lessen	the	chances	of	a	relapse.	We	can	go	up	by
road,	and	thus	avoid	the	distraction	of	a	train	journey.”
“And	afterwards?”
“We	shall	return	here,	and	continue	the	work.”
“He	will	be	agreeable?”
“He	 will	 not	 know	 any	 more	 than	 is	 absolutely	 necessary,	 Simon.	 Once	 he	 has
assisted	at	the	Mass,	and	committed	the	ultimate	sacrilege,	I	shall	trap	him	into	making	an
act	of	renunciation,	and	control	of	the	monstrosity	will	pass	to	me.”
“And	then?”
“Then	he	can	go.	I	shall	have	no	more	use	for	him.	I	doubt	if	he	will	desire	to	assist
the	consummation;	he	will	never	be	a	really	useful	member	of	our	Order;	he	has	not	the
inclination.”
“No,	I	agree	with	you	there,	Doctor.	I	fear	he	will	always	lean	towards	the	good.	A
pity!”
“As	you	say,	Simon,	a	pity.	I	have	grown	to	like	him.	However,	such	trifles	must	not
stand	 in	 the	way	 of	 our	 plan.	Once	 that	 is	 in	 operation,	 nothing	will	matter	 very	much
anymore.”
“It	terrifies	me	sometimes,	Doctor;	it	is	so	vast,	so	overwhelming.”
“It	is	the	ultimate	triumph,	Simon.”
“I	know,	but	supposing	anything	were	to	go	wrong?”
“Nothing	can	go	wrong;	trust	in	me.	As	soon	as	I	have	control	over	the	monstrosity	I
shall	sever	the	link	which	binds	it	 to	this	place	and	loose	it	upon	the	world.	Think	of	it,
Simon!	That	 thing	 is	 a	 concentration	 of	 pure	 evil,	 and	 sentient	 at	 that.	 It	 is	 as	 different
from	an	ordinary	elemental	as	the	sun	is	from	a	candle-flame;	there	is	no	one	power	of	evil
in	the	world	with	a	tithe	of	its	strength;	it	is	unique.	And	it	has	been	lying	here	fermenting,
as	 it	 were,	 for	more	 than	 a	 thousand	 years;	 feeding	 on	 the	 life-stream	 of	 the	wretched
Lovells	for	the	last	four	hundred.	It	must	have	acquired	quite	a	taste	for	human	souls	—
but	I	fancy	it	would	welcome	a	variety.	Satan!	What	will	it	not	do	when	it	is	released?”	He
laughed	horribly,	and	paused	for	a	moment,	reveling	in	the	prospect.	Then	he	went	on:
“But	quite	 apart	 from	 that	 aspect	of	 its	 release,	Simon,	 it	will	 upset	 the	balance	of
power	in	this	world,	which,	as	you	know,	has	been	slightly	in	favour	of	the	good	for	some
two	thousand	years.	We	shall	immediately	and	irrevocably	gain	the	ascendancy	for	which
we	have	been	struggling	for	so	long,	and	mankind	will	be	delivered	into	our	hands.	What
then?	First	the	moral	downfall	—	that	should	please	you,	Simon	—	all	codes	will	become
meaningless,	and	pleasure	the	only	goal.	Next,	I	suppose	that	civilization	will	collapse	—
it	 is	 but	 a	 frail	 edifice	 even	 now	—	 and	 anarchy	 and	 barbarism	 will	 return	 to	 power.
Ultimately	mankind	will	 sink	 to	 the	 level	 of	 the	 beasts;	 lower,	 even,	 for	man	will	 still
retain	his	gift,	or	curse,	as	it	will	be	in	those	days,	of	self-knowledge	and	free-will;	and,
knowing	all	the	while	what	he	is	doing,	he	will	plunge	ever	deeper	into	the	pit.”
Vaughan,	 who	 had	 seated	 himself	 on	 one	 of	 the	 trunks	 near	 by	 and	 lit	 a	 cheroot,
asked:
“And	what	will	the	end	be,	Doctor?”
Gaunt	walked	lightly	up	the	altar	steps,	turned,	and	stood	with	his	back	to	the	stone.
The	 lamps	 on	 either	 side	 threw	 strange	 shadows	 on	 his	 pale	 face,	 and	made	 the	white
streaks	in	his	hair	seem	like	little	tongues	of	fire.
“That	even	I	cannot	tell	you,	Simon,”	he	said.	“It	may	be	that	in	the	pit	mankind	may
find	our	Lord,	and	that	he	may	lift	them	up	again,	and	make	of	this	earth	such	a	home	of
intelligent	evil	as	will	be	a	menace	to	the	Universe.	It	may	be	that	out	of	this	thing	we	do
will	 spring	 the	 beginning	 of	 the	 end	 of	 Light	 itself.	 How	 long	 have	 you	 been	with	 us,
Simon?”
“Forty	years,	Doctor.”
“Before	that	you	were	a	priest	—	one	of	them?”
Vaughan’s	face	hardened,	and	his	thick	lips	twisted.
“Yes.	They	cast	me	out.	I	swore	to	repay	them	a	thousandfold	for	 the	humiliation	I
endured.”	His	tone	was	bitter	as	death.
“What	have	you	achieved	 since	you	 joined	our	 ranks?”	Gaunt	went	on.	 “You	have
said	 the	Black	Mass	many	 times,	 profaning	your	 old	 faith.	That	 soothed	your	wounded
pride,	no	doubt.	But	have	we	really	advanced	at	all	these	forty	years?”
“A	 little,	 Doctor,	 surely.	We	 have	won	many	 souls	 from	 them.	What	 of	 the	Great
War?	And	then	Spain,	and	China,	and	the	continual	 threat	of	another	world	conflict.	All
our	doing;	Darkness	is	spreading	slowly.”
“Slowly,	yes.	Too	slowly!	They	are	at	work	as	well;	their	inmost	fortresses	have	not
fallen.	There	 are	 still	 some	 six	hundred	million	 souls	who	acknowledge	Christ	 as	Lord,
and	countless	more	who	 turn	unknowingly	 towards	 the	Light.	The	brethren	of	 the	right-
hand	path	go	forward	also,	Simon.	There	is	more	goodwill	on	earth	today	than	there	ever
was.	But	here	at	 last	 is	our	greatest	opportunity	since	Calvary.	We	must	not	fail!	At	one
stroke	the	battle	can	be	won.	Do	you	realize,	Simon,	that,	quite	apart	from	simply	loosing
this	monstrosity	upon	the	world,	I	could,	if	I	desired,	reopen	the	breach	in	the	Veil	and	let
the	Darkness	in?”
“Doctor!”	 Vaughan	 sprang	 erect,	 his	 face	 chalk-white.	 “You	would	 not	 do	 that!	 It
would	mean	—	the	end.”
“Exactly.	The	end	of	all	 life	as	we	know	it.	The	end	of	Light,	and	the	beginning	of
eternal	Darkness.”
“Chaos	once	again!”	Vaughan’s	lips	shook	so	that	he	could	scarcely	frame	the	words.
“But,	Doctor,	what	of	us?	We	too	should	perish	—	we	should	never	enjoy	the	fruits	of	our
labour.	Are	we	not	worthy	of	our	reward?	Be	content	to	liberate	this	horror;	it	will	wreak
desolation	enough;	it	will	quench	all	the	will	to	good	there	ever	was,	and	we	shall	se	the
victory.”
“Oh,	Simon,	Simon!	Must	you	always	think	of	your	wretched	self?	Can	you	not	sink
your	ego	for	the	Cause?	I	must	admit	I	would	rather	carry	out	our	original	plan;	I	shall	do
so	if	all	goes	well.	But,	Simon,	I	fear	Intervention.”
“There	has	been	no	direct	 Intervention	 for	more	 than	nineteen	hundred	years.	Why
should	you	fear	it	now?”
“Because	 the	release	of	 this	monstrosity,	and	 the	victory	of	Darkness	 in	 this	world,
may	have	repercussions	throughout	the	whole	Universe.	It	might	even	be	the	beginning	of
the	 end.	And	 so	 I	 feel	 that	we	may	be	prevented;	 I	 am	practically	 certain	we	are	being
watched	already;	and	the	Powers	who	govern	the	rotation	of	the	Eighth	Sphere	may	take	it
upon	themselves	to	move	against	us.”
“Master,	I	beg	of	you	—	“	Vaughan’s	voice	trembled	with	terror.
“Silence!”	Gaunt	sprang	down	the	altar	steps	and	stood	towering	over	the	other,	his
face,	contorted	with	sudden	fury,	truly	fiendish	in	the	half-light.
“I	have	warned	you	before,	Simon;	obstruct	my	path	again	and	I	will	cast	you	into	the
Abyss	without	hesitation.	My	mind	is	made	up:	I	shall	proceed	with	our	original	plans	for
the	release	of	the	monstrosity,	but	at	the	least	sign	of	outside	interference	I	shall	rend	the
Veil.”
Vaughan	cowered.
“Very	well,	master.	I	will	not	attempt	to	dissuade	you	further,	but	if	aught	goes	amiss,
remember	that	I	warned	you.”
“I	will	remember	—	everything.	Proceed	with	the	diagram,	and	let	us	have	no	more
words.”
The	doctor	stalked	away	and	went	up	the	spiral	stair,	while	his	colleague	bent	once
more	to	his	arduous	task,	albeit	with	many	a	sigh,	and	some	shaking	of	the	head.

Chapter	XI	
One	morning,	less	than	a	fortnight	after	his	visit	to	the	crypt,	Tony	was	overjoyed	by
Gaunt’s	 announcement	 that	 he	 was	 now	 ready	 for	 initiation,	 and	 that	 accordingly	 they
would	proceed	to	London	on	the	morrow.
During	the	remainder	of	that	day	the	doctor	carefully	coached	his	willing	pupil	in	the
actual	ceremony	—	at	least,	in	such	portions	of	it	in	which	he	would	be	required	to	play	an
active	part;	 teaching	him	 the	 formal	 responses	 to	 the	questions	he	would	be	 asked,	 and
impressing	him	with	the	solemnity	of	the	vows	which	he	would	take.	Certain	phases	of	the
ritual,	he	told	him,	were	absolutely	secret,	and	must	not	be	divulged	beforehand.
The	hours	flew	by,	but	after	he	was	in	bed	that	night	Tony	lay	awake	for	a	long	time,
staring	into	the	darkness,	far	too	excited	by	the	prospect	of	his	approaching	ordeal	to	sleep
at	once.
At	 last	 it	 was	 at	 hand,	 he	 thought,	 the	 long-awaited	 fulfilment	 of	 his	 dreams;	 the
greatest	moment	of	his	 life	so	far;	 this	 first	decisive	step	along	his	chosen	path.	Feeling
himself	to	be	upon	the	threshold	of	a	new	life,	he	looked	back	for	a	moment	at	the	way	he
had	come,	and	was	aghast.	Until	his	father’s	death	he	had	been	a	selfish	young	hedonist,
spending	 his	 days	 in	 folly	 and	 the	 ceaseless	 search	 for	 pleasure.	During	 those	 years	 in
London	he	had	been	the	ringleader	of	a	group	of	“bright	young	things”,	whose	watchword
had	been	distraction,	anything	for	a	fresh	thrill.	He	had	had	dozens	of	 love-affairs	of	no
importance,	 hundreds	 of	 friendships	 of	 no	 account.	 The	 only	 hours	 that	 seemed	 in
retrospect	 to	have	been	at	all	worth	while	were	 those	he	had	spent	with	John	Hamilton.
Why	the	older	man	should	have	troubled	with	him	at	all	had	always	been	something	of	a
mystery,	after	 their	first	casual	acquaintanceship	—	the	result	of	a	chance	recognition	of
their	 common	 Varsity	 colours.	 Tony	 supposed	 that	 Hamilton	 must	 have	 sensed	 the
desperate	loneliness	which	he	had	generally	managed	to	conceal	beneath	a	mask	of	gaiety.
Now	 he	 had	 parted	 for	 ever	 from	 that	 one	 true	 friend,	 and	 was	 following	 down
another	path	a	new	life,	alone.	Yet	not	quite	alone	—	the	face	of	Nicholas	Gaunt,	strong
and	wise,	kindly	and	steadfast,	rose	in	his	mind.	Here	was	another	friend,	to	whom	he	was
bound,	and	would	 soon	be	bound	even	more	closely,	by	 the	 ties	of	common	experience
and	secret	knowledge	shared.
Next	he	thought	of	his	parents	—	of	his	mother,	dead	these	five	years.	How	often	she
must	have	sorrowed	over	his	youthful	follies	and	aimless	existence.	And	his	father,	who
had	thought	so	little	of	him	that,	when	his	wife	died,	he	had	come	alone	to	Kestrel.	How
happy	 those	 last	 few	weeks	 had	 been,	when	 the	 two	 had	 been	 reunited,	 before	 the	 old
man’s	tragic	end.
He	remembered	his	father’s	last	solemn	charge	—	the	trust	he	had	placed	in	his	son’s
hands	—	to	keep	the	curse	of	Kestrel	from	the	world.	How	infinitely	better	 than	that	he
hoped	to	do!	To	banish	it	for	ever	from	the	face	of	earth.	How	proud	his	parents	must	be	if
they	could	see	their	son	now!	Never	again	would	he	shame	their	memory.
Tony	turned	his	eyes	away	from	the	sorry	sight	of	the	wasted	years	behind	and	set	his
face	steadfastly	 towards	 the	 future,	 still	half	hidden	 in	a	veil	of	mystery,	but	 soon	 to	be
revealed	in	all	its	glowing	wonder	of	knowledge,	power,	and	limitless	experience.	Rapt	in
ecstasy,	he	fell	asleep.
After	an	early	breakfast	the	three	crossed	to	Pentock	in	the	launch.	Lorrimer	had	been
told	 to	 expect	 them	 back	within	 three	 days.	 He	 had	 seemed	 surprised	 when	 his	 young
master	told	him	of	the	proposed	journey	to	London	“on	business”,	and	had	seemed	on	the
point	of	making	some	observation,	but	had	checked	himself,	and	bowed	in	silence.	Sitting
in	 the	 rapidly	 moving	 boat,	 Tony	 wondered	 vaguely	 what	 could	 have	 been	 in	 the	 old
servant’s	mind,	but	he	soon	forgot	the	incident.
The	sea	was	choppy	and	the	sky	overcast,	but	the	voyage	was	accomplished	in	less
than	an	hour.	They	had	no	luggage,	save	a	dressing-case	apiece,	and	made	their	way	to	the
inn	as	soon	as	they	had	disembarked.	Dykes,	the	landlord,	led	them	through	the	yard	to	the
stable	where	the	cars	were	kept,	and	unlocking	the	door,	helped	to	roll	the	great	Bentley
out.	Rain	threatened,	so	they	put	up	the	top	of	the	coupé.	They	were	engaged	in	this	task,
Vaughan	 being	 inside	 the	 car,	 screwing	 down	 the	 fastenings	 of	 the	 hood,	when	 a	 slight
figure	 in	 a	black	cassock	 turned	 into	 the	yard.	Dykes,	who	was	closing	 the	 stable	door,
was	the	first	to	see	the	priest,	and,	hearing	his	greeting,	Tony	and	the	doctor	turned.
“Good	morning,	Sir	Anthony,”	said	the	rector,	“not	a	very	promising	day	for	a	run.”
“Good	morning,	Mr.	Bennett,”	returned	Tony.	“We’re	going	up	to	Town	on	business;
more	convenient	by	road.	You	have	met	Dr.	Gaunt,	I	think?”
They	saluted	each	other,	and	at	 that	moment	Vaughan	emerged	from	the	car.	At	the
sight	 of	 his	 gross	 figure	 the	 rector	 stiffened,	 and	 his	 face	 went	 deadly	 pale.	 Vaughan
straightened	himself,	and	their	eyes	met.	There	was	a	moment	of	uncomfortable	silence,
broken	by	Tony	saying:
“Er	—	Mr.	Bennett,	this	is	Mr.	Vaughan.”
Neither	made	 the	 least	 offer	 to	 shake	 hands,	 though	Vaughan	 bowed	 slightly.	 The
rector	 remained	motionless,	his	 eyes	 fixed	on	 the	other’s	 face	with	 terrible	 intensity.	At
last	he	spoke,	in	a	voice	so	unlike	his	own	that	Tony	was	almost	shocked.
“I	think	we	have	met	before,	Mr.	Vaughan,”	he	said	slowly.
“I	don’t	think	so,	Mr.	Bennett,”	replied	the	other	with	a	nervous	laugh.
“No,	 I	 don’t	 suppose	 you	would	 remember	me,”	 answered	 the	 priest.	 “It	 is	 a	 long
time	ago,	and	I	have	changed	a	good	deal,	but	I	remember	you	very	well.”
“You	have	the	advantage	of	me,	then.	Good	day	to	you,	sir.”
And	with	this	Vaughan	went	round	the	car	and	climbed	into	the	back	seat.	Tony	and
Gaunt,	 who	 had	 stood	 motionless	 and	 decidedly	 uncomfortable	 during	 this	 short
conversation,	followed,	Gaunt	taking	the	wheel.	A	second	later	the	engine	roared	into	life,
and	further	talk	was	impossible.	The	doctor	let	in	his	clutch,	Tony	waved	a	cheery	farewell
to	the	rector,	and	they	swung	out	of	the	yard	in	a	great	flurry	of	dust.
Not	until	the	throb	of	the	exhaust	had	died	away	up	the	narrow	street	did	the	rector
move,	and	when	he	tried	to	walk	he	staggered.	In	a	moment	Dykes,	who	was	still	in	the
yard,	ran	to	him	and	caught	his	arm.
“Aren’t	you	well,	Father?”	he	asked	anxiously.
“A	little	faint	—	it’s	nothing	really,”	the	old	priest	murmured;	but	the	worthy	landlord
would	not	be	denied.
“Come	inside	and	rest,”	he	urged.	“Perhaps	a	spot	of	brandy	wouldn’t	be	amiss,	eh?”
The	rector	allowed	himself	to	be	led	away,	his	face	drawn	with	pain,	and	a	dreadful
bewilderment	in	his	eyes.
*	*	*
Gaunt	drove	without	a	break	to	Salisbury,	which	they	reached	at	four	o’clock	in	the
afternoon.	After	a	short	stop	there	for	a	meal	Vaughan	took	over	the	wheel,	and	by	eight
o’clock	they	had	reached	Ealing	and	turned	on	to	the	North	Circular	Road	for	Hampstead.
Inside	an	hour	the	great	car	swung	into	the	open	gates	of	the	house	on	the	Heath.
The	same	manservant	who	had	admitted	Hamilton,	months	before,	had	the	door	open,
and	was	helping	them	out	the	moment	the	car	stopped.	After	removing	the	stains	of	travel
they	sat	down	to	a	light	dinner;	after	which	they	went	to	bed	almost	immediately,	for	both
Gaunt	and	his	colleague	were	very	tired	after	their	long	drive,	and	the	doctor	insisted	that
Tony,	though	not	so	fatigued,	must	conserve	his	energies	for	the	next	day.
Smoking	a	last	cigarette	before	turning	out	the	light,	Tony	reflected	how	cramped	his
room	seemed,	in	spite	of	its	superficial	size,	after	the	great	stone-walled	chambers	of	the
Abbey.	The	papered	walls,	the	white	ceiling,	the	electric	lamps	with	their	silk	shades,	all
appeared	flimsy,	ephemeral,	beside	the	solid	strength	which	he	had	grown	accustomed	to
during	 the	 past	 months.	 Never	 again	 would	 he	 be	 quite	 happy	 away	 from	 Kestrel;	 he
understood	now	why	his	 father	 had	 never	 come	back;	 the	 air	 of	London	was	 close	 and
flavourless	after	that	salty	tang.
He	stubbed	out	his	cigarette	and	clicked	off	 the	pendant	switch.	Why,	there	was	no
darkness,	even,	here!	The	rays	of	a	distant	street	lamp	found	their	way	in	through	the	wide
sash-windows,	flinging	strange	patterns	on	the	walls.	Save	for	 the	occasional	sound	of	a
passing	car	 a	profound	 silence	enwrapped	 the	house;	 the	perpetual	 lullaby	of	 the	waves
was	absent.	It	was	a	long	time	before	he	fell	asleep.
All	Tony	had	for	breakfast	was	a	little	fruit	and	a	tumblerful	of	cold	water.	This	was
by	Gaunt’s	instructions,	and	would	be	his	last	meal	for	twenty-four	hours.	It	was	essential
that	his	spiritual	faculties	should	be	at	their	keenest,	and	this	was	one	means	to	that	end.
He	was	to	spend	the	daylight	hours	in	solitary	meditation,	and	the	doctor	took	him	up	to	a
small	 room,	 scarcely	 more	 than	 an	 attic,	 under	 the	 roof.	 It	 was	 furnished	 in	 Spartan
simplicity	with	 a	 table	 and	one	 chair.	There	was	 no	window,	 only	 a	 skylight	 of	 opaque
glass.	Here	Tony	was	left,	with	no	company	save	his	thoughts,	but	so	adept	was	he	now	at
the	arts	of	concentration	and	meditation	that	the	hours	slipped	quickly	by	and	he	lost	all
count	of	time.
He	sat	rigid	on	his	chair,	like	a	marble	figure,	so	still	were	his	limbs.	His	hands	were
flat	upon	his	knees,	his	breathing	was	rhythmical,	his	eyes	closed.	So	withdrawn	were	his
faculties	that	he	was	almost	in	a	state	of	trance,	and	it	may	be	that	during	those	long	hours
thoughts	which	did	not	arise	in	his	own	brain	were	projected	into	his	consciousness	by	the
powerful	will	of	his	tutor.
The	oblong	of	 light	 in	 the	 sloping	 roof	 faded	as	night	 fell,	 but	Tony	never	moved.
The	shadows	grew	deeper,	until	at	last	his	motionless	figure	became	indistinguishable	in
the	 darkness,	 but	 still	 he	 sat	 on,	 awaiting	 the	 summons	 which	 would	 lead	 him	 to	 the
supreme	moment.	His	whole	being	was	poised,	expectant;	all	his	previous	excitement	had
passed	away,	and	he	was	utterly	calm.
Somewhere	a	clock	struck,	and	as	he	counted	the	distant	strokes,	the	first	contact	he
had	made	with	the	outer	world	for	many	hours,	he	realized	that	it	was	midnight.	The	hour
was	at	hand.
The	 door	 opened	 suddenly,	 letting	 in	 a	 dazzling	 flood	 of	 light	which	momentarily
blinded	him,	and	when	he	could	see	again	Dr.	Gaunt	was	standing	before	him,	a	lamp	in
one	hand	and	a	bundle	of	clothing	in	the	other.
Tony	sprang	to	his	feet,	catching	at	the	table	to	prevent	himself	falling	as	his	numbed
limbs	refused	their	office.
“Is	it	time?”	he	whispered	hoarsely.
The	 doctor	 nodded	 gravely,	 and	 set	 the	 lamp	on	 the	 table.	He	was	wearing	 a	 long
robe	of	scarlet,	like	a	monk’s	habit,	with	the	hood	thrown	back,	leaving	his	head	bare.
“Take	off	your	clothes,”	he	said	quietly,	and	went	out.
When	 he	 returned,	 carrying	 a	 jug	 of	 water	 and	 a	 towel,	 Tony	 stood	 naked	 by	 the
table,	 subduing	 by	 a	 tremendous	 effort	 the	 rising	 excitement	 which	 threatened	 to
overwhelm	him	once	more.
“Repeat	the	ablutionary	formula,”	Gaunt	commanded;	and	as	Tony	said	the	words	he
had	been	taught	the	other	lifted	the	jug	over	his	head	and	emptied	its	contents	upon	him.
The	water	was	 icy	 cold,	 and	 the	 shock	made	 every	 nerve	 in	 his	 body	 tingle,	 but	 as	 he
toweled	himself	he	thought	that	he	had	never	felt	so	keen	and	fresh.
Then	 the	doctor	proceeded	 to	anoint	him	from	head	 to	 foot	with	some	pungent	oil,
applying	it	according	to	a	set	ritual	—	first	to	his	eyes,	ears,	nose,	and	mouth,	then	to	his
hands	 and	 feet,	 and	 then	 to	 the	 genitals.	 Finally	 he	went	 over	 the	whole	 surface	 of	 his
pupil’s	body,	rubbing	until	the	oil	had	been	absorbed.	From	each	point	of	contact	Tony	felt
a	violent	shock,	until	at	last	his	whole	body	was	racked	with	a	fiery	pain,	but	as	the	doctor
uttered	the	words	of	the	ritual,	and	he	forced	himself	to	make	the	responses,	the	torment
lessened	 and	passed	 away,	 leaving	 a	 strange	 ethereal	 sensation,	 as	 if	 he	were	no	 longer
subject	to	the	laws	of	gravity.
When	Tony	 had	 put	 on	 the	 robe	 of	 plain	white	 linen	 he	 followed	Gaunt	 down	 the
stairs,	still	feeling	oddly	weightless,	and	scarcely	conscious	of	the	treads	beneath	his	bare
feet.	They	stopped	at	a	door	on	the	first-floor	landing,	and	the	doctor	knocked	twice.	The
door	 opened	 a	 few	 inches;	 he	 exchanged	 a	 word	 with	 someone	 within	 and	 they	 were
admitted.
The	 room	which	 they	 entered	 was	 of	 great	 size,	 and	 had	 probably	 been	made	 by
removing	the	dividing	walls	of	several	smaller	rooms.	The	walls	were	completely	covered
with	black	curtains,	hiding	 the	windows,	and	any	other	doors	 there	may	have	been.	The
floor	was	overlaid	by	an	 immense	black	carpet,	whose	 thick	pile	muffled	every	footfall;
even	the	ceiling	was	painted	black,	relieved	only	by	a	great	pentagram	in	silver.
The	 effect	 of	 this	 gloomy	 drapery	 was	 sombre	 in	 the	 extreme,	 and	 the	 absolute
deadening	 of	 all	 echo	 made	 the	 voice	 sound	 thin	 and	 flat,	 as	 though	 one	 were	 on	 a
mountain	top.
The	sole	source	of	illumination	was	at	the	extreme	end	of	the	chamber,	where	six	tall
candles	of	dark-coloured	wax	burned	upon	a	bare	stone	altar,	raised	upon	three	low	steps,
with	two	massive	seven-branched	candlesticks	of	bronze	on	either	side.	On	the	right	of	the
altar	 stood	 a	 great	 throne-like	 chair,	 heavily	 gilt,	 and	 Gaunt	 walked	 towards	 this,
motioning	Tony	 to	 follow	him.	As	he	went	 the	young	man	caught	a	 fleeting	glimpse	of
some	 twenty	 figures,	 robed	 in	 black,	 their	 faces	 hidden	 by	 their	 hoods,	 seated	 on	 low
benches	at	 the	other	end	of	 the	room.	When	he	reached	the	altar	he	knelt	on	the	bottom
step,	while	Gaunt	took	his	place	upon	the	throne.
The	deep	notes	of	a	hidden	organ	throbbed	upon	the	still	air,	and	the	hooded	figures
on	their	benches	took	up	the	solemn	chant.	The	words	were	in	some	strange	tongue,	and
conveyed	nothing	to	him,	but	the	music	stirred	in	Tony’s	drowning	consciousness,	and	he
became	 aware	 of	 a	 tremendous	 atmosphere	 of	 purpose,	 as	 if	 the	wills	 of	 all	within	 the
shrouded	walls	of	the	dark	chamber	were	directed	at	him,	urging	him	on,	sustaining	him	in
the	great	act	of	self-dedication	which	he	was	about	 to	make.	His	own	will	awoke	again,
and	joined	with	 the	rushing	stream	of	volition	about	him,	as	he	rose	from	his	knees	and
waited.
The	music	ceased,	save	for	one	lonely	voice,	which,	rising	and	falling	in	a	plaintive
minor	key,	seemed	to	hold	all	the	sorrows	of	the	labouring	world,	crying	out	in	its	travail
for	 deliverance	 from	 the	 perpetual	 bondage	 of	 space	 and	 time.	 So	 universal	 was	 the
poignant	appeal	 that	Tony	felt	his	 throat	constrict	and	the	hot	 tears	prick	his	eyes,	while
his	own	deep	longing	increased	to	an	almost	unbearable	degree.	The	singing	died	away	at
last,	and	a	pregnant	silence	filled	the	room.
From	 behind	 him	 a	 large	 form,	 which	 Tony	 instantly	 recognized	 as	 Vaughan’s,
despite	 the	 hood,	 approached	 and	 stood	 at	 his	 side,	 addressing	 the	 scarlet	 figure	 on	 the
throne:
“Most	 reverend	 Master,	 I	 present	 unto	 thee	 Anthony	 Lovell,	 who	 desires	 most
earnestly	to	be	admitted	to	the	high	fellowship	of	our	Order.”
Gaunt	spoke,	addressing	Tony:
“Dost	thou	desire	to	be	admitted	to	the	brotherhood	of	the	ancient	mysteries?”
“I	do	so	desire,”	replied	Tony	in	the	accustomed	form.
“Approach,	 then,	 Anthony,	 the	 altar	 of	 our	 worship,	 and,	 kneeling	 at	 it,	 make	 the
vows,	as	I	shall	bid	thee.”
Tony	climbed	the	steps	and	knelt,	resting	his	hands	on	the	cool	stone.	Gaunt	went	on:
“Swear,	 then,	 in	 the	presence	of	 those	who	will	 soon	be	 thy	brethren,	 to	 take	upon
thee	the	perpetual	service	of	our	Lord,	to	work	His	will	in	all	things,	to	strive	ever	for	the
establishment	of	His	Kingdom	upon	earth,	and	to	obey	they	superiors	at	all	times.”
Obediently,	 almost	 in	 a	 dream,	 Tony	 repeated	 the	 oath.	 As	 he	 did	 so	 the	 thought
flashed	through	his	mind	that	this	was	the	first	time	he	had	ever	heard	Gaunt	mention	any
form	of	worship,	particularly	 the	worship	of	a	Person,	but	before	his	dulled	brain	could
grasp	the	significance	of	this	the	Master’s	voice	continued:
“Swear,	 then,	 that	never	wilt	 thou	 reveal	 the	 inner	 secrets	of	 the	Order,	 and	of	 thy
service	therein,	to	any	living	soul	outside	that	Order.”
“I	swear!”
“Repeat	after	me:	All	these	things	do	I	swear	by	the	Seal	of	Solomon,	by	the	Veil	of
Isis,	by	the	Key	of	Ashtaroth,	and	by	the	Name	of	Names;	and	if	I	break	this	oath	may	my
soul	be	cast	into	the	Abyss.”
Automatically	Tony	said	the	words	after	him.	The	queer	sensation	of	floating	which
had	 been	with	 him	 ever	 since	 the	 anointing	was	 growing	more	 and	more	 powerful;	 his
head	was	spinning,	and	he	was	scarcely	conscious	of	his	surroundings.	His	one	desire	was
to	 get	 this	 business	 over	 and	 lie	 down;	 he	 had	 almost	 forgotten	 the	 burning	 thirst	 for
knowledge	which	had	possessed	him	only	a	few	minutes	before.
“Anthony,	stand	up	and	face	thy	brethren,”	said	the	remorseless	voice.
Long	obedience	to	his	tutor	brought	Tony	staggering	to	his	feet;	he	turned,	clinging	to
the	 altar	 behind	 him	with	 both	 hands.	 There	 in	 the	 gloom	was	 the	 double	 row	 of	 dark
figures,	 their	 eyes	glowing	 in	 the	 recesses	of	 their	hoods,	 all	 staring	 fixedly	at	him;	 the
concentrated	stream	of	energy	pouring	from	them	beat	upon	him	like	a	steady	wind.
“Now	swear	 the	most	mighty	oath	of	all,	 and	 receive	 freely	all	we	have	 to	give	of
knowledge,	power,	and	secret	wisdom.	Repeat	after	me:	All	this	do	I	swear	in	the	Name
*****.”
Here	 Gaunt	 uttered	 a	 word	 which	 may	 not	 be	 written,	 and	 as	 the	 awful	 syllables
throbbed	upon	the	still	air	it	seemed	to	Tony	that	an	icy	wind	blew	about	his	thinly	clad
body	and	the	floor	rocked	beneath	his	feet.	Twice	he	opened	his	mouth,	twice	he	strove	to
force	 his	 lips	 to	 frame	 the	 words,	 while	 within	 his	 drugged	 brain	 a	 thin	 small	 voice
screamed	shrilly,	“No!	No!	No!”
Then,	 lifted	on	 the	stream	of	volition	from	those	sinister	watching	figures,	his	own
will	strengthened,	caught	hold,	and	in	a	firm	voice	he	swore	the	oath.
As	the	awful	words	died	echoless	against	the	shrouded	walls	a	frightful	silence	fell,
and	it	seemed	to	Tony	that	he	stood	there	motionless	for	an	eternity,	while	all	around	him
the	dust	of	ages	drifted	down	ceaselessly,	like	gentle	snow.	Then	the	sable	hangings,	the
scarlet	 figure	 on	 the	 throne,	 the	 paunchy	 form	 beside	 it,	 and	 those	 others	 in	 the
background	all	 faded	from	his	sight,	 leaving	only	a	fathomless	gulf	 in	which	he	floated,
bodiless.	All	around	was	the	void	of	outer	space,	sown	with	blazing	stars,	and	before	his
eyes	the	great	globe	of	the	earth	spun	slowly	on	its	axis,	presenting	shimmering	seas	and
shadowy	continents	to	his	strangely	incurious	gaze	as	it	rotated.
All	at	once	he	knew	that	he	was	not	alone	in	the	void,	for	behind	him	he	could	feel	a
Presence	 hovering,	 like	 a	 dark	 cloud	 veiling	 the	 stars,	 and	 casting	 its	 shadow	upon	 the
very	 earth	 beneath,	 and	 a	Voice	whispered	 softly	 to	 his	 soul:	 “All	 this	will	 I	 give	 unto
thee…”
For	an	instant	one	tiny	point	of	 light	flickered	in	a	corner	of	his	being,	 then,	as	his
conscience	died,	that	too	was	overwhelmed	by	the	great	flood	of	darkness	pouring	in,	and
without	 another	 effort	 he	 gave	 up	 the	 pitifully	 unequal	 struggle.	 Staggering	 down	 the
steps,	he	turned	and	fell	upon	his	face,	worshiping	the	awful	Presence	that	hovered	upon
the	altar.
Gaunt	sank	back	in	his	chair,	his	face	a	mask	of	devilish	triumph,	and	Vaughan	leapt
forward,	 standing	over	Tony’s	prostrate	 figure.	Raising	his	hands	 aloft,	 the	hood	 falling
back	from	his	face,	he	cried:
“O	Satan,	Lord,	 receive	 this	Thy	servant	whom	we	here	dedicate	 to	Thee.	Be	with
him	 in	 life,	 and	 in	death,	 and	 through	all	 eternity,	 and	uphold	him	with	Thine	 almighty
power!”
At	a	sign	from	Gaunt	two	of	the	hooded	brethren	advanced,	lifted	Tony’s	slight	form,
and	laid	him	on	the	altar.	Then	began	the	monstrous	blasphemy	of	the	Black	Mass.
But	Tony	was	hardly	conscious	of	it,	for	the	reek	of	the	incense	curling	about	him	in
thick	 yellow	 clouds	 still	 further	 stupefied	 his	 senses,	 and	 finished	 the	 work	 which	 the
ointment	 had	 begun.	 His	 mind,	 however,	 was	 quite	 clear	 and	 active,	 and	 he	 realized
perfectly	what	was	being	done:	how	he	was	being	finally	consecrated	to	the	service	of	the
Prince	of	Darkness.
That	all	this	was	quite	unnecessary	he	knew	full	well.	With	that	one	act	of	worship	he
had	sealed	his	doom	for	ever,	but	he	was	not	afraid,	and	had	no	regrets.	He	realized	that	he
must	have	known,	subconsciously,	all	through	the	long	months	of	his	preparation,	where	it
was	all	leading	to.	Only	the	consummate	skill	of	Nicholas	Gaunt	had	prevented	him	from
realizing	it	in	time	to	draw	back,	and	he	doubted,	even	now,	if	he	would	have	drawn	back,
had	he	known	all.	For	the	dark	power	surging	through	his	veins	filled	him	with	exultation;
he	knew	at	last	 that	this	was	the	only	certain	way	to	all	knowledge	and	all	mastery.	The
wisdom	of	the	Serpent	coiled	about	his	brain,	and	he	saw	the	current	of	desire	in	which	all
things	move,	and	knew	that	he	could	direct	it	as	he	willed.
He	 felt	 a	 tremendous	 scorn	 of	 all	 weak	 things,	 and	 all	 things	 pitiful:	 Jesus	 of
Nazareth,	 and	 John	 Hamilton	—	 they	 passed	 through	 his	 mind	 together,	 pale	 shadows
both;	 he	 rejected	 them	 utterly.	 This	 was	 the	 way	 of	 the	 strong,	 into	 whose	 hands	 the
lordship	over	all	things	was	given.	Darkness	reigned	supreme,	and	he	was	of	the	legions	of
the	darkness,	and	was	glad.

Chapter	XII	
I	
The	sun	was	shining	gloriously	over	the	sea,	and	lighting	up	the	moorland	road	from
Portreath	 to	 Pentock,	 along	which	 John	Hamilton	was	 striding,	 swinging	 his	 ash-plant.
That	morning	he	had	come	from	Otterham	by	rail,	and	by	the	railway	motor	from	Redruth
to	Portreath.
The	city	pallor	was	gone	from	his	face,	for	in	spite	of	the	heavy	rain	which	had	fallen
during	the	greater	part	of	his	ten-days’	tramp	he	had	been	in	the	open	practically	the	whole
time,	 and	 the	 intervals	 of	 sunshine	had	given	him	a	 fair	 tan.	His	 clothes	 had	 suffered	 a
good	deal,	being	badly	creased	and	crumpled	from	many	wettings,	and	his	flannel	trousers
were	liberally	splashed	with	mud.	A	rent	in	his	jacket	testified	to	an	encounter	with	a	furze
bush	near	Camelford,	and	owing	 to	an	early	start	 that	morning	he	had	omitted	 to	shave.
Altogether	he	looked	a	distinctly	unconventional	figure,	but	he	felt	in	splendid	health	and
spirits,	and	whistled	cheerfully	as	he	walked.
When	he	drew	near	 to	 the	narrow	 ravine	 in	which	 the	village	 lay	he	 struck	off	 the
road	along	the	path	which	led	to	the	cliff	top	and	down	by	the	church,	for	he	intended	to
call	on	 the	 rector	 at	once.	He	had	conceived	a	great	 affection	 for	 the	old	man,	 and	was
looking	forward	to	seeing	him	again	with	much	pleasure.
Soon	 he	 reached	 the	 cliffs	 and	 had	 a	 view	 of	 the	 open	 sea,	 with	 Kestrel	 in	 the
distance.	What	 had	 happened	 there	 in	 his	 absence,	 he	 wondered,	 and	 how	 was	 Tony?
These	questions	would	 soon	be	 answered.	Reaching	 the	 steep	descent,	 he	 shortened	his
stride.
On	reaching	the	rectory	gate	he	had	something	of	a	shock,	for,	sitting	on	a	deck-chair
on	the	lawn	in	front	of	the	house,	was	a	girl,	reading.
He	 pushed	 open	 the	 gate	 and	 approached,	 rather	 diffidently,	 the	 gravel	 crunching
beneath	his	heavy	shoes.	The	girl	raised	her	eyes	from	her	book,	and	he	had	a	swift	vision
of	a	sweet	oval	face	surrounded	by	a	mass	of	short	dark	curls.	Before	he	could	speak	she
said:
“You	wanted	to	see	my	uncle?	I’m	afraid	he’s	out	 just	now.	But	come	round	to	 the
back,	and	I’ll	see	if	I	can	find	something	for	you.”
She	rose	lightly,	dropping	the	book	on	her	chair,	and	he	saw	that	she	was	very	slim,
and	 that	 her	 legs	 were	 bare.	 It	 was	 evident	 that	 she	 took	 him	 for	 a	 tramp	 seeking	 the
rector’s	charity.	Small	wonder,	 too,	he	 thought,	 looking	 ruefully	down	at	his	bedraggled
appearance.	Wondering	what	to	do,	he	followed	her	round	to	the	back	door.
Once	in	the	kitchen,	she	said:
“Sit	down,	please,	and	I’ll	make	you	some	tea.	I	think	Mrs.	Drew	must	be	upstairs.”
Obediently	he	sat	down	at	the	bare	table,	thinking	furiously,	striving	to	frame	some
sort	of	explanation	which	would	not	embarrass	her.
The	kettle	was	 singing	on	 the	hob,	 and	 in	 a	 few	minutes	he	had	made	 the	 tea	 and
poured	out	a	cup,	which	she	set	before	him,	together	with	a	piece	of	meat	pie	which	she
found	in	the	cupboard.	Her	proximity,	as	she	leaned	over	the	table,	made	him	feel	hotter
and	grimier	than	ever,	for	she	was	dressed	all	in	white,	and	looked	as	fresh	and	cool	as	a
flower.
Thinking	 that	 perhaps	 after	 he	 had	 finished	 he	 could	 escape	 before	 the	 rector
returned,	Hamilton	began	to	eat.	Indeed	the	food	was	welcome,	for	he	had	walked	several
miles	in	the	heat	of	the	day	since	lunching	at	Portreath.
The	girl	perched	herself	on	the	edge	of	the	table,	swinging	her	legs	and	looking	out	of
the	window.	Hamilton	felt	extremely	uncomfortable.
When	he	had	finished	she	asked	if	he	had	had	enough,	and,	receiving	a	satisfactory
answer,	 offered	 him	 a	 cigarette.	 Thinking	 longingly	 of	 the	 pipe	 reposing	 in	 his	 pocket,
Hamilton	dutifully	accepted	one,	and,	when	the	girl	followed	suit,	found	his	matches	and
gave	her	a	 light.	As	he	held	 the	flame	for	her	he	saw	her	eyes	fall	on	his	hands,	which,
though	very	dirty	at	present,	were	well	cared	for,	and	she	looked	up	at	him	curiously.
Now	or	never,	he	told	himself,	and	was	just	opening	his	lips	to	speak	when	the	door
opened	and	the	rector	came	in.
The	old	man	stopped	short,	stared	for	a	moment,	then	asked:
“Why,	Valerie	my	dear,	what’s	this?”
“Oh,	uncle,	this	gentleman	came	to	see	you,	so	I	gave	him	some	tea.”
The	rector	looked	hard	at	the	blushing	Hamilton	and	his	lips	twitched.
“All	right,	my	dear,	thank	you.	Run	along	now.”
With	another	quick	glance	at	Hamilton	the	girl	left	them,	going	out	through	the	back
door.	When	she	had	gone	the	rector	continued:
“Well,	Mr.	Hamilton,	you	nearly	took	me	in	for	a	moment.	I	am	glad	to	see	you.”
“And	 I	 you,	 Father!”	 They	 shook	 hands	 heartily.	 “I’m	 afraid	 I	 got	 in	 under	 false
colours.	Your	niece	didn’t	give	me	a	chance	to	explain.	I	feel	an	awful	fool.”
“Don’t	worry	 about	 that,	my	boy.	She’s	 a	 dear	 girl,	 and	generous	 to	 a	 fault.	She’d
feed	every	vagabond	in	the	duchy	if	she	got	a	chance.	Would	you	like	a	wash?”
“Very	 much	 indeed,	 Father.	 But	 if	 you	 don’t	 mind,	 I’ll	 slip	 along	 to	 the	 inn	 and
change	as	well.”
“As	you	wish.	But	come	back	to	dinner.	I’ve	a	lot	to	talk	over	with	you.”
Hamilton	 left	by	 the	 front	door,	but	Valerie	was	not	 to	be	 seen.	He	wondered	very
much	what	she	would	say	when	next	they	met.
An	hour	later	he	was	back	again,	and	this	time	the	housekeeper,	Mrs.	Drew,	let	him
in.
“The	Father’s	in	church,	saying	his	office,	sir,	but	Miss	Valerie’s	in	the	study.”
She	 led	him	 to	 the	 little	 room	overlooking	 the	garden,	where	Valerie	was	sitting	 in
one	of	the	big	leather-covered	chairs	in	front	of	a	cheerful	fire.
“Come	 in,	Mr.	Hamilton,”	 she	cried	when	he	was	announced;	“Uncle’s	 told	me	all
about	you.”
“Thank	you,	Miss	Bennett.	I’m	afraid	I	made	an	awful	ass	of	myself	this	afternoon.”
“Well,	you	might	have	explained	yourself	a	little.”	She	blushed	delightfully.	“Do	sit
down;	Uncle	won’t	be	long.”
As	Hamilton	sank	into	the	opposite	chair	she	went	on:
“I	 was	 very	 angry	 with	 you	 at	 first,	 but	 I	 suppose	 I	 did	 take	 things	 a	 little	 for
granted.”
“The	fault	was	mine	entirely;	I	should	never	have	come	as	I	was,	but	I	expected	to
find	the	rector	alone.”
“Naturally.	I’ve	only	been	here	two	days.	I	always	come	for	my	holidays,	you	see.”
“I	 envy	you,	Miss	Bennett.	This	 is	only	my	 second	visit	 to	Cornwall,	 and	 I’m	 just
finding	out	all	I’ve	missed	in	not	coming	here	more	often.”
“You	enjoyed	your	tramp,	then?”	she	asked.
“Rather!	It	rained	a	lot,	but	I	saw	all	the	places	I	wanted	to.	But	there	are	lots	more
left	for	my	next	visit.”
“When	will	that	be?”
“I	really	couldn’t	say.	I	have	to	take	my	holiday	when	I	can.	It’s	not	always	easy	to
get	away.”
“You’re	a	writer,	aren’t	you?”
“Yes.	Journalism	and	short	stories.	Nothing	much.”
“But	 it’s	 creative	work,	 and	 that	makes	 all	 the	 difference,	 doesn’t	 it?”	 She	 sighed.
“Mine’s	not,	and	so	my	fortnight	is	rather	precious.	I’ve	been	in	an	office	in	Bristol	ever
since	Daddy	died,	and	it’s	pretty	deadly	sometimes.	I	look	forward	to	staying	with	Uncle
here.	There’s	no	one	else,	you	see.”
She	 spoke	 quite	 simply,	 without	 emotion,	 but	 Hamilton	 could	 feel	 the	 depth	 of
loneliness	behind	the	words.	Finding	no	adequate	reply,	he	remained	silent,	while	she	sat
staring	into	the	fire,	her	chin	resting	on	her	hands.	He	noticed	that	she	was	now	wearing
simple	dark	dress,	and	that	her	unruly	curls	were	neatly	arranged.	If	possible,	she	looked
even	more	lovely	than	when	he	had	first	seen	her.	Her	pale	cheeks	owed,	perhaps,	a	little
of	their	rose	to	art,	but	her	delicate	brows	were	natural,	he	could	swear,	and	her	mouth	was
a	 thing	 to	 set	 any	 poet’s	 heart	 a-beating.	 Proud	 it	 was,	 and	 firm,	 but	 with	 a	 deceptive
firmness,	for	he	knew	full	well	that	the	chiseled	outline	of	the	warm	red	lips	would	vanish
at	a	touch,	and	become	as	melting	soft	as	the	heart	of	any	rose.
He	was	awakened	from	this	delicious	reverie	by	the	entrance	of	the	rector.
“Well,	my	children,	have	you	explained	yourselves	now?”	he	asked.	“Good!	Let’s	go
and	have	dinner.”
During	 the	meal	 they	 talked	 about	Hamilton’s	walking	 tour,	 and	 upon	 a	 variety	 of
general	topics,	but	when	Valerie	had	left	them,	the	old	priest	unburdened	himself.
“My	boy,”	said	he,	“I	am	desperately	afraid.”
So	earnest	was	his	tone	that	Hamilton	stopped	filling	his	pipe	and	stared	at	him.	He
went	on:
“I	 saw	your	 friend	Tony	and	his	 two	associates	yesterday	morning.	They	were	 just
setting	off	for	London	by	road.	I	was	introduced	to	Mr.	Simon	Vaughan.”
He	stopped	abruptly,	and	Hamilton	leaned	forward,	his	heart	beating	quickly.
“Yes,	Father,”	he	breathed.	“Go	on!”
“It	is	he!	There	can	be	no	mistake:	that	false	priest	I	told	you	of	when	last	we	talked
together.	 It	 is	 forty	 years	 since	 I	 saw	 him,	 but	 he	 has	 not	 changed	—	 those	 drooping
eyelids;	that	sensuous	mouth	—	I	would	know	them	anywhere.”
Hamilton	uttered	a	sharp	cry	as	 the	match	he	was	holding	burned	his	 fingers.	Wild
thoughts	scurried	through	his	brain.
“But,	Father,”	he	stammered,	“you	said	he	was	sixty	then.”
“I	 know.	He	was	—	 and	 is	 still,	 by	 all	 appearances.	 John,	 what	 does	 it	mean?	 In
God’s	name,	what	does	it	mean?	I	tell	you,	I	went	straight	back	to	the	church	and	prayed
for	 three	 hours	 before	 the	 Tabernacle.	 I	 have	 scarcely	 slept	 since.	 My	 boy	—	 there’s
devilry	afoot!”
When	Hamilton	replied	he	affected	a	lightness	he	was	far	from	feeling.
“You	must	be	mistaken,	Father	—	some	chance	likeness,	perhaps.	And	even	if	it	were
the	 same	 he	 may	 have	 managed	 to	 arrest	 the	 natural	 approach	 of	 age	 somehow.	 That
power	was	claimed	by	the	adepts,	was	it	not?”
“Oh,	yes,	I	know.	I’m	not	much	concerned	with	his	apparent	age.	Were	it	anyone	else
I	 would	 agree	 with	 you,	 and	 attribute	 it	 to	 some	 miraculous	 control	 over	 nature.
Methuselah	lived	to	be	nine	hundred,	we	are	told.	But	that’s	not	the	point.	What	I	mean	is
that	 I	 know	 the	man	 to	 be	wholly	 evil.	 I	 cannot	 tell	 you	 the	 details	 of	 the	 unspeakable
foulness	 for	which	he	was	 expelled	 from	 the	Church,	 but	 you	 can	 take	 if	 from	me	 that
such	a	monster	could	never	change	his	character.	When	you	told	me	of	your	friend’s	new
faith,	I	set	it	down	as	comparatively	harmless	transcendental	magic,	such	as	was	practiced
by	the	Rosicrucians	and	others;	but,	believe	me,	this	Vaughan	would	have	no	hand	in	such
child’s	play,	as	he	would	doubtless	term	it.”
A	dreadful	suspicion	of	the	other’s	meaning	began	to	form	in	Hamilton’s	mind.
“You	mean	—?”	he	whispered.
“I	mean	Satanism	—	Black	Magic	—	of	the	most	damnable	and	abominable	kind.”
“No,	Father,	it’s	impossible!	Even	if	you	are	right	about	Vaughan,	Tony	would	never
go	in	for	such	a	thing.”
“He	may	not	know	what	he	 is	doing	until	 it	 is	 too	 late.	The	Serpent	 is	a	devilishly
subtle	beast.”
“We	must	save	him.”	Hamilton	sprang	to	his	feet.
“How?	What	can	we	do?”
“Follow	them	—	go	to	London	—	to	Gaunt’s	home.”
“And	 then	 what?	 Break	 down	 the	 door?	 Call	 the	 police,	 and	 tell	 them	 that	 devil-
worship	 is	going	on?	No,	 John,	you	would	be	 laughed	at.	Authority	does	not	 recognize
these	things	any	more.”
Hamilton	sank	down	again.
“But	still	they	go	on,”	he	muttered,	covering	his	face	with	his	hands.
“Yes,	they	still	go	on.	In	London,	Paris,	New	York	—	every	great	city	of	the	world	—
these	abominable	cults	still	persist.	We	can	do	nothing	for	your	friend,	my	son.	Only	God
can	save	him	now.	We	can	but	pray	to	Him.	I	said	a	Mass	of	the	Holy	Ghost	this	morning
for	 Anthony	 Lovell’s	 soul.	 There	 is	 little	 else	 to	 be	 done.	 Even	 now	 he	 is	 probably
initiated.”
Hamilton	groaned	aloud,	twisting	his	fingers	in	his	hair.
“Can	we	do	nothing,	then,”	he	cried	—	“not	one	single	mortal	thing?”
“I	have	one	other	suggestion,	my	boy.”
“What’s	that?”
“Go	across	to	the	Abbey,	while	they	are	away,	and	try	to	find	out	what	is	going	on
there.	I	feel	certain	that	the	focus	of	the	whole	foul	business	lies	on	Kestrel.”
Hamilton	uncovered	his	face,	fresh	hope	dawning	in	his	eyes.
“I’ll	go	tomorrow,”	he	said	eagerly;	“where	can	I	get	a	boat?”
“I’ll	speak	to	one	of	my	choirmen.	He’ll	take	you	across.	Shall	I	come	with	you?”
“No,	 Father,	 I’ll	 go	 alone,	 if	 you	 don’t	 mind.	 I	 feel,	 somehow,	 that	 it	 is	 my
responsibility.”
“Very	well.	I	shall	pray	most	earnestly	for	you.	Come	to	Mass	tomorrow.”
“I	will.	May	I	make	my	confession	tonight?”
“Of	course.	We	will	go	into	church	when	you	leave	here.	Now	shall	we	join	Valerie?
Not	a	word	to	her,	naturally.”
Composing	 their	 features,	 and	 resolutely	 thrusting	 aside	 the	 black	 thoughts	 which
crowded	their	minds,	they	returned	to	the	study.
II	
For	 the	 third	 time	 in	 five	minutes	Hamilton	ducked	 to	avoid	 the	swinging	boom	as
the	little	boat	changed	its	course.	There	was	a	slight	rain	falling	in	the	stiff	wind,	and	he
sat	 huddled	 in	 his	mackintosh,	 feeling	 rather	miserable.	 The	man	 at	 the	 tiller,	 his	 pipe
inverted	to	keep	out	the	wet,	hardly	spoke	at	all,	but	concentrated	on	the	difficult	 job	of
tacking	against	the	wind.
Half-way	across	they	sighted	the	Abbey	launch,	with	Tom	Tregellis	at	the	wheel,	and
the	 two	 boatmen	 exchanged	 a	 hail.	 The	 mist	 of	 rain	 made	 observation	 difficult,	 but
Hamilton	fancied	he	could	make	out	another	figure	crouched	in	the	bottom	of	the	launch.
He	was	still	wondering	who	it	could	be	when	they	ran	into	smooth	water	in	the	lee	of	the
island,	 and	 the	brown	 sail	 hung	 limp.	The	 fisherman	got	out	his	oars	 and	began	 to	 row
strongly	for	the	harbour	mouth.
It	was	dank	 and	 cold	within	 the	 sheltering	 rocks,	 and	Hamilton’s	 spirits	 sank	 even
lower	as	he	stood	up	and	prepared	to	jump	for	the	landing-stage.
When	 he	 had	 accomplished	 this	 feat	 in	 safety,	 he	 gave	 his	 instructions	 to	 the	man
who	had	brought	him	across:
“Wait	for	me.	If	I’m	not	back	in	an	hour,	go	back	and	tell	Father	Bennett.”
The	man	nodded	silently,	and	began	to	refill	his	pipe.	Hamilton	started	on	 the	 long
climb	up	to	the	Abbey.
The	wicket	 in	 the	 outer	 door	was	 latched,	 but	 yielded	 to	 pressure,	 and	 he	 stepped
through	into	the	courtyard.	Here	it	was	very	gloomy,	and	the	narrow	window-slits	of	the
building	frowned	at	him	like	so	many	suspicious	eyes.	An	indefinable	chill	settled	upon
his	heart,	but	he	took	his	courage	in	both	hands	and	crossed	resolutely	to	the	inner	door.
Mounting	the	steps	leading	up	to	 it,	he	pulled	the	bell.	After	a	 little	 interval	 there	was	a
sound	of	bolts	being	withdrawn,	the	door	opened	a	crack,	and	Lorrimer’s	frightened	face
peered	 out	 at	 him.	Recognizing	 the	 visitor,	 he	 brightened	 remarkably,	 and,	 opening	 the
door	wide,	besought	him	to	enter.
Once	 inside,	 and	 the	 door	 secured	 again,	 he	 spoke	 to	Hamilton	 in	 a	 husky,	 fearful
voice.
“I’m	very	glad	to	see	you,	sir,	and	that’s	the	truth.	I	didn’t	hardly	know	what	to	do.
Come	through	into	the	kitchen,	sir,	if	you	don’t	mind.	The	missus’ll	be	that	pleased.”
Mrs.	Lorrimer	welcomed	Hamilton	with	no	less	warmth,	taking	off	his	wet	coat	and
giving	 him	 a	 chair	 beside	 the	 fire.	 When	 his	 pipe	 was	 going	 satisfactorily	 he	 asked
Lorrimer	to	tell	him	exactly	what	was	the	matter.
“It’s	Mr.	Tony,	sir	—	I	mean	Sir	Anthony,	and	those	other	two,”	the	old	servant	burst
out;	“I	don’t	know	what	they’re	up	to,	but	I	don’t	like	it.	That	Mr.	Vaughan	stays	down	in
the	crypt	all	day;	and	Sir	Anthony	and	Dr.	Gaunt,	cooped	up	in	the	library	with	all	them
books	—	it’s	not	natural,	sir.	I’ve	had	a	look	at	some	of	their	books,	too,	sir,	after	they’ve
gone	to	bed	—	I	know	I	shouldn’t	have,	but	I	felt	I	must.	And	they’re	not	good	books.	It’s
my	belief,	sir,	that	they’re	leading	Sir	Anthony	astray	somehow.”
“Is	that	all	you	have	to	tell	me,	Lorrimer?”	asked	Hamilton,	as	the	other	paused	for
breath.
“No,	sir,	not	by	half.	There’s	other	things	besides	—	things	that	Mr.	Tony	don’t	know
about.	I’m	generally	up	pretty	early	in	the	morning,	sir,	and	time	and	again	I’ve	seen	the
doctor	and	his	friend	come	up	out	of	the	crypt,	long	before	Sir	Anthony	was	awake.	They
came	close	by	me	once,	and	their	clothes	smelt	of	that	stuff	they	burn	in	Popish	churches
—	incense	they	call	it.	What	have	they	been	up	to	so	early?	—	that’s	what	I	asks	myself,
sir.	No	good,	I’ll	be	bound.	And	now	they’ve	gone	off,	taking	the	master	with	them,	and
leaving	us	alone.	We	don’t	like	it,	sir.”
“You’ve	been	left	here	before,	surely?”
“No,	 sir,	 not	 for	 longer	 than	 a	 day	 since	 old	 Sir	 Anthony	 first	 brought	 us	 from
London	 with	 him.	 Besides,	 it’s	 different	 now.	 Can’t	 you	 feel	 it,	 sir?	 The	 place	 feels
different.”
Hamilton	leaned	back	in	his	chair	and	closed	his	eyes,	trying	to	get	in	touch	with	the
atmosphere	of	the	Abbey,	but	he	could	only	feel	the	warmth	of	the	fire,	and	smell	his	own
tobacco-smoke.	Lorrimer	watched	him,	saying:
“No,	sir,	you	won’t	feel	anything	here.	It’s	kind	of	home-like	with	the	missus	and	me
living	here,	but	in	the	hall	it’s	terrible	sometimes.	A	sort	of	nasty	feeling,	like	as	if	you	was
in	a	heathen	temple.	You’ve	noticed	it	too,	haven’t	you,	my	dear?”	He	addressed	the	last
question	to	his	wife.
“Yes,	Mr.	Hamilton,	sir,	it’s	quite	right	what	he	says,”	she	replied;	“we	daren’t	go	out
of	here	after	dark,	not	into	the	hall	we	daren’t.	We	hadn’t	used	to	be	afraid,	not	when	the
old	 master	 was	 alive,	 in	 spite	 of	 the	 tales	 they	 told,	 but	 it’s	 changed	 now.	 Like	 as	 if
something	had	woken	up.”
“Hush,	my	dear,”	her	husband	broke	in,	“you	mustn’t	say	things	like	that.	There’s	a
God	above	who’ll	take	care	of	us	—	we	needn’t	be	afraid.	But	Sir	Anthony	don’t	think	as
we	do,	sir	—	he’s	not	a	religious	man,	and	some	harm	might	come	to	him.”
While	he	had	been	speaking	a	thought	had	been	stirring	in	Hamilton’s	brain.	Now	it
crystallized,	and	he	voiced	it:
“Where	is	Johnston,	Sir	Anthony’s	man,	Lorrimer?	What’s	he	think	of	all	this?”
“I	was	coming	to	that,	sir:	he’s	gone;	went	this	morning.”
“So	that	was	whom	I	saw	in	the	launch.	Why	did	he	go?”
“Said	he	couldn’t	stick	it	no	longer,	sir.	Said	he’d	been	in	some	queer	places	in	his
time,	but	none	so	queer	as	this.	He’d	been	whittling	for	quite	a	while	now,	but	last	night
finished	him.”
“What	happened	last	night?”	Hamilton	inquired.
Lorrimer	looked	uneasily	at	his	wife.
“We	heard	it	again,	sir,”	said	he,	“like	on	the	night	Sir	Anthony	died.”
“Heard	what?”
“I	don’t	know	what	it	was,	sir,	and	I	hope	to	God	I	shan’t	ever	know.	It’d	be	about
one	o’clock	this	morning,	wouldn’t	it,	my	dear?”
His	wife	assented,	and	he	went	on:
“It	woke	us	up,	sir:	a	sort	of	shaking	of	the	whole	building,	like	an	earthquake;	and
then	such	a	hullabaloo	as	you	never	heard,	sir.	A	kind	of	shouting	and	a	bellowing,	as	if	all
hell	was	let	loose	under	us.	We	heard	it	before,	the	night	the	old	master	died,	but	not	near
so	bad	as	this.”
“What	did	you	do?”	Hamilton	was	intensely	interested.
“What	 could	 we	 do,	 sir?	 Nothing;	 just	 lay	 still	 and	 prayed	 for	 sunrise.	 The	 noise
stopped	after	a	bit,	but	the	trembling	went	on	for	hours.	It	finished	Johnston,	as	I	told	you,
sir.	Wouldn’t	listen	to	reason.	Just	up	and	went	as	soon	as	Tom	was	ready	to	take	him.”
“Amazing,	Lorrimer!	You’re	quite	sure	it	wasn’t	 the	sea,	or	 the	wind,	or	something
like	that?”
“Oh,	no,	sir”	—	the	servant	shook	his	head	decidedly	—	“the	sea	was	a	bit	rough	and
the	wind	was	blowing,	but	you	couldn’t	call	it	a	storm	even.	Besides,	the	noise	seemed	to
come	from	beneath,	in	the	rock	itself.”
“I	 see,”	 Hamilton	 nodded,	 then	 looked	 sharply	 at	 the	 other.	 “Have	 you	 ever	 been
down	into	the	crypt?”
“No,	sir,	not	I!	I	wouldn’t	meddle	with	such	things.”
“Are	you	game	 to	come	down	with	me	now?	I	came	over	 this	morning	 to	 find	out
what	was	going	on,	and	I	believe	that	is	the	place	to	start.”
Lorrimer	was	silent	for	several	seconds,	and	Hamilton	could	see	the	sweat	glisten	in
tiny	droplets	upon	his	forehead.	Then	he	stood	up,	saying	quietly:
“I’ll	come	with	you,	sir.	We’ll	take	a	lamp	from	the	hall.”
“Good	 man!”	 Hamilton	 jumped	 to	 his	 feet,	 clapping	 him	 on	 the	 shoulder.	 Mrs.
Lorrimer	said	nothing.
“Are	you	coming,	too,	Mrs.	Lorrimer?”	Hamilton	asked.
She	shook	her	head.
“No,	sir.	I’ll	stay	here	and	pray	for	you	both.”
Hamilton	knocked	out	his	pipe	and	thrust	it	in	his	pocket;	a	thought	occurred	to	him.
“Have	 you	 any	 sort	 of	 weapon?”	 he	 asked.	 “We	 may	 as	 well	 be	 prepared	 for
anything.”
Lorrimer	looked	wonderingly	at	him.
“I	don’t	think	weapons’d	be	much	use	against	the	powers	of	darkness,	sir,”	he	said.
Hamilton	smiled	grimly.
“Probably	not,	but	the	powers	of	darkness	sometimes	have	mortal	agents.	Anything
will	do	—	an	old	shot-gun,	for	instance.”
The	other	scratched	his	head.
“I	can	do	better	than	that,	sir,”	he	said	at	last;	“there	should	be	a	pistol	in	the	library.
Old	Sir	Anthony	used	to	keep	it	there.	Souvenir	of	the	war,	I	think	it	was.”
“Fine.	Let’s	go.”
They	went	out	of	 the	kitchen,	 along	 the	passage,	 and	 into	 the	 library.	Going	 to	 the
desk	by	 the	window,	Lorrimer	began	 to	 rummage	 in	 its	drawers.	Hamilton	stood	by	 the
long	table,	 idly	turning	over	the	books	which	still	 littered	it.	As	far	as	he	could	see	they
were	harmless	enough,	though	they	all	dealt	with	the	occult.	There	was	no	suggestion	of
Satanism,	certainly.	He	was	knitting	his	brows	over	Levi’s	Rituel	de	la	Haute	Magie	when
he	 heard	 an	 exclamation	 of	 satisfaction,	 and,	 looking	 up,	 saw	 Lorrimer	 with	 a	 heavy
automatic	pistol	in	his	hands.
Hamilton	took	the	weapon	gingerly	and	examined	it.	It	was	a	pre-war	Luger,	and	he
was	unfamiliar	with	the	mechanism,	but	a	little	fumbling	released	a	cartridge-clip	from	the
butt,	and	he	saw	the	blunt	noses	of	seven	bullets	lying	meekly	side	by	side.	The	thing	was
fully	 loaded.	 Laying	 the	 clip	 on	 the	 table,	 he	 attempted	 to	 pull	 the	 jacket	 back.	 It	 was
immovable,	 so	 he	 pressed	 the	 trigger	 gently,	 pointing	 the	muzzle	 at	 the	 floor.	 It	was	 as
well	he	did,	 for	a	heavy	report	shook	the	room,	 the	pistol	almost	 leaped	from	his	grasp,
and	he	found	himself	 looking	ruefully	at	a	neat	black	hole	 in	 the	carpet,	while	 the	acrid
smoke	rose	in	wreaths	about	his	head.
Lorrimer	came	to	his	side	and	took	the	gun	from	him.
“I	think	I	know	how	to	work	it,	sir,”	he	said,	and	jerked	the	jacket	back.	The	empty
shell	spun	through	the	air	and	tinkled	in	the	hearth.
“Sir	Anthony	showed	me	once.	I	didn’t	know	it	was	loaded	though;	there	must	have
been	a	cartridge	in	the	breech.”
He	demonstrated	 the	mechanism	 to	Hamilton,	 replaced	 the	clip	and,	clicking	down
the	safety-catch,	handed	the	weapon	back	to	him.
“It’s	 ready	 now,	 sir.	 But	 be	 careful.	 It’ll	 shoot	 off	 the	whole	magazine	 before	 you
know	where	you	are.”
He	bent	down	and	retrieved	the	cartridge-case	from	the	hearth	and	then	opened	the
window.
“Best	 not	 leave	 any	 traces	 for	 them	 to	 see,	 sir,”	 he	 explained.	 “I	 don’t	 think	 Sir
Anthony	knows	the	gun	was	there.	You’d	better	keep	it,	sir.”
They	went	out	into	the	corridor,	 to	find	Mrs.	Lorrimer	standing	at	 the	open	door	of
the	kitchen,	one	hand	on	her	breast.	Her	startled	face	framed	a	wordless	question.
“It’s	all	right,	Mrs.	Lorrimer,”	Hamilton	assured	her.	“Just	a	little	target-practice.	No
damage	done.”
She	nodded	and	withdrew,	closing	the	door.
As	 they	entered	 the	hall	Hamilton	 threw	back	his	head	and	 sniffed	 sharply.	But	he
could	detect	no	smell,	though	there	had	been	a	distinct	change	in	the	atmosphere.	Putting
it	aside	as	indefinable,	he	helped	Lorrimer	to	light	one	of	the	vapour-lamps	which	hung	on
brackets	round	the	walls,	holding	a	match	ready	while	the	other	worked	the	little	pump	to
give	 the	 initial	pressure.	 In	a	 few	minutes	 the	 lamp	was	hissing	cheerfully	and	giving	a
good	light.	Lorrimer	 took	up	 the	 lamp	and	 they	went	 to	 the	stone	 trap	beneath	 the	great
staircase,	and	Hamilton	lifted	it.
Gingerly	they	crept	down	the	spiral	stair,	Hamilton	going	first.	As	they	descended	he
began	to	be	more	and	more	aware	of	an	intense	oppression,	which	seemed	to	weigh	upon
him	 like	 an	 invisible	 cloud.	 Strange	 and	 horrible	 thoughts,	 quite	 foreign	 to	 his	 nature,
began	to	crawl	about	his	mind,	and	by	the	time	they	reached	the	bottom	step	he	was	in	the
grip	 of	 a	 dreadful	 wave	 of	 despair,	 which	 well-nigh	 overwhelmed	 him.	 This	 visit,	 his
efforts	 to	 save	 Tony	 from	 himself,	 all	 seemed	 utterly	 useless,	 ridiculous	 in	 their	 pitiful
futility.	 How	 typical	 of	 Life	 itself,	 he	 thought,	 this	 miserable	 struggle	 against	 hideous
Destiny!	His	knees	shook,	and	he	would	have	fallen,	quite	overcome	by	the	dark	clouds	of
evil	which	swirled	about	that	silent	place,	had	not	Lorrimer	gripped	his	arm	and	held	the
lamp	close	to	his	face.
“I	know	how	you	feel,	sir,”	whispered	the	old	man.	“I	can	feel	 it	 too.	It’s	 the	same
upstairs	sometimes,	only	not	so	bad.	Try	and	shake	it	off,	sir.	Remember,	God’s	with	us
everywhere.”
Feverishly	Hamilton	caught	at	 that	 last	assurance,	striving	 to	 fix	his	mind	upon	 the
service	he	had	attended	that	morning,	and	That	which	he	had	received	there.	Immediately
he	felt	stronger,	and	was	able	to	make	the	sign	of	the	cross	with	a	trembling	hand.
“The	Cross	of	Christ	between	me	and	all	harm!”	he	whispered,	and	felt	strength	flow
back	into	his	limbs.
Clinging	to	each	other,	the	two	crept	down	the	middle	of	the	crypt,	between	the	rows
of	pillars	supporting	the	vaulted	roof.	They	had	almost	reached	the	centre	when	Lorrimer,
who	was	 a	 little	 in	 front,	 stopped	with	 a	 sharp	 cry.	Hamilton,	 his	 heart	 thudding	 in	 his
throat,	asked	what	was	the	matter.
“I	can’t	go	any	further,	sir.	There	—	there	seems	to	be	something	in	the	way.”
Feeling	that	his	brain	was	going,	Hamilton	took	a	step	forward,	only	to	find	himself
brought	up	sharply	against	an	invisible	barrier.	For	a	moment	stark	panic	rose	screaming
in	his	soul,	and	he	all	but	 fled	 incontinently.	When	he	had	got	hold	of	himself	again	he
took	the	lamp	from	the	other’s	shaking	fingers,	which	threatened	to	drop	it	at	any	moment,
and	held	it	aloft.
There	 was	 nothing	 to	 be	 seen,	 only	 the	 avenue	 of	 pillars	 disappearing	 into	 the
darkness	beyond	the	rays	of	the	lamp.	There	was	no	tangible	obstruction,	but,	strive	as	he
would,	he	could	not	advance	one	foot	farther	forward.	It	was	as	if	a	transparent	sheet	of
rubber	was	stretched	tightly	across	their	path.	Sweating	with	a	curious	combination	of	fear
and	baffled	rage,	he	lowered	the	lamp	and	scanned	the	ground.	Then	he	saw	the	diagram.
Its	outermost	circle,	a	brilliant,	luminous	red	against	the	dark	stone	flags,	marked	the	limit
of	their	progress.	The	complexity	of	lines	within	stretched	away	from	them	in	the	gloom.
Intense	curiosity	partly	overcoming	their	dread,	 the	 two	made	a	complete	circuit	of
the	 outside	 edge	of	 the	 figure,	 but	 at	 no	 point	 could	 they	penetrate	 into	 its	 interior;	 the
invisible	 force	restrained	 them	always.	Dimly	 they	could	make	out	 the	dark	mass	of	 the
altar,	with	 its	white	 tapes,	but	 their	 light	was	not	strong	enough	to	see	 it	clearly.	At	one
point	 they	 came	 upon	Vaughan’s	 two	 trunks,	 standing	 outside	 the	 circle,	 but	 both	were
locked,	and	to	have	forced	them	would	have	meant	leaving	visible	traces	of	their	visit,	and
this	they	were	loath	to	do.	At	length	they	were	obliged	to	confess	that	there	was	nothing
more	to	be	done,	so	they	retraced	their	steps	to	the	floor	above.
When	 the	 trap	 was	 shut	 and	 the	 lamp	 replaced	 Lorrimer	 asked	Hamilton	 what	 he
made	of	it.	The	latter	shrugged,	his	face	a	picture	of	bewilderment.
“I	don’t	know	what	to	make	of	it,”	said	he.	“I	have	never	believed	that	such	things
were	possible.	Now	I	see	that	they	are.	If	that	is	Dr.	Gaunt’s	doing,	or	his	colleague’s,	and
I	suppose	it	must	be,	then	it	only	goes	to	prove	that	they	do	possess	an	amazing	power.	I
suppose	they	didn’t	want	anyone	to	go	near	the	altar,	for	that’s	what	I	presume	it	was,	and
accordingly	 took	 steps	 to	 prevent	 it.	 At	 all	 events,	 we	 don’t	 seem	 to	 be	 any	 nearer	 a
solution	of	the	mystery	than	we	were	before.	I’m	completely	at	a	loss.”
Lorrimer	nodded;	he	was	far	less	disturbed	than	Hamilton.
“Well,	sir,”	he	said,	“I	never	thought	I	should	live	to	see	a	miracle,	but	now	I	have.	I
wish	I	could	believe	that	it	was	one	such	as	Moses	did,	but	I’m	afraid	that	it	is	more	like
those	of	Pharaoh’s	wizards.	We’re	swimming	in	deep	waters,	sir.”
They	reached	the	kitchen	door	and	went	in.	Mrs.	Lorrimer	was	standing	by	the	fire,
her	whole	body	 tense.	As	soon	as	she	saw	 them	she	 relaxed,	and	going	 to	her	husband,
quietly	kissed	him.
“Thank	God	you’re	both	safe!”	said	she.	Her	husband	looked	down	at	her	gravely.
“Amen	 to	 that,	my	dear,”	 he	 said.	 “We’ve	been	 in	 a	 strange	place,	 and	 seen	queer
things,	Mr.	Hamilton	and	I.	But	I’ll	 tell	you	about	it	 later.	Now,	sir,	I	don’t	want	to	rush
you,	 or	 to	 seem	 inhospitable,	 but	 I’m	expecting	 them	back	 any	 time,	 and	 I	 think	you’d
better	be	going.”
“Yes,	 it	 wouldn’t	 do	 for	 them	 to	 find	 me	 here.”	 Hamilton	 took	 up	 his	 coat,	 and
Lorrimer	helped	him	into	it.
“I	shall	be	staying	at	the	Three	Fishermen	for	a	while,”	he	continued,	“and	if	you’re
willing	to	stay	on	here	you	can	keep	me	informed	through	Tom	Tregellis.	Let	me	know	at
once	if	anything	definite	happens.”
“That	I	will,	thank	you,	sir.	Of	course	we’ll	stay;	we’ll	do	our	duty	by	Sir	Anthony
while	we’re	able	to.”
“Very	well,	 then.	Good-bye,	 and	God	keep	you	both.”	Hamilton	 shook	hands	with
them,	and	Lorrimer	escorted	him	out	through	a	back	door	and	round	to	the	outer	gate.	He
went	down	to	the	harbour	alone,	to	find	his	boatman	turning	the	boat	round	preparatory	to
departing.	Seeing	Hamilton,	the	man	rowed	back	to	the	landing-stage.
“I	was	just	off,	sir,”	he	explained;	“you’ve	been	gone	well	over	the	hour.”
“Sorry!	 I	 suppose	 I	 have.	 I’m	 glad	 you	 waited,	 though,”	 Hamilton	 said,	 climbing
aboard.
As	 they	 were	 rowing	 out	 of	 the	 little	 harbour	 the	 man	 looked	 curiously	 at	 his
passenger.
“Queer	place,	that,	sir?”	he	remarked,	interrogatively.
Hamilton	nodded.
“Very	 queer.”	 He	 did	 not	 feel	 disposed	 to	 be	 drawn	 into	 a	 conversation	which	 he
knew	 would	 be	 broadcast	 over	 the	 village,	 and	 contented	 himself	 with	 non-committal
replies	to	the	leading	questions	which	were	fired	at	him	from	time	to	time.
He	was	forced	into	revealing	action,	however,	when,	only	half	a	mile	from	Pentock,
he	 saw	 the	white	 shape	of	 the	Abbey	 launch	coming	 towards	 them.	Silently	cursing	 the
unfortunate	 coincidence,	 he	 flung	 himself	 into	 the	 bottom	 of	 the	 boat	 and	 pulled	 a
tarpaulin	over	his	body.	His	pilot	stared	at	him	in	astonishment	as	he	asked	in	a	low	voice:
“That	launch;	how	many	are	there	aboard?”
The	other	peered	under	his	hand.
“There	be	three,	sir,	besides	Tom	Tregellis;	Sir	Anthony,	it	looks	like,	and	two	others.
They’ll	be	his	two	friends,	like	as	not.	Don’t	you	want	them	to	see	you,	sir?”
“No,”	said	Hamilton	shortly,	and	pulled	 the	 tarpaulin	over	his	 face.	 It	was	hot,	and
smelt	abominably,	but	he	stayed	under	it	until	the	launch	had	passed	only	a	cable’s-length
away,	and	their	own	boat	had	entered	the	harbour	and	was	hidden	by	the	wall.
*	*	*
After	 lunching	at	 the	inn	Hamilton	made	his	way	to	the	rectory.	Valerie	met	him	at
the	door,	greeting	him	gaily	with:
“Good	afternoon,	Mr.	Hamilton.	Are	you	hungry	this	time?”
He	 tried	 desperately	 to	 echo	 her	 carefree	 tone,	 but	 was	 conscious	 that	 he	 failed
dismally	as	he	answered:
“No,	thanks,	Miss	Bennett.	I’ve	just	had	lunch.	Is	the	rector	in?”
“I	think	so.	Do	come	in!	Will	you	stay	for	tea?”
“Thanks.	I’d	love	to.”	Hamilton	was	peering	anxiously	over	her	shoulder	towards	the
study.	Ever	since	his	strange	experience	of	 the	morning	his	one	thought	had	been	to	 tell
the	old	priest	of	 this	 amazing	confirmation	of	 their	worst	 fears.	He	 scarcely	noticed	 the
girl,	and	she,	 sensing	his	 lack	of	 interest,	gave	up	 the	attempt	 to	entertain	him	and	 took
him	straight	to	the	rector.
“Uncle,	here’s	Mr.	Hamilton,”	she	said;	“he’s	got	something	on	his	mind	and	won’t
rest	until	he’s	seen	you.	From	his	face	I	think	he	must	have	murdered	someone.”
Her	uncle	put	down	his	book.	For	perhaps	one	second	a	tiny	frown	appeared	between
his	brows	and	a	reproof	trembled	on	his	lips.	Then	he	remembered	that	she	knew	nothing
of	the	grim	secret	which	lay	between	Hamilton	and	himself,	and	he	smiled	gravely.
“Thank	you,	my	dear,”	he	said.	“Come	in	and	sit	down,	my	boy.	Have	some	tobacco
—	I’ve	got	a	new	tin	today.”
Hamilton	sat	down	and	began	to	fill	his	pipe	in	silence.	The	girl	hovered	uncertainly
at	the	door,	looking	curiously	from	one	to	the	other.
“I’ll	leave	you	to	it,	then,”	said	she.	“Don’t	be	too	hard	on	him,	Uncle.”
When	the	door	had	closed	behind	her	the	rector	spoke:
“Not	a	word	until	your	pipe’s	going,	John.	And	take	your	time;	I	can	see	it	was	pretty
bad.”
Collecting	 his	 thoughts,	 the	 young	 man	 told	 him	 the	 whole	 story	 of	 his	 visit	 to
Kestrel,	and	what	he	had	found	in	the	crypt.	Not	until	it	was	finished	did	the	other	speak,
but	smoked	his	pipe	quietly,	betraying	no	sign	of	astonishment	at	the	bizarre	tale.	When	he
spoke	he	said:
“If	your	visit	has	accomplished	nothing	else,	my	boy,	it	has	convinced	you	that	these
people	 do	 possess	 a	 real	 and	 terrifying	 power.	 That	 is	 very	 important,	 for	we	must	 not
underestimate	 our	 opponents.	 I	 must	 confess	 that	 I	 have	 never	 actually	 experienced
anything	 so	 objective	 as	 this	 barrier	 you	 speak	 of,	 but	 I	 have	 never	 doubted	 for	 one
moment	that	such	things	are	possible.	I	rather	think	you	did	at	one	time.”
“Yes,	 Father,”	Hamilton	 agreed.	 “But	 never	 again.	 That	 has	 settled	 all	my	 doubts,
once	and	for	all.	But	now	the	question	is,	what	is	it	all	about,	and	what	are	we	to	do?”
“We	 cannot	 do	 anything	 yet	 except	 wait	 for	 further	 developments.	 You	 have
established	communication	with	the	Lorrimers,	at	all	events.”
“Yes,	I	suppose	that	is	something,”	assented	Hamilton.	“The	simple	faith	of	those	two
old	people	is	amazing,	Father.	I	couldn’t	have	stood	half	what	they’ve	gone	through.”
“You	may	have	to	stand	more	before	this	episode	is	over,	John.	I	wish	I	knew	what
they	have	in	mind.	All	this	seems	a	tremendous	lot	of	trouble	to	go	to	to	gain	one	convert
to	their	beastly	faith.	We	must	not	lose	sight	of	the	other	possible	purpose	of	that	magic
circle.”
“Why,	Father,	what	do	you	mean?”	Hamilton	was	startled.	“It	could	only	be	intended
to	keep	intruders	out,	surely.”
“It	might	also	serve	to	keep	something	in,”	the	priest	answered	quietly.
Hamilton	could	feel	the	colour	draining	from	his	cheeks	as	he	said:
“The	bellowing	sound?”
The	other	nodded.
“That	 may	 have	 been	 the	 wind,	 of	 course.	 I	 place	 more	 reliance	 on	 your	 own
sensations	when	descending	into	the	crypt.	You	might	have	imagined	the	feeling	of	evil,
being	prepared	for	it,	but	the	assault	of	despair	is	very	significant.	It	seems	to	point	to	the
presence	 of	 some	 intelligent	 entity,	 which	 was	 endeavouring	 to	 persuade	 you	 of	 the
hopelessness	of	attempting	to	interfere.”
“What	a	horrible	idea,	Father!”
“We	may	encounter	things	more	horrible	before	we’ve	done,	my	boy.	I	take	it	you	are
determined	to	see	this	through?”
“Absolutely,”	 Hamilton	 answered	 firmly.	 “I	 shall	 stay	 here	 until	 there	 is	 no	 more
hope	for	Tony.”
“Say,	rather,	until	Tony	is	saved.”
“There	is	a	hope,	then?”	Hamilton’s	voice	was	eager.
“There	 is	always	hope.	 If	we	could	once	get	him	out	of	 the	 influence	of	 those	 two
wretches	 we	 might	 work	 wonders.	 I	 have	 been	 polishing	 up	 my	 knowledge	 of	 these
matters	 today.”	 The	 rector	 picked	 up	 the	 book	 he	 had	 been	 reading	 and	 gave	 it	 to
Hamilton,	who	glanced	at	the	title,	The	Brethren	of	the	Left-Hand	Path.
“It	is	not	very	edifying	reading	for	a	priest,”	he	went	on,	“but	it	is	necessary	that	we
should	 know	what	 to	 expect.	They	 are	 diabolically	 clever,	 these	 people,	 and	 I	 can	well
understand	your	friend	getting	caught	up	by	their	specious	reasoning,	especially	if	he	has
had	no	instruction	in	Catholic	tradition	and	the	teaching	of	the	Church.”
“I	expect	he	was	brought	up	as	a	Christian,	Father.”
“No	doubt,	but	in	that	milk-and-water	Christianity	which	is	so	common	these	days.
Our	faith	is	a	glorious	adventure,	a	flaming	reality,	or	it	is	nothing.	I	doubt	if	it	was	ever
real	to	him,	and	consequently	he	did	not	realize	that	this	Satanism	is	merely	a	perversion
of	 the	Catholic	 religion.	They	have	 their	Masses,	 and	 their	 dark	 sacraments,	 you	know.
Their	ritual	is	elaborate	and	full	of	meaning,	as	ours	is:	quite	attractive	to	the	superficial
observer;	while	their	claim	to	greater	knowledge	and	objective	power	is	undeniable.	They
can,	 and	 do,	 effect	 far	 greater	material	 results	 than	we	 do,	 but	 at	what	 a	 cost!”	He	 fell
silent,	and	Hamilton	asked:
“Why	should	 they	 fear	 the	cost,	 if	 it	 is	 simply	damnation,	and	 the	 final	union	with
their	Master?”
“So	their	false	reasoning	runs.	But	they	are	wrong;	they	may	achieve	that	union	for	a
while	—	even	after	death,	but	I	cannot	believe	they	reach	eternity	that	way.	We	are	taught
that	at	the	Last	Day	Satan	himself	shall	perish,	and	with	him	all	these	unhappy	souls	who
have	 thrown	 in	 their	 lot	with	him.	Of	course	 they	deny	 this,	claiming	 that	Darkness	has
always	existed,	as	a	co-equal	of	Light,	and	 that	Darkness	will	conquer	 in	 the	end.	But	 I
will	not	believe	that:	 it	 is	inconceivable	in	the	light	of	our	faith.	God	is	omnipotent,	and
the	Devil	merely	a	rebellious	angel,	fallen	from	grace.”
“Poor	old	Tony,”	Hamilton	mused,	“to	get	taken	in	by	all	this	clap-trap.	I	hope	to	God
we	can	do	something	about	it.”
“Amen,”	 answered	 the	 priest.	 “If	we	 could	 only	 get	 him	 away	 somehow!	 I	 do	 not
think	they	are	really	very	much	concerned	with	him;	we	shouldn’t	meet	much	opposition
from	 them,	 only	 from	 the	 boy	 himself,	 poor	 fool!	 I	 can’t	 believe	 that	 he	 is	 such	 a
tremendous	acquisition	to	them.”
“He’s	 pretty	well	 off,	 you	 know,”	Hamilton	 reminded	 him;	 “they	may	 be	 after	 his
money.”
The	other	shook	his	head.
“I	 don’t	 think	 so,”	 said	 he.	 “They	 are	 not	 short	 of	means,	 and	 I	 shouldn’t	 imagine
wealth	by	itself	would	hold	much	attraction	for	them.	It	may	be	Kestrel,	though,	that	they
are	 after.	 Such	 an	 unholy	 spot,	 so	 admirably	 situated,	 would	 make	 a	 very	 desirable
stronghold	for	the	headquarters	of	their	Order.	I	wonder…”	His	voice	died	away,	and	for	a
while	they	sat	silent,	smoking	their	pipes.	At	last	the	rector	spoke	again.
“Well,	 John,”	he	said,	“I	 think	we	have	chewed	over	 this	business	 long	enough	for
today.	Let’s	go	and	have	some	tea.	And	listen,	you	mustn’t	get	obsessed	with	these	things.
Don’t	let	them	get	hold	of	you;	keep	your	mind	clear;	I’ll	do	the	worrying.	We	can	do	no
more	at	present,	so	try	and	forget	all	about	it.	Dr.	Pellew	is	coming	up	this	evening	for	a
game	of	chess	with	me,	and	 I	 suggest	 that	you	 take	Valerie	 for	 a	walk,	 and	 try	and	put
Kestrel	out	of	your	head	for	a	while.”
“There’s	nothing	I	should	like	better,	Father.”
“Splendid!	 Now	 we’ll	 say	 no	 more	 about	 Tony	 Lovell	 and	 his	 troubles	 today.
Agreed?”
“Agreed,	Father.”
After	 tea	 Hamilton	 and	 Valerie	 set	 off	 along	 the	 cliff	 path	 in	 the	 direction	 of
Portreath.	The	wind	had	dropped,	and	the	sky	cleared	since	morning;	the	sun	was	shining,
and	the	air	was	very	fresh	and	cool	after	the	rain.
Rather	 to	his	 surprise,	Hamilton	 found	his	 troubles	 slipping	off	his	 shoulders	as	he
strove	to	enter	into	the	gay	spirit	of	her	conversation,	and	before	long	he	was	laughing	as
merrily	as	she.	He	found	her	a	delightful	companion,	and	before	they	had	been	out	an	hour
they	were	firm	friends.
It	was	not	until	they	had	turned	on	to	the	inland	road,	and	were	walking	homewards
between	the	high	banks,	that	she	mentioned	Kestrel.
“What’s	going	on	 there,	Mr.	Hamilton?	Do	 tell	me;	Uncle’s	 so	mysterious.	 I	know
you	went	over	there	this	morning,	and	you	looked	so	worried	this	afternoon.”
He	 looked	 down	 at	 her	 clear	 grey	 eyes,	 turned	 so	 confidently	 upon	 his	 face,	 and
mentally	vowed	that	she	should	never	know	anything	of	the	horror	that	dwelt	on	Kestrel,
but	he	knew	that	he	could	never	lie	to	her,	so,	man-like,	he	temporized:
“Well,	Tony	—	that’s	Sir	Anthony,	of	course	—	he’s	an	old	pal	of	mine,	and	he’s	got
himself	into	a	bit	of	a	jam.	His	father	had	a	sort	of	nervous	breakdown	before	he	died,	and
Tony	asked	me	 to	 send	down	a	psycho-therapist	 from	London.	 I	was	put	 on	 to	 this	Dr.
Gaunt.	 He	 came	 down	 and	 has	 been	 here	 ever	 since.	 It	 seems	 that	 he’s	 a	 bit	 of	 a
spiritualist,	 and	 is	 rather	 keen	 on	 solving	 the	 mystery	 of	 the	 Lovell	 family	 curse,	 and
Tony’s	got	mixed	up	with	 the	whole	 cranky	business,	 and	 I’m	a	bit	worried	about	him.
That’s	all.”
She	laughed.
“That	doesn’t	sound	very	serious.	People	do	get	caught	up	in	these	things,	I	know.	A
girl	friend	of	mine	in	Bristol	did	once	—	séances,	and	all	that	sort	of	thing.	Very	creepy!
But	she	soon	got	tired	of	it.	I	expect	your	friend	will	too.”
“I	sincerely	hope	so,”	said	Hamilton,	and	meant	it.
They	said	no	more	about	the	matter	then,	but	went	on	chattering	happily	about	other
things.	About	a	mile	from	the	rectory,	however,	Valerie	gave	a	little	cry	of	pain	and	nearly
fell.	Hamilton	caught	her	in	a	moment,	and	she	stood	on	one	leg,	ruefully	looking	down	at
her	 left	 shoe.	She	had	 caught	 it	 between	 two	 stones	 in	 the	 rutty	 road,	 and	 the	heel	was
twisted	off.	He	knelt	down	in	the	dust	and	tried	to	put	it	back	again,	but	it	was	hopeless,
and	so	they	went	slowly	on,	she	clinging	to	his	arm.
He	found	it	very	pleasant	to	help	her	thus,	and	privately	blessed	the	unwitting	stones
which	had	caused	the	little	accident.	Her	slight	weight	on	his	arm	made	him	feel	large	and
heroic.	Mentally	he	called	himself	an	ass,	but	the	fact	was	undeniable.
As	they	approached	the	rectory	gate	she	suddenly	became	very	quiet,	and	seemed	to
press	closer	to	him	than	was	absolutely	necessary.	Wondering	what	happy	conclusion	he
could	deduce	from	this,	he	stopped,	and	held	the	gate	open	for	her.	Without	saying	a	word
she	released	his	arm	and	dived	her	hand	into	his	jacket	pocket.	Dumbly	he	submitted,	as
the	 truth	flashed	blindingly	across	his	mind,	and	watched	her	draw	out	 the	heavy	pistol,
whose	bulky	shape	she	had	felt	against	her	side.
For	a	long	moment	they	stood	there,	a	strange	little	tableau;	he	tense	and	expectant,
she	 facing	him,	 looking	down	at	 the	grim	object	 in	her	small	hands.	Then	she	shivered,
and	looked	up	at	him,	her	face	white;	and	he	took	the	gun	from	her.
“Are	 your	 articles	 so	 violent	 that	 you	 must	 needs	 go	 armed,	 Mr.	 Hamilton?”	 she
asked.
He	 did	 not	 reply,	 but	 still	 held	 the	 gate	 open	 for	 her.	 She	 passed	 through,	 and	 he
followed,	but	as	they	entered	the	house	she	spoke	again:
“Spiritualism,	you	said,	Mr.	Hamilton?”
He	could	find	no	words	to	answer	her.

Chapter	XIII	
I	
Next	morning	Hamilton	 received	 a	 note	 from	Lorrimer.	He	was	 sitting	 on	 a	 bench
outside	the	inn	enjoying	the	warm	sunshine	when	he	saw	the	man	Tregellis	climbing	the
steep	street	 towards	him.	He	got	up	and	went	 to	meet	him,	and	 the	other	 took	 the	 letter
from	his	pocket,	saying:
“From	Mr.	Lorrimer,	sir.”
The	message	was	brief,	and	ran	as	follows:
Mr.	Hamilton,	sir,
Sir	Anthony	and	the	others	returned	yesterday,	just	after	you	left.	They	did
not	 ask	 if	 you	 had	 been,	 so	 I	 suppose	 they	 did	 not	 know	 that	 you	 are	 in	 the
village.	They	all	went	down	to	the	crypt	last	night,	and	were	there	a	long	time.
Sir	 Anthony	 is	 much	 changed;	 you	 would	 scarcely	 know	 him,	 sir.	 I	 will
communicate	any	further	developments	at	once.
Hamilton	folded	the	note	thoughtfully	and	put	 it	 in	his	pocket,	 telling	Tregellis	 that
there	would	be	no	answer,	and	made	his	way	to	the	rectory.	He	could	see	no	other	course
than	 to	 wait	 from	 something	 to	 turn	 up,	 but	 he	 hated	 the	 inaction,	 and	 Tony	might	 be
inextricably	involved	while	he	sat	still	and	did	nothing.
He	found	the	rector	digging	in	the	front	garden	and	gave	him	the	note.	The	old	man
read	it	through	carefully	and	then	tore	it	into	small	fragments.
“It	 tells	 us	 very	 little,”	 said	 he.	 “You	 will	 observe	 that	 ‘Sir	 Anthony	 is	 much
changed’.	I	have	no	doubt	that	he	is	now	initiated,	and	realizes	to	what	he	has	committed
himself.	He	could	hardly	be	otherwise	than	changed,	poor	boy.	I	don’t	think	we	can	rely
upon	their	not	knowing	you	are	here.	If	they	are	as	clever	as	I	think	they	will	be	perfectly
well	aware	of	our	movements.	No,	we	can	do	nothing	at	present.	The	next	move	is	theirs.”
Hamilton	was	forced	to	agree,	and	the	rector	continued:
“I	think	you	had	better	go	and	speak	to	Valerie.	You	will	find	her	round	at	the	back
somewhere.	She	made	me	 tell	her	 the	whole	 story	 last	night	 after	you	had	gone.	 It	was
careless	of	you	to	leave	that	pistol	in	your	pocket,	but	perhaps	it	is	as	well	that	she	should
know.”
“How	did	she	take	it?”	Hamilton	asked	anxiously.
“Rather	badly	at	first,	I’m	sorry	to	say.	It	was	an	unpleasant	shock	for	her	—	she	did
not	suspect	that	such	things	happened	at	all;	but	she	is	better	now.	She	wants	to	see	you.”
Hamilton	left	him	and	walked	round	the	side	of	the	house.	When	he	came	to	the	lawn
at	the	back	he	saw	the	girl	sitting	on	a	garden	seat,	apparently	deep	in	thought,	for	she	did
not	look	up	as	he	approached.	Without	saying	anything	he	sat	down	beside	her	and	began
to	fill	his	pipe.	Presently	she	spoke,	not	looking	at	him,	but	staring	straight	in	front	of	her.
“Uncle	told	me	everything	last	night.”
“Yes,	I	know.”	Hamilton	struck	a	match.
“Oh,	how	can	you	sit	still,	smoking	your	pipe,	while	out	there	a	soul	is	being	ruined
for	ever?”	she	burst	out	with	surprising	vehemence.	“You’re	as	bad	as	Uncle.	‘Pray’,	he
says.	What	 good	will	 that	 do?	 It’s	—	 its’	 damnable!”	She	 finished	with	 a	 half-sob,	 and
suddenly	 burst	 into	 tears,	 burying	 her	 face	 in	 her	 hands.	 Hamilton	 felt	 an	 almost
uncontrollable	desire	to	take	her	in	his	arms	and	comfort	her,	but	he	merely	bit	his	pipe-
stem	hard	and	said	quietly:
“Your	uncle	is	right,	Miss	Bennett.	Things	are	rather	out	of	our	hands	now.	They	are
so	much	more	powerful	than	we	are;	we	can	do	nothing	against	them	in	our	own	strength.
But	God	will	help	us,	if	we	trust	Him.”
“Then	why	does	He	let	such	things	go	on	at	all?	I	never	knew	that	there	were	such
people	as	these	—	these	Satanists.”
“It’s	very	hard,	I	know,”	he	answered,	“but	don’t	you	see	that	it	explains	a	good	deal
of	 the	misery	and	horror	of	 this	world,	 that	 such	people	 as	 these	deliberately	 take	 sides
against	God,	and	help	to	bring	about	the	Devil’s	plans?”
“But	why	should	only	they	have	this	awful	power?	Why	shouldn’t	decent	people	be
able	to	fight	them	with	their	own	weapons?”
“I	 suppose	 because	 it’s	 easier	 to	 gain	 this	 power	 by	 submitting	 to	 the	Devil,”	 said
Hamilton	slowly.	He	was	not	very	sure	of	his	ground,	being	almost	as	new	to	this	as	she
was,	but	the	rector	had	tried	to	explain	to	him	also,	and	he	desperately	wanted	to	help	her
in	her	trouble.
“Great	saints	have	had	material	power,”	he	went	on,	“but	we	ordinary	people	would
probably	only	misuse	it	if	we	had	it,	so	God	doesn’t	let	us	have	the	chance.	The	Devil	is
only	too	ready	to	help	his	own.”
“I	 suppose	 that	must	be	 it”	—	she	 spoke	more	calmly	now	—	“but	 I	 can’t	bear	 to
think	of	that	poor	boy	all	alone	at	the	mercy	of	such	monsters.”
“Do	you	think	it	is	any	easier	for	me?”	he	asked.	“Tony	was	my	friend	—	you	have
not	 yet	 even	met	 him	—	 and	 since	 it	 was	 I	 who	was	 responsible	 in	 the	 first	 place	 for
Gaunt’s	coming	down	here,	I	feel	partly	to	blame	for	the	whole	affair.”
She	was	instantly	contrite.
“I’m	 so	 sorry	—	of	 course	 it’s	much	worse	 for	 you.	 I’d	 no	 idea	 you	 felt	 like	 that
about	it.	It	was	beastly	of	me	to	turn	and	rend	you.	Please	forgive	me!”
“With	all	my	heart,	Valerie.”
“Thank	you	—	John.”	She	glanced	sideways	at	him,	half-shyly,	as	she	used	his	name,
and	he	felt	a	sudden	glow	of	warmth	about	his	heart.
“Shall	we	try	and	forget	all	about	it	for	the	present?”	he	asked.	“Worrying	won’t	do
any	good	at	all;	we’ve	done	all	we	can;	the	rest	lies	with	God.”
“I’ll	do	my	best,”	she	answered,	“but	you	must	help	me,	John.”
“We’ll	help	each	other,	Valerie,”	said	he.
So	 began	 a	 very	 happy	 companionship,	 born	 not	 only	 of	 their	 mutual	 physical
attraction,	but	of	a	very	real	spiritual	need	which	both	felt.
The	weather	had	taken	a	turn	for	the	better,	and	during	the	next	week	they	spent	most
of	their	time	together,	out	of	doors.
They	 went	 for	 long	 walks	 over	 the	 bleak	 moors,	 peering	 fearfully	 down	 the
abandoned	mine-shafts	which	scarred	them,	and	exploring	the	ruined	engine-houses.	They
climbed	 the	 gaunt	 granite	 tors,	 and	 scrambled	 over	 the	 weird-shaped	 masses	 of	 rock,
finding	 sheltered	 crannies	 in	 which	 to	 unpack	 their	 picnic	 basket.	 They	 bathed	 from	 a
secluded	 cove	 a	mile	 or	 so	 north	 of	 Pentock,	where	 there	was	 a	 beach	 of	 firm,	 golden
sand,	and	the	sea	was	free	from	rocks.	Here	they	would	splash	about	in	the	clear,	shallow
water,	warm	 as	milk,	 or	 swim	 together	 out	 to	 sea	when	 the	 tide	was	 favourable.	 Then,
pleasantly	 tired	with	 the	exertion,	 they	would	dry	 in	 the	hot	sun,	 talking	sometimes,	but
more	 often	 silent	 in	 their	 perfect	 comradeship.	 At	 such	 times	 Valerie	 looked	 more
intoxicatingly	 lovely	 than	 ever,	with	 her	 dark	 curls	 lying	 damp	 about	 her	 face,	 and	 her
lithe	 body	 and	 slim	 legs,	 delicately	 tanned,	 set	 off	 to	 perfection	 by	 the	 white	 costume
which	she	wore.
Hamilton	knew	he	was	fast	falling	in	love	with	her,	and	he	was	content	that	it	should
be	so.	Whether	his	feelings	were	reciprocated	he	did	not	know,	but	 the	 light	 in	her	eyes
and	 the	 look	 on	 her	 face	 sometimes	 gave	 him	much	 cause	 for	 hope.	 And	 so	 the	 days
passed.
One	 morning	 Valerie	 said	 she	 would	 like	 to	 go	 for	 a	 sail.	 Hamilton	 doubted	 the
wisdom	of	this,	since	his	boating	experience	was	limited	to	yachting	on	the	Broads,	but	he
was	 long	 past	 denying	 her	 anything;	 so,	 without	 consulting	 the	 rector,	 they	 packed	 a
luncheon-basket	and	crept	out	like	two	naughty	children.	They	managed	to	hire	a	dinghy
down	at	the	harbour,	and	after	lengthy	instructions	from	the	boatman	about	the	tides	they
set	sail.	The	harbour	mouth	was	negotiated	successfully,	and	in	a	few	minutes	they	were
out	 in	 the	 open	 sea.	 There	 was	 a	 fresh	 breeze,	 and	 the	 sea	 was	 rather	 choppy,	 but	 by
avoiding	the	shore	and	keeping	well	out	Hamilton	thought	they	would	be	safe	enough.
He	set	his	course	for	the	north,	giving	Kestrel	a	wide	berth,	and	for	a	couple	of	hours
they	glided	along	happily.	The	only	other	boat	in	sight	was	a	coal-barge	—	from	Cardiff
he	 guessed,	 making	 for	 Portreath.	 Presently	 that	 disappeared,	 and	 they	 had	 the	 sea	 to
themselves;	the	distant	rocky	coast	on	their	right	and	Kestrel	behind	them.
Shortly	after	noon	they	opened	the	basket	and	had	lunch.	Then	Hamilton	lay	down	in
the	 bottom	 of	 the	 boat,	 one	 hand	 on	 the	 tiller,	 smoking	 his	 pipe	 and	 lazily	 watching
Valerie,	who	was	perched	in	the	bows;	a	delightful	picture	in	her	white	sweater	and	short
blue	skirt.	Overhead	two	seagulls	sailed	in	the	deep	blue,	their	wings	flashing	in	the	sun.	It
was	very	peaceful.
Then	the	wind	dropped.	For	a	while	they	waited	hopefully,	but	the	calm	continued,	so
Hamilton	lowered	the	empty	sail	and	got	out	the	oars.	They	were	perhaps	five	miles	from
Pentock,	and	he	was	settling	down	to	what	promised	to	be	a	long	and	tiresome	job,	when
the	wind	began	to	blow	again,	in	short	gusts,	from	the	land.
Shipping	 the	 oars,	 he	 hoisted	 the	 sail	 once	more,	 but	 soon	 found	 that	 tacking	was
well-nigh	 impossible,	 to	 one	 of	 his	 small	 skill,	 in	 such	 an	 uncertain	 and	 violent	 wind.
After	 twice	 going	within	 an	 ace	 of	 capsizing	 them	he	 gave	 it	 up,	 lowered	 the	 sail,	 and
began	to	row	again.
He	had	his	back	 to	 the	wind,	and	consequently	did	not	see	 the	great	bank	of	cloud
which	piled	swiftly	up,	but	the	girl	was	watching	it	intently,	and	when	it	finally	obscured
the	sun	she	voiced	the	apprehension	which	had	been	troubling	her.
“Are	we	in	for	a	storm,	John?”	she	asked	in	a	small	voice.
Hamilton	gave	one	swift	look	over	his	shoulder	and	went	on	pulling	harder	than	ever.
“Afraid	so,”	he	muttered.	“If	only	we	weren’t	so	far	out!”
As	he	spoke	great	drops	of	rain	began	splashing	on	to	the	boat,	and	in	the	heart	of	the
dark	cloud	overhead	there	was	a	little	violet	flicker,	followed	in	a	few	seconds	by	a	distant
rumble.	The	wind	increased,	and	began	lashing	the	grey	sea	to	fury.
Soon	Hamilton	drew	in	the	oars;	it	was	quite	hopeless	trying	to	row	in	the	welter	of
water	upon	which	 the	dinghy	 tossed.	He	crawled	over	 the	 thwarts	 to	where	Valerie	was
crouching	in	the	stern,	taking	the	tiller	from	her,	and	trying	to	keep	the	boat	head	on	to	the
gale.	Even	then	mountainous	waves	threatened	to	overwhelm	them	every	second.
The	 sky	 was	 now	 like	 ink,	 and	 the	 shore	 invisible	 through	 the	 driving	 rain.	 The
thunder	crashed	and	rolled,	while	the	lightning	flickered	incessantly.
Hamilton	put	his	free	arm	round	Valerie,	and	she	pressed	close	against	him.	He	could
feel	her	trembling	slightly,	but	her	voice	was	quite	steady	as	she	spoke	into	his	ear	above
the	tumult	of	the	storm.
“Do	you	think	we	shall	come	through,	John?”
He	nodded	vigorously,	saying	with	an	assurance	he	was	far	from	feeling:
“Of	course	we	shall	come	through.	This’ll	soon	blow	over.”
Then	he	had	to	leave	her	and	bail	out	the	water,	which	was	rapidly	filling	the	bottom
of	the	boat.
For	what	seemed	like	hours	they	kept	up	the	unequal	battle	with	the	elements.	They
lost	 all	 count	 of	 time,	 for	Hamilton’s	wrist-watch	 had	 stopped	 long	 ago,	 but	 at	 last	 the
darkness	became	absolute,	save	when	the	lightning	lit	up	the	waste	of	heaving	water	with
its	weird	blue	glare.	Night	had	fallen.
Soaked	 to	 the	 skin,	 shivering	 with	 cold	 and	 terror,	 they	 huddled	 together	 in	 the
bottom	of	the	boat.	A	cross-wave	had	carried	away	the	rudder,	and	they	were	at	the	mercy
of	the	wind.	Hamilton	cursed	himself	bitterly	for	ever	having	allowed	her	to	persuade	him
to	this	mad	adventure.	Unless	a	miracle	happened	they	were	lost.
A	 deeper	 roaring	 rose	 above	 the	 noise	 of	 the	wind	—	 a	 crashing,	 seething	 sound.
Breakers!	He	pulled	himself	up	to	the	level	of	the	gunwale	and	saw,	in	the	brief	blue	glare,
the	black	bulk	of	Kestrel,	with	the	Abbey	perched	atop,	hard	on	the	leeward	bow.	Nothing
could	save	 them	now,	he	 thought;	 they	were	 rushing	straight	 to	destruction	on	 the	cruel
rocks.	This	was	the	end!
Howling	like	a	demon,	the	wind	caught	the	boat	and	lifted	it	broadside	on	the	crest	of
a	 mighty	 wave.	 As	 they	 turned	 over	 he	 saw	 the	 welter	 of	 foam	 and	 the	 black	 rocks
beneath.
II	
“But,	Doctor,	you	know	I	don’t	like	these	anthropomorphic	ceremonies.”
Anthony	Lovell	was	the	speaker.	He	sat	facing	Dr.	Gaunt	in	front	of	the	roaring	fire
in	the	library.	Outside	the	wind	was	yelling	round	the	walls	of	Kestrel,	mingling	with	the
ceaseless	 roar	 of	 the	 surf	 at	 the	 foot	 of	 the	 cliffs.	 The	 resultant	 tumult	 penetrated	 the
Abbey	 to	 such	 an	 extent	 that	 the	 speakers	 had	 to	 raise	 their	 voices	 a	 little,	 and	 pause
altogether	when	the	thunder	shook	the	building	to	its	foundations.
“No,	 Tony,	 I	 know	 you	 don’t,”	 Gaunt	 answered,	 after	 one	 of	 these	 interruptions.
“Neither	do	I.	But	Vaughan	does.	I	suppose	it’s	a	survival	from	the	days	when	he	was	a
priest.	He	loves	ceremonial,	and	the	Black	Mass	particularly.”
“But	it	effects	nothing;	it	has	no	use.”
“Save	on	the	mind	of	the	celebrant	and	those	present.	It	is	true	that	a	great	adept	can
dispense	entirely	with	ceremonial	—	even	I	can	sometimes;	but	Vaughan	and	yourself	are
not	sufficiently	advanced	yet.”
“But	so	much	of	the	ritual	seems	quite	childish	and	fantastic.”
The	doctor	smiled.
“I	 know.	 So	 does	 all	 ritual.	 Even	 our	 little	 human	 acts	 and	 gestures	 by	which	we
express	our	emotions	—	love,	fear,	laughter,	and	so	on	—	are	quite	absurd	if	viewed	in	a
detached	 manner.	 But	 ritual	 is	 helpful.	 These	 time-honoured	 ceremonies	 of	 ours	 are
merely	a	means	by	which	we	focus,	and	concentrate	into	action,	all	 the	latent	powers	of
the	soul.”
“Yes,	Doctor,	 I	know	all	 that.	 It	 is	only	against	 this	pointless	Black	Mass	 that	I	am
protesting.”
“Well,	Tony,	Simon	believes	it	to	be	necessary	for	you	to	assist	him	at	it,	in	order	to
carry	on	with	our	work	of	banishing	the	curse-elemental	from	the	island.	After	all,	he	is	in
charge	of	the	job,	and	we	must	let	him	carry	it	out	in	his	own	way.	The	Mass	is	merely	a
rather	unpleasant	survival	of	our	great	rebellion	against	the	soul-destroying	bondage	of	the
Catholic	 religion,	 and	 Vaughan	 likes	 to	 use	 it	 as	 a	 means	 of	 reminding	 himself	 of	 his
escape	from	that	bondage.	We	must	humour	him,	Tony.”
“Very	well,	I’ll	do	it,	but	under	protest.	When	does	he	want	to	begin?”
“Tonight;	now,	I	fancy.	Shall	we	join	him?	He’s	down	below.”
They	rose	and	went	out	together.	As	they	entered	the	passage	leading	to	the	hall	the
kitchen	door	burst	open	and	Lorrimer	appeared,	clad	in	oilskins,	and	dripping	wet.
“What	on	earth’s	the	matter,	Lorrimer?”	asked	Tony.
Between	gasps,	for	he	had	just	run	up	the	stairway	from	the	harbour,	the	servant	told
him.
“Tom	and	I	were	 just	 letting	down	the	water-gate,	Sir	Anthony,	when	a	great	wave
carried	a	little	boat	clean	over.”
“Great	Scott!	Anybody	in	it?”
“Yes,	Sir	Anthony,	a	man	and	a	woman.	It	took	us	a	long	time	to	fish	them	out,	and
they	were	pretty	far	gone,	sir.	Tom’s	with	them	now.”
“Come	on,	Doctor!”	cried	Tony.	“We	must	lend	a	hand.”	He	followed	Lorrimer	into
the	kitchen	and	struggled	into	another	oilskin.	Gaunt	shrugged	his	shoulders	and	followed
also,	a	little	frown	of	annoyance	on	his	face.
“Bring	them	up	here,	gently,”	he	said.	“I’ll	wait	for	you.	Mrs.	Lorrimer,	hot	blankets
and	brandy,	please.”
Outside	 the	wind	was	 terrific,	 and	 it	was	 all	 Tony	 could	 do	 to	 keep	 his	 feet	 as	 he
stumbled	down	the	worn	steps	after	Lorrimer’s	torch.
Down	 on	 the	 landing-stage	 two	 bedraggled	 figures	 were	 stretched	 out	 near	 a
hurricane	lamp.	Tregellis	was	kneeling	astride	one	of	them,	applying	artificial	respiration.
Every	 few	 seconds	 a	 tremendous	 wave	 would	 burst	 in	 the	 harbour	 mouth,	 flinging	 a
shower	of	spray	over	the	group.
Tregellis	greeted	Lorrimer	with	a	shout.
“The	other’s	breathing	now;	this	one	isn’t.”
Motioning	him	to	help	Lorrimer,	Tony	took	over	the	seemingly	hopeless	task.	He	had
set	his	hands	upon	her	back,	and	was	hard	at	work,	before	he	 realized	 that	 it	was	a	girl
who	lay,	apparently	lifeless,	between	his	knees.	Lorrimer	and	Tregellis	picked	up	the	other
castaway	and	staggered	off	up	the	steps.
It	seemed	to	Tony	that	he	knelt	over	that	frail	body	for	hours,	pressing	and	relaxing	in
the	endless	effort	to	restart	the	water-logged	lungs.	The	noise	of	the	sea	was	frightful,	and
the	flickering	lightning	rendered	the	lamp	practically	useless,	so	dazzling	was	it.	Tregellis
had	 returned	 and	 had	 been	 standing	 beside	 him	 for	 some	 time	 when	 Tony	 was	 at	 last
rewarded	by	a	choking	sigh	as	the	girl	struggled	painfully	back	to	life.	He	staggered	to	his
feet,	numb	with	cold	and	almost	exhausted,	while	the	other	gathered	up	the	slight	figure.
Together	they	climbed	the	stairway,	Tony	lighting	the	way.
In	 the	 kitchen	 the	 doctor	 was	 kneeling	 beside	 the	 first	 patient,	 forcing	 brandy
between	 the	 blue	 lips.	 He	 got	 up	 when	 Tregellis	 entered	 carrying	 the	 girl,	 but	 was
forestalled	by	Mrs.	Lorrimer,	who	bustled	forward,	making	little	sounds	of	pity.	It	was	she
who	drove	them	all	out	save	the	doctor,	while	she	stripped	the	saturated	clothing	from	the
slim	body	and	wrapped	her	in	a	warm	blanket.
When	Tony	came	in	again	the	two	castaways	were	lying	side	by	side	in	front	of	the
great	range,	and	Gaunt	was	ministering	to	them	both.
“How	are	they,	Doctor?”	he	asked.
“They’ll	be	all	 right.	There’s	nothing	seriously	wrong	now	except	for	exposure	and
exhaustion.	You	undoubtedly	saved	the	girl’s	life,	though;	she	was	nearly	gone,	Tregellis
tells	me.”
“Good!”	said	Tony,	and	peered	closer	at	 the	faces	of	 the	couple.	He	uttered	a	great
cry,	and	sprang	erect.
“Why,	Doctor,	it’s	John	Hamilton!	You	remember	—?”
“Of	course	I	remember,”	Gaunt	replied	quietly,	“I	recognized	him	at	once.”
“But	what	an	extraordinary	thing	—	”
“Is	it,	Tony?	Nothing	is	extraordinary	in	this	fantastic	world.	I	might	have	anticipated
something	like	this.”
“What	do	you	mean,	Doctor?”
“Nothing.	Help	me	get	them	to	bed.	Mrs.	Lorrimer	is	preparing	two	rooms	over	here.
They	will	be	warmer	than	anywhere	else.”
So	 that	 night	 Hamilton	 and	 Valerie	 lay	 on	 Kestrel	 isle,	 in	 a	 deep	 coma	 of	 utter
exhaustion,	unaware	that	they	had	been	miraculously	saved	from	a	watery	grave.
*	*	*
When	Valerie	 awoke	 she	 found	 herself	 in	 a	 low,	 cosy	 room	with	 stone	 walls	 and
narrow,	uncurtained	windows,	and	a	cheerful	fire	making	dancing	patterns	on	the	ceiling.
A	grey	light	was	struggling	in	from	outside,	but	a	lamp	still	burnt	beside	the	bed.
She	looked	round	in	drowsy	wonder,	and	a	kind-faced,	grey-haired	woman	came	to
her	side,	carrying	a	great	bowl	of	soup.
“Drink	this,	my	dear,	and	don’t	talk.”
Valerie	 obeyed	 both	 commands,	 and	 lay	 back,	 feeling	 deliciously	 lazy,	 and	 far	 too
sleepy	to	think.	A	tall,	dark	man,	with	silver-streaked	hair	and	piercing	eyes,	came	in	and
sat	by	the	bedside,	feeling	her	pulse.	She	supposed	she	had	been	ill	and	that	this	was	the
doctor,	but	where	she	was	she	hadn’t	the	faintest	notion.	Then	the	doctor	told	her	to	go	to
sleep,	and	without	more	ado	she	did	so.
Gaunt	got	up	and	went	into	the	adjoining	room,	where	he	sat	down	beside	the	still-
sleeping	Hamilton,	gently	taking	the	young	man’s	hands	in	his.
For	a	long	time	he	sat	thus,	his	look	withdrawn	and	his	lips	moving	slightly.	Then	he
called	 to	Mrs.	Lorrimer,	who	 came	 in	with	 another	 bowl	 of	 soup.	Hamilton	 opened	his
eyes	and	sat	up,	staring	around.	He	recognized	 them	both,	and	remembered	 instantly	—
the	boat,	the	storm,	the	rocks	and	—
“Valerie!	Is	she	safe?”
“Quite	safe,	my	boy,”	answered	Gaunt,	“asleep	in	the	next	room.	Now	drink	this,	and
try	to	get	some	more	sleep.”
Reassured,	Hamilton	obediently	drank	his	soup,	and	was	soon	asleep	once	more.
The	doctor	went	back	to	Valerie,	and	repeated	the	process	he	had	performed	with	her
companion-in-distress,	holding	her	hands	and	whispering	softly,	his	glittering	eyes	fixed
upon	her	quiet	face.
When	 he	 joined	 his	 colleague	 Vaughan	 in	 the	 great	 hall	 he	 was	 smiling	 with
satisfaction.	The	other	noticed	this	at	once	and	asked:
“You	have	been	successful,	then?”
Gaunt	laughed	softly.
“Eminently	 so,	 my	 friend,”	 he	 said.	 “They	 knew	 a	 little,	 and	 suspected	—	much.
When	they	wake	again	they	will	know	nothing	and	suspect	less.	All	is	well.”
“Did	you	have	any	difficulty	with	Hamilton?”
“Very	 little.	He	was	so	exhausted	 that	 I	overcame	his	will	 almost	at	once.	The	girl
was	easy.”

Chapter	XIV	
When	Hamilton	woke	again	he	found	Tony	sitting	beside	him.	As	soon	as	he	opened
his	eyes	the	other	spoke.
“Well,	John,	feeling	better?”
Hamilton	stretched	luxuriously.
“I	feel	fine	now,	Tony,	thanks.	How	is	Valerie	—	Miss	Bennett?”
“The	girl	who	was	with	you?	She’d	doing	very	well.	Who	is	she,	John?”
“Niece	of	the	rector	at	Pentock.	An	awfully	nice	girl.”
“So	I	should	imagine.	How	on	earth	did	you	come	to	be	out	in	that	storm?”
Hamilton	related	the	story,	and	then	Tony	told	him	how	they	had	been	saved	from	the
deep.
“It’s	little	short	of	miraculous	that	you’re	here	at	all,	John,”	he	concluded.
“Yes.	And	we	owe	our	lives	to	you	and	your	servants,	Tony.	If	they	hadn’t	fished	us
out	of	the	harbour	we	should	certainly	have	been	drowned.	Is	the	storm	over	yet?”
Tony	went	 to	 the	window	and	 looked	out.	 It	was	 late	 afternoon,	but	 the	 sky	was	a
uniform	slate	colour,	and	the	gale	was	still	raging	furiously.	The	continuous	thunder	of	the
surf	could	be	plainly	heard.
“It’s	 still	 very	 rough,	 John,”	 said	 he.	 “I	 suppose	 you	want	 to	 get	 back	 as	 soon	 as
possible?”
“Yes,	or	at	least	to	get	a	message	to	Father	Bennett.”
“No	chance	of	that	yet,	I’m	afraid,”	answered	Tony.	“We	couldn’t	possibly	get	across
in	the	launch.	It	may	be	days	before	we	can	get	in	touch.	We’ve	been	cut	off	here	before
after	a	storm	like	yesterday’s.”
“That’s	 awkward.	 The	 rector	 will	 have	 given	 us	 up	 for	 lost.	 However,	 it	 can’t	 be
helped.	We	shall	have	to	trespass	still	further	on	your	hospitality	for	a	while,	that’s	all.”
“You’re	welcome	to	stay	as	long	as	you	like,	John.	Now	I	must	be	off.	You	mustn’t
talk	too	much	yet.”
After	the	door	had	closed	behind	his	friend	Hamilton	lay	thinking	how	fortunate	they
were	to	have	fallen	into	such	good	hands.	For	a	moment	a	vague	recollection	of	something
unpleasant	that	he	had	read	or	heard	—	he	couldn’t	be	sure	which	—	about	Kestrel	rose	in
his	mind,	but	he	dismissed	it	at	once.	It	was	very	good	to	lie	here,	warm	and	comfortable,
after	 the	hell	of	 the	previous	night,	watching	 the	cheerful	glow	of	 the	fire,	and	knowing
that	Valerie	was	safe	in	the	next	room.
At	about	the	same	hour	Valerie	also	woke	to	find	Mrs.	Lorrimer	still	with	her.	At	first
she	was	 just	as	puzzled	as	on	 the	occasion	of	her	 first	awakening,	and	asked	where	she
was.
Mrs.	Lorrimer	put	down	her	sewing	and	turned	towards	her.
“Ah,	 so,	 you’re	 awake	 now,	 my	 dear,”	 she	 said.	 “Don’t	 worry,	 you’re	 quite	 safe.
You’re	on	Kestrel	Island;	my	husband	helped	pull	you	and	Mr.	Hamilton	out	of	the	sea	last
night.”
Recollection	came	back	with	a	rush,	and	the	girl’s	face	whitened.
“John	—	is	he	safe?”	she	breathed.
“Yes,	my	dear.	Quite	 safe	 and	 sound.	You’re	both	very	 fortunate	 to	be	 alive	 at	 all.
You	were	in	God’s	hands	last	night.”
Valerie	lay	and	contemplated	the	wonder	of	it.	They	were	safe,	and	here	she	was,	on
Kestrel	Island,	actually	within	the	walls	of	the	Abbey,	that	fairy	castle	of	romance	which
she	had	so	often	gazed	at	longingly	from	the	mainland.	It	was	almost	too	good	to	be	true.
“Is	old	Sir	Anthony	here?”	she	asked.
“No,	my	dear;	he’s	dead	now,	you	know,	and	his	son	is	master	of	Kestrel.”
“Yes,	of	course.	How	silly	of	me!	John’s	friend	—	I	had	forgotten.”
It	was	not	the	only	thing	she	had	forgotten,	for	all	memory	of	the	dark	mystery	which
surrounded	Tony	and	his	associates	had	been	blotted	out	of	her	mind,	as	out	of	Hamilton’s,
by	the	iron	will	of	Dr.	Gaunt.
Presently	 there	came	a	knock	at	 the	door,	and	Tony’s	voice	was	heard	asking	 if	he
might	come	 in.	Mrs.	Lorrimer	 looked	 inquiringly	at	Valerie,	who	nodded	shyly,	and	she
bade	him	enter.
Half	 diffidently	 he	 opened	 the	 door	 and	 approached	 the	 bed.	While	 he	was	 asking
how	she	was	—	and	she	was	thanking	him	prettily	for	his	hospitality	—	she	was	thinking:
“So	this	is	John’s	friend…	now	nice!”
“I’ve	just	been	with	John,”	he	went	on.	“He’s	awake	and	feeling	very	fit.	I	expect	the
doctor	will	let	you	both	get	up	tomorrow.”
When	he	had	gone	Mrs.	Lorrimer	 told	her	how	he	had	battled	with	death	over	her
unconscious	body,	and	she	was	filled	with	a	great	tenderness	towards	the	young	man.
Dr.	 Gaunt	 was	 the	 next	 visitor,	 and	 expressed	 himself	 much	 pleased	 with	 their
condition.
Downstairs	he	confirmed	Tony’s	guess	that	they	might	get	up	the	following	morning.
Tony	was	highly	delighted	and	remarked	that	he	didn’t	mind	how	long	they	had	to	stay.	To
Gaunt’s	suggestion	that	 they	should	carry	on	with	the	interrupted	ceremony	of	last	night
he	made	an	impatient	reply.
“No,	 Doctor,	 that	 can	 wait	 until	 they’ve	 gone.	 There’s	 plenty	 of	 time	 before	 the
twenty-fifth.	She’s	very	lovely,	isn’t	she?”
The	other	nodded	and	turned	his	head	away,	so	that	Tony	should	not	see	the	frown	of
annoyance	he	could	not	suppress.	This	delay	was	not	at	all	to	his	liking.
He	 said	 as	much	 to	 Vaughan	when	 next	 they	were	 alone,	 but	 that	 gentleman	was
inclined	to	agree	with	Tony	that	they	had	better	wait.
Next	morning	the	whole	party	met	at	the	breakfast-table.	Mrs.	Lorrimer	had	dried	and
pressed	Valerie’s	 clothes,	 and	 she	 looked	 very	 charming.	 Tony,	 in	 particular,	 could	 not
keep	his	eyes	off	her.	Hamilton,	in	a	suit	of	Tony’s,	which	did	not	fit	him	very	well,	was
quite	 left	out	of	 the	conversation	which	they	kept	up	and	was	forced	to	fall	back	on	Dr.
Gaunt.	Vaughan,	after	the	first	introductions,	said	little,	but	he	too	kept	turning	his	sleepy
eyes	in	Valerie’s	direction.
After	the	meal	Tony	bore	Valerie	off	to	show	her	the	Abbey,	and	Hamilton	went	with
the	 others	 to	 the	 great	 hall,	 where	 they	 sat	 round	 the	 cavernous	 hearth	 smoking	 and
talking.	He	 found	 them	delightful	 company,	 and	 time	 passed	 quickly.	Outside	 the	wind
still	roared	with	scarcely	abated	vigour,	and	with	the	dull	pounding	of	the	waves	made	a
continual	background	to	their	conversation.
When	 the	 two	 young	 people	 joined	 them	 the	 girl’s	 face	was	 flushed,	 and	 her	 eyes
were	shining	with	excitement.
“Oh,	John,”	she	exclaimed,	“isn’t	this	a	marvelous	place?	You	are	lucky,	Tony,	to	be
able	to	stay	here	whenever	you	want	to.”
Hamilton	 noticed	 the	 “Tony”	 with	 a	 little	 pang	 of	 jealousy,	 but	 immediately
reproached	himself	for	the	thought.	He	told	himself	he	should	be	glad	that	she	was	getting
on	so	well	with	his	friend.
“It’s	all	so	ancient	and	splendid,	somehow,”	she	went	on.	“But	tell	me,	surely	there’s
some	legend	about	a	ghost	or	something,	isn’t	there?”
Tony	flashed	a	quick	look	at	Gaunt,	who	nodded	slightly.
“Well,	we’ve	no	real	ghosts,	as	far	as	I	know,”	he	answered.	“But	I	suppose	you	are
thinking	of	the	family	curse.	It	is	said	to	have	taken	the	form	of	a	monster	which	inhabits
the	caves	under	the	Abbey.”
Valerie	clapped	her	hands	delightedly.
“Oh,	how	perfectly	splendid!”	she	cried.	“It	only	wanted	that	to	make	it	quite	perfect.
Have	you	ever	seen	it,	Tony?”
“No,”	he	answered	slowly,	“I	can’t	say	I	have.	But	you	must	ask	Vaughan	about	that.
He	knows	all	about	these	things,	and	he’s	actually	come	down	here	to	investigate	it.”
“Really,	Mr.	Vaughan?”	She	turned	to	him,	her	big	grey	eyes	suddenly	serious.	“Are
you	one	of	those	psychic	research	people?”
Vaughan	gave	a	fat	chuckle,	and	removed	his	cheroot.
“Only	 an	 amateur,	Miss	 Bennett,”	 said	 he.	 “I’ve	 studied	 these	matters	 quite	 a	 lot,
though,	and	I	may	say	that	I	hope	to	expel	the	curse	in	time.”
“Oh,	 but	 you	 mustn’t!	 Or	 at	 least,	 if	 you	 do,	 don’t	 tell	 anyone	 it’s	 gone.	 All	 old
houses	must	have	their	family	ghost,	you	know.”
“I	think	you	could	do	without	yours,	eh,	Tony?”	Vaughan’s	thick	voice	was	quizzical.
“Yes,	I	think	I	could,”	Tony	replied	quietly.
“Have	you	seen	it,	then,	Mr.	Vaughan?”	Valerie	demanded.
“Once,	Miss	Bennett.	But	 I’d	 rather	not	 talk	 about	 it,	 if	 you	don’t	mind.	 It’s	 not	 a
very	pleasant	subject.”
“But	how	are	you	going	 to	get	 rid	of	 it?”	she	 insisted.	“I	mean	 it’s	not	 like	rats,	or
dry-rot,	or	anything,	is	it?”
“I	am	making	my	preparations.	I	shall	be	delighted	to	show	them	to	you	some	time.”
“Where	are	they?”
“Down	in	the	crypt	below	here.”
“I	should	be	frightfully	scared.”	She	shivered.	“But	it’s	most	awfully	thrilling,	isn’t	it,
John?	Let’s	all	go	down,	this	afternoon.”
“Very	well,	Miss	Bennett,	 if	 you	wish	 it,”	 said	Vaughan,	 and	 adroitly	 changed	 the
subject.
But	Valerie	did	not	forget	the	promise,	and	after	lunch	they	all	descended	to	the	crypt.
Hamilton	 was	 surprised	 to	 find	 how	 familiar	 it	 all	 seemed,	 since	 he	 could	 not
remember	ever	having	been	down	there	before.
Valerie	was	vastly	intrigued	by	the	elaborate	diagram,	upon	which	they	walked	quite
freely,	and	by	 the	seals	on	 the	altar.	Vaughan	explained	 them	 to	her	 in	a	vague	manner,
using	terms	with	which	she	was	unfamiliar,	and	finally	she	gave	up	the	effort	of	following
him	 and	 confessed	 that	 it	was	 too	 deep	 for	 her.	 She	 asked	 if	 they	 could	 go	 on	 into	 the
caverns	beneath,	but	Vaughan	promptly	quashed	the	suggestion	with	a	vivid	account	of	the
dangers	of	falling	rocks	and	hidden	pitfalls.
In	the	evening	they	played	bridge,	while	Vaughan	sat	reading,	and	all	retired	early	to
bed,	 the	 two	 castaways	 keeping	 their	 original	 rooms	 to	 avoid	 troubling	Mrs.	 Lorrimer
unduly.
As	Hamilton	was	 climbing	 into	 bed	 there	 came	 a	 knock	 at	 his	 door,	 and	Lorrimer
entered.
“Pardon	the	intrusion,	sir,”	he	said,	“but	I’ve	been	trying	to	speak	to	you	all	day,	and
this	is	the	first	chance	I’ve	had	to	see	you	alone.”
Hamilton	stared	at	him.	What	on	earth	did	the	fellow	want?
“I’m	very	glad	you’re	here,	sir,”	the	other	continued;	“Sir	Anthony	is	quite	a	different
man	since	you	came.	You	got	my	note	all	right,	sir?”
“What	note?	What	are	you	talking	about,	man?”
Lorrimer	was	amazed.
“The	note	about	Sir	Anthony,	 sir,	 and	his	 friends	 that	you	asked	me	 to	write	when
you	came	over	to	find	out	what	was	going	on.	You	agreed	with	me	at	the	time,	sir,	that	he
was	not	keeping	good	company.”
“I’m	not	in	the	habit	of	discussing	my	friend’s	affairs	with	their	servants,	Lorrimer,”
said	Hamilton	indignantly.	“That	will	be	all,	thank	you.”
The	old	man	stared	at	him,	hurt	astonishment	written	large	upon	his	face.	He	bowed,
saying:
“I’m	very	sorry,	sir,	if	I’ve	spoken	out	of	place.	Good	night,	sir.”
After	he	had	gone	Hamilton	lit	his	pipe	and	smoked	awhile,	deep	in	 thought.	What
had	 the	man	 been	 driving	 at?	Did	 he	mean	Gaunt	 and	Vaughan?	Surely	 not;	 they	were
charming	fellows,	both.	He	remembered	his	first	visit	to	the	island,	and	why	he	had	left,
well	 enough;	 but	 the	 second	 visit,	 and	 all	 that	 he	 had	 learnt	 from	 the	 rector,	 were
completely	forgotten.	He	supposed	that	Tony	was	still	going	on	with	his	new	studies,	and
hoped	that	he	was	progressing	favourably.	Certainly	he	looked	very	well,	and	his	face	had
acquired	far	more	character	than	it	had	had	in	the	old	days.	Still	puzzling	over	Lorrimer’s
ambiguity,	he	fell	asleep.
In	a	room	not	very	far	away	Lorrimer	was	talking	to	his	wife.
“Stared	at	me	quite	blank,	he	did,	 as	 if	 I	was	 a	piece	of	dirt,	 and	 then	ordered	me
out.”
“Don’t	 take	 it	 to	 heart,	 James,”	 she	 consoled	 him.	 “He	 may	 be	 acting	 a	 part.	 Or
else…”
“What?”
“They	have	been	getting	at	him	too.”
“God	help	us	if	they	have!”
“He	will,	James,	never	fear.”
*	*	*
Valerie	had	a	strange	dream	that	night:	she	dreamed	she	was	 in	an	endless	winding
passage,	cut	out	of	 the	solid	 rock,	whose	walls	dripped	with	slime	and	were	 rotten	with
luminous	 fungi.	 She	 dreamed,	 moreover,	 that	 something	 abominable	 was	 pursuing	 her,
some	nightmare	creature	that	slithered	along	the	rocky	floor	at	lightning	speed.	She	tried
to	run,	but	her	feet	were	like	lead;	she	could	only	drag	them	painfully,	a	few	inches	at	a
time.	She	opened	her	mouth	to	scream,	but	her	throat	dried	up,	and	her	tongue	refused	its
office.	Half	crazed	with	 terror,	she	 looked	behind	her	 to	see	 the	horror	assume	the	form
and	features	of	Simon	Vaughan.	The	sensual	lips	leered	wickedly	at	her,	the	podgy	hands
outstretched	 to	 clutch.	 Then	 Anthony	 Lovell	 caught	 her	 in	 his	 arms,	 and	 the	 pursuer
vanished.	She	 clung	 to	 her	 rescuer,	 sobbing	 incoherently,	while	 he	 stroked	her	 hair	 and
whispered	 endearments	 to	 her.	 Presently	 she	 became	 calm;	 he	 kissed	 her	 lips,	 and	 she
found	his	kisses	strangely	sweet.
When	she	woke	the	narrow	windows	of	her	room	still	framed	only	darkness,	but	the
dying	fire	lit	the	room	with	a	warm	glow.	The	impression	that	Tony	was	still	near	her	was
so	strong	that	she	sat	up,	staring	round,	but	the	room	was	empty	save	for	herself.	Smiling
sleepily	at	her	own	foolishness,	she	lay	down	and	slept	dreamlessly	till	dawn.
But	 in	his	 distant	 room	Tony	 lay	on	his	back,	 staring	wide-eyed	 into	 the	darkness.
Using	the	powers	which	he	now	possessed,	he	had	deliberately	projected	himself	into	her
dreams,	but	the	vision	had	been	brief	and	unsatisfying.
Ever	since	he	had	dragged	her	back	from	the	 jaws	of	death	 two	nights	ago,	he	had
known	that	there	was	no	other	woman	in	the	world	for	him,	and	he	was	greatly	troubled.
He	could	see	quite	plainly	that	Hamilton	loved	her,	but	whether	she	returned	his	friend’s
love	he	could	not	tell.	He	wanted	her	desperately,	and	for	the	first	time	since	he	had	begun
this	new	life	of	his	he	began	to	wonder	whether	it	were	everything	that	he	had	imagined.
He	possessed	 the	power,	he	knew,	 to	 subject	her	 to	his	will	 and	 to	bring	her,	 even
now,	to	him;	but	his	soul	revolted	from	the	thought	of	making	her	an	unwilling	victim	to
his	desire.	She	must	come	willingly,	or	not	at	all.	But	the	temptation	was	great,	and	he	lay
wrestling	with	it	until	the	first	grey	light	of	dawn,	when	at	last	he	fell	asleep,	worn	out	by
his	struggle,	but	so	far	victorious.
*	*	*
The	next	day	passed	very	much	like	its	predecessor.	The	storm	had	abated	somewhat,
but	the	sea	was	still	far	too	rough	to	attempt	the	crossing.
In	the	afternoon	Hamilton,	Valerie,	and	Tony	went	for	a	scramble	across	the	island,
laughing	breathlessly	as	they	struggled	over	the	uneven	ground	in	the	teeth	of	the	gale.
While	they	were	gone	Gaunt	and	Vaughan	held	a	council	of	war.
“I	 am	greatly	 troubled,	 Simon,”	 announced	 the	 doctor.	 “There	 is	 but	 a	week	 to	 go
before	the	anniversary,	and	he	has	not	yet	assisted	at	the	Mass.”
“The	girl,	Doctor.”
“Precisely.	She	is	affecting	his	whole	outlook	on	the	situation.	From	being	his	whole
life,	it	has	become	quite	secondary.	He	has	fallen	in	love	with	her.”
“She	must	be	removed.”
“Yes,	and	not	only	from	this	island,	but	from	his	life	altogether.	Since	she	will	stay	at
Pentock	with	her	uncle	when	she	leaves	us,	she	must	be	destroyed	utterly.”
“How?”	Vaughan	leaned	forward,	his	coarse	face	ablaze	with	eagerness.
Gaunt	placed	his	fingertips	carefully	together	and	replied	in	measured	tones:
“I	propose	to	work	upon	her	expressed	desire	to	visit	the	caves	beneath	the	crypt,	and
to	send	her	down	there,	tonight,	alone.	The	monstrosity	will	make	short	work	of	her,	and
no	one	will	be	the	wiser.”
“Could	I	not	have	her	first,	Doctor?”	Vaughan	passed	the	tip	of	his	tongue	over	his
thick	red	lips.	“Her	naked	body	would	be	a	most	suitable	adornment	for	the	altar.”
“No!”	 said	 Gaunt	 curtly.	 “We	 have	 no	 time	 for	 such	 frivolities.	 It	 must	 be	 done
quickly.”
A	shade	of	disappointment	passed	over	the	other’s	face.
“Very	well,	Doctor,”	he	sighed.	“At	what	hour?”
“At	1	a.m.	tomorrow.	You	will	be	ready?”
“Yes,	Doctor,	I	will	be	ready.”
And	so	it	came	about	that,	when	Valerie	had	been	in	bed	and	asleep	for	a	couple	of
hours,	she	awoke	with	one	consuming	idea	in	her	mind:	to	see	for	herself	what	lay	beneath
the	altar	in	the	crypt.
She	got	up	and	slipped	on	the	heavy	woolen	dressing-gown	which	Mrs.	Lorrimer	had
lent	her,	thrusting	her	feet	into	a	pair	of	slippers.	Lighting	the	oil-lamp	which	stood	by	her
bed,	she	took	it	up	and	went	silently	out,	down	the	staircase	to	the	warm	kitchen	and	along
the	cold	passage	 to	 the	great	hall.	The	 fact	 that	 the	 stone	 trap	which	gave	access	 to	 the
crypt	stood	open	did	not	appear	 to	surprise	her	unduly,	and	she	made	her	way	down	the
spiral	stairs.	There	was	no	fear	in	her	heart,	no	foreboding	of	the	frightful	danger	she	was
walking	into,	but	only	that	one	burning	desire	which	dominated	her	whole	being	and	must
be	fulfilled.
With	 unerring	 steps	 she	went	 straight	 to	 the	 altar.	 The	 seals	were	 broken,	 and	 the
upper	slab	stood	on	end.	She	went	up	the	low	steps,	set	her	lamp	on	the	broad	edge	of	the
altar-side,	 and	 climbed	 lithely	 over.	 Taking	 up	 the	 lamp	 once	 more,	 she	 fearlessly
descended	the	steps	within.
When	the	last	faint	reflection	of	her	lamp	was	gone	Gaunt	and	his	colleague	emerged
from	 their	 hiding-place	 behind	 one	 of	 the	 near-by	 pillars,	 lowered	 the	 altar-stone	 into
place,	 and,	 without	 a	 word,	 returned	 to	 the	 doctor’s	 room.	 There	 on	 the	 table	 Gaunt’s
crystal	 stood	 ready,	 and	 they	 sat	 down,	 one	 on	 either	 side.	 Gazing	 into	 its	 opalescent
depths,	they	followed	Valerie’s	progress	through	the	caves.
The	girl	was	walking	cautiously	along,	holding	the	lamp	in	her	left	hand	and	with	her
right	drawing	her	gown	close	about	her,	for	the	air	was	bitterly	cold.	Her	eyes	were	fixed
on	the	uneven	floor.	She	did	not	hesitate	at	the	division	of	the	tunnel,	but	turned	to	the	left
and	went	 boldly	 on.	As	 she	 penetrated	 deeper,	 so	 the	 cold	 grew	more	 intense,	 and	 the
peculiar	odour	which	she	had	noticed	from	the	first	grew	stronger;	but	still	she	went	on,
driven	by	the	will	behind	those	glittering	eyes	which	stared	unwinkingly	into	the	crystal	as
they	watched	her	fatal	progress.
She	was	approaching	the	bend	which	came	before	the	opening	into	the	great	cavern
when	she	encountered	a	wave	of	cold	so	intense	that	she	stopped	involuntarily,	gasping	for
breath.	So	violent	was	the	shock	that	her	numbed	fingers	loosed	their	hold	upon	the	lamp
and	it	fell	to	the	ground,	smashing	into	fragments	and	plunging	her	into	total	darkness.
As	 this	 catastrophe	 occurred	 the	 spell	 which	 had	 held	 her	 was	 broken,	 and	 she
regained	full	possession	of	her	faculties.	She	realized	at	once	where	she	was,	for	she	could
remember	 her	 journey	 thither	with	perfect	 clarity,	 though	what	 had	made	her	 undertake
such	 a	 foolhardy	 expedition	 she	 was	 at	 a	 loss	 to	 understand.	 Even	 then	 she	 was	 not
particularly	 frightened,	 for	her	upbringing	had	 left	her	 singularly	 free	 from	superstitious
fears.	And,	merely	wondering	if	she	would	ever	be	able	to	find	her	way	back	in	the	dark,
she	began	to	retrace	her	steps,	feeling	her	way	along	the	slippery	wall.
The	watchers	looked	at	each	other.
“She	is	not	afraid,”	Vaughan	whispered,	incredulous	wonder	in	his	heart.	“It	cannot
feel	her	presence	if	she	is	not	afraid…	She	will	escape.”
“No!”	Gaunt	 fairly	 spat	 out	 the	monosyllable	 and	 bent	 his	 gaze	 once	more	 on	 the
crystal.
Instantly	Valerie’s	eyes	were	opened	and	she	remembered	all	 that	she	had	forgotten
about	 Kestrel,	 all	 that	 Gaunt	 had	 made	 her	 forget	 and	 which	 he	 now	 willed	 her	 to
remember.	She	realized	that	she	and	Hamilton	were	in	the	very	stronghold	of	the	Satanists;
sleeping	under	the	same	roof,	breaking	bread,	laughing	and	talking	with	the	forgotten	of
God,	 the	 Devil-worshipers,	 the	 accursed.	 She	 remembered	 that	 this	 island	 was	 under
interdict,	bereft	of	grace;	that	for	four	centuries	the	sacraments	had	been	absent	from	this
soil;	 and	 that	 in	 the	 bowels	 of	 the	Abbey	 rock,	where	 she	 now	 stood,	 a	 horror	 of	 great
darkness	dwelt.	With	a	 little	broken	cry	she	sank	 to	 the	ground	and	huddled	against	 the
wall,	praying	frantically	for	help.
But	no	help	came.	Instead	the	solid	rock	began	to	quake,	and	a	faint	greenish	glow	lit
up	 the	 tunnel.	Through	her	closed	eyelids	she	saw	the	hellish	radiance,	and	 twisting	her
head	beheld	with	starting	eyes	the	monstrous	Thing	which	was	crawling	up	behind	her.	Lit
with	its	own	horrid	light	it	came,	a	living	stream	of	putrefaction,	a	tidal	wave	of	darkness,
filling	the	tunnel	from	wall	to	wall,	writhing	and	quivering	with	abominable	purpose.
Had	she	stayed	and	faced	it,	calling	upon	God	for	help,	it	is	impossible	to	say	what
the	 outcome	would	 have	 been,	 but	 it	was	more	 than	mortal	 flesh	 could	 bear.	With	 one
shriek	of	pure	 terror	she	was	on	her	feet	and	flying	headlong	up	the	passage.	It	was	her
dream	come	true.
Twice	 she	 caught	 her	 foot	 on	 the	 boulder-strewn	 floor	 and	 fell	 headlong,	 but	 each
time	she	struggled	up,	numb	with	fear	and	regardless	of	her	bruises.
When	she	reached	the	foot	of	the	steps	leading	up	to	the	crypt	she	was	on	the	verge
of	collapse,	her	breath	sobbing	 in	her	 throat	and	her	heart	pounding	chokingly,	but	with
renewed	hope	she	dragged	herself	up	towards	safety.
The	altar-stone	was	down.	She	was	trapped!
At	the	foot	of	the	steps	the	horror	was	surging,	swelling	and	crawling	up.	As	it	came,
so	 the	 awful	 Personality	 which	 dwelt	 in	 the	 veil	 of	 darkness	 which	 was	 its	 substance
mocked	at	her	helplessness.
Frantically	she	beat	upon	the	cruel,	unyielding	stone	above	her,	until	her	little	hands
were	bleeding.	Then	at	last	her	strength	failed	utterly	and	she	fell	senseless	on	the	upper
step.
Nicholas	Gaunt	rose	from	his	chair	and	flung	a	velvet	cloth	over	the	crystal.
“That,	 I	 think,	 is	 that,	 my	 friend,”	 he	 said	 calmly,	 but	 his	 voice	 exulted	 despite
himself.
Simon	Vaughan	sat	huddled	up,	his	hands	locked	together,	his	features	rigid.	A	thin
stream	of	saliva	ran	down	his	chin.	When	he	raised	his	great	head	there	was	horror	in	his
eyes.
“She	was	so	beautiful,”	he	said	dully.
Gaunt	 laughed	 harshly,	 flinging	 himself	 upon	 the	 bed,	 and	 drew	 out	 his	 cigarette-
case.

Chapter	XV	
When	Tony	went	to	bed	that	night	his	spirit	was	in	a	turmoil.	He	thought	that	once	or
twice	during	the	day	Valerie	had	looked	at	him	with	something	more	than	mere	friendship
in	her	lovely	eyes.	He	scarcely	dared	to	hope,	but	the	thought	that	she	might	conceivably
return	his	love	well-nigh	intoxicated	him.
She	filled	his	mind	utterly	now.	Everything	else	took	second	place:	the	great	work	he
was	engaged	upon,	the	new	philosophy	of	life	he	had	accepted	—	all	became	dream-like
and	unreal.	Was	it	indeed	he,	he	asked	himself	incredulously,	who	had	stood	in	that	secret
temple	 in	 far-off	 London,	 vowing	 to	 serve	 none	 other	 than	 the	 powers	 of	 darkness?	 It
could	 not	 be.	 A	 slender,	 grey-eyed	 girl	 had	 come	 into	 his	 life,	 and	 at	 one	 touch	 had
dispelled	the	murky	shadows	which	clouded	it.	Her,	and	her	only,	would	he	serve…	and
she	was	light,	not	darkness.
Before	going	to	sleep	he	toyed	for	a	moment	with	the	idea	of	visiting	her	in	dream	as
he	 had	 done	 before,	 but	 he	 dismissed	 the	 thought	 as	 unworthy.	 Rigidly	 composing	 his
mind,	he	fell	into	a	troubled	slumber.
Some	hours	later	he	awoke	suddenly	and	sat	bolt	upright,	staring	into	the	darkness.
Was	 it	 imagination,	 born	 of	 his	 anxious	 love,	 or	 had	 he	 indeed	 heard	 Valerie’s	 voice
calling	for	help	in	accents	of	desperate	terror?
His	heart	beat	thunderously	in	his	ears,	and	he	trembled	in	every	limb,	but,	steeling
his	will,	he	thrust	his	mind	out	from	him	into	the	night,	feeling	for	her	whereabouts.	Her
room	was	empty.	Where	was	 she?	Desperately	he	cast	 around,	using	every	 trick	he	had
learnt	from	Gaunt.	Then	he	saw.
With	a	smothered	cry	he	leapt	out	of	bed,	snatched	up	his	torch,	tore	open	the	door,
and	rushed	headlong	towards	the	staircase.	Down	the	stairs	he	flew,	his	bare	feet	padding
on	the	stones.	A	moment’s	struggle	with	the	trap	and	he	was	winding	down	the	spiral	into
the	crypt.	Darting	between	the	squat	pillars,	his	 torch	throwing	a	brilliant	splash	of	 light
before	him,	he	reached	the	altar.	Precious	seconds	were	wasted	struggling	with	the	hidden
catch	that	secured	the	top,	but	soon	he	swung	it	upwards	on	its	balanced	pivot	and	flashed
his	lamp	within.
There	she	lay,	a	pitiful	little	figure,	one	bare	arm	flung	over	her	face,	while	one	step
below	her	the	tide	of	annihilation	writhed	and	crawled.
Too	late	to	reach	her.	For	perhaps	one	second	his	mind	balked	and	his	heart	stopped
beating.	Let	that	dark	horror	but	touch	her	for	an	instant	and	she	was	lost	for	ever.
In	that	dreadful	moment	his	mind	turned	instinctively	to	the	only	god	he	knew	—	the
Lord	 of	Darkness	—	 and	 as	 the	wordless	 prayer	was	 uttered	 power	 surged	 through	 his
body,	hanging	limp	over	the	altar-side.	This	monstrosity	which	threatened	the	very	soul	of
the	girl	he	loved	was	his,	bound	to	his	family	by	ties	centuries	old;	his	to	command.
His	 lips	 parted	 and	 from	 them	 flowed	 the	 words	 of	 power	—	 phrases	 he	 had	 not
known	he	knew,	rising	from	some	forgotten	ancestral	memory.	The	very	air	 throbbed	as
the	mighty	syllables	crashed	through	it.
The	tide	was	stayed.	Slowly,	reluctantly,	the	loathsome	thing	sank	back,	step	by	step,
quivering	with	baffled	rage.
Instantly	Tony	was	over	the	altar-side,	had	gathered	Valerie	in	his	arms,	and	was	back
again	in	safety.	He	laid	her	gently	down	and	lowered	the	altar-stone.	As	the	catch	clicked
into	place,	so	the	tension	which	had	upheld	him	during	those	awful	moments	was	released,
and	he	sank	down	beside	the	girl,	trembling	violently,	and	gripped	by	a	dreadful	nausea.
When	he	had	recovered	somewhat	he	 turned	 to	 the	girl	and	gently	 raised	her	head.
She	opened	her	eyes,	dark	with	terror,	and	looked	up	at	him.	His	torch,	still	burning,	lay
near	by,	and	she	could	see	his	 troubled	 face	plainly	 in	 the	dim	 light.	As	she	 recognized
him,	so	the	horror	in	her	eyes	faded,	and	tears	came	in	its	stead.	Her	arms	crept	about	his
neck	and	he	bent	his	head	and	kissed	her	gently	on	the	lips.	She	clung	to	him,	crying	softly
like	a	child	that	has	been	badly	frightened	and	finds	refuge	in	its	mother’s	arms.
At	 last	 she	grew	quiet,	 and,	holding	his	 torch	with	difficulty,	he	picked	her	up	and
carried	her	back	to	the	great	hall.	All	was	still	—	there	seemed	to	be	no	one	else	awake	in
the	building	—	so	he	took	her	to	her	own	room	and	laid	her	on	the	bed.	Then	he	fetched
water	and	bathed	her	bruised	hands.
Neither	spoke	a	word.	The	terrible	experience	she	had	undergone	had	all	but	broken
Valerie’s	spirit,	and	Tony,	with	deep	understanding,	refrained	from	uttering	the	questions
which	crowded	to	his	lips.
Day	was	breaking	when	he	left	her,	kissing	her	gently	on	the	brow,	his	reward	a	little
smile	so	tender	that,	in	spite	of	the	gloomy	circumstances,	his	heart	burst	into	song	within
his	breast.	But	as	he	made	his	way	quietly	to	his	own	room	the	light	died	from	his	face	and
his	brows	drew	 together	 in	a	 frown	of	dreadful	 fury,	 for	he	knew	 instinctively	who	was
responsible	for	the	night	of	terror	which	she	had	been	through.
Valerie	did	not	appear	at	the	breakfast-table,	and	Hamilton	was	the	first	to	comment
on	her	absence.	As	he	did	so	Gaunt	looked	across	at	his	colleague	and	their	eyes	met.	In
an	even	voice	the	doctor	said:
“Perhaps	she	is	unwell.”
Tony,	who	had	scarcely	spoken	until	then,	answered	him.
“Yes,”	said	he,	“she	 is	having	breakfast	 in	her	 room,	poor	child.	She	had	a	ghastly
experience	last	night.”
“Why,	Tony,	what	on	earth	do	you	mean?”	Hamilton’s	anxious	query	fell	into	the	gulf
of	silence	which	had	opened	in	their	midst.	Vaughan	looked	as	if	his	collar	were	about	to
suffocate	him,	and	Gaunt	turned	deadly	pale,	clenching	his	hands	beneath	the	table	until
the	nails	drew	blood.
Tony	went	on,	calmly:
“She	was	apparently	seized	with	a	sudden	and	overwhelming	desire	to	see	for	herself
what	was	in	the	passages	beneath	the	crypt	altar.”
“Good	God!”	Hamilton	said	in	a	shocked	tone.	“Do	you	mean	to	say	she	went	down
there	by	herself,	in	the	dark?”
“She	 took	 a	 lamp,	 John,	 but	 dropped	 it,	 apparently.	 Fortunately	 I	 woke,	 for	 some
unaccountable	reason,	and	went	down	to	see	if	everything	was	all	right.	Finding	the	way
to	the	crypt	open,	I	investigated,	and	was,	fortunately,	just	in	time.”
“In	time	for	what,	Tony?”
“In	time	to	save	her	from	the	curse.”
“Good	heavens!	You	don’t	mean	 to	 tell	me	 there	 really	 is	 something	 in	 the	 legend,
then?”
Tony	sighed	wearily.
“I	can’t	hope	to	explain,	John,	if	you	don’t	understand	what	I	mean.	Suffice	it	that	she
was	nearly	frightened	out	of	her	wits,	in	the	same	manner	as	my	father	was.	If	I	had	not
arrived	when	I	did	she	would	be	 insane	now,	at	 the	very	 least,	 if	not	 literally	dead	from
shock.”
Hamilton	sat	silent,	his	face	showing	plainly	the	turmoil	which	was	going	on	in	his
head.	There	was	much	he	did	not	understand,	much	that	he	felt	he	ought	to	understand,	but
which,	somehow,	just	eluded	him.
Vaughan,	who	by	this	time	had	recovered	his	voice,	remarked	suavely:
“It	might	well	have	been	a	horrible	tragedy,	Sir	Anthony.	You	know	my	views	as	to
the	nature	of	the	curse.	I	wonder	what	can	have	possessed	Miss	Bennett	to	go	down,	after
my	warning.”
Gaunt,	taking	his	cue	from	the	other,	put	in:
“I	 don’t	 think	 you	 put	 it	 plainly	 enough,	 Vaughan.	 You	 spoke	 to	 her	 of	 purely
physical	dangers	from	falling	rocks	and	so	on.	Miss	Bennett	probably	did	not	appreciate
the	appalling	spiritual	dangers	of	the	place.	I	am	very	glad	you	were	in	time,	Tony.”
Tony	looked	at	his	tutor	so	strangely	that	the	doctor	lowered	his	eyes	and	was	silent.
This	was	one	of	the	very	few	occasions	in	his	life	upon	which	Gaunt	did	not	feel	master	of
the	situation.	As	soon	as	he	could	he	excused	himself	and	withdrew,	taking	Vaughan	with
him.
When	they	were	gone,	Hamilton	spoke	very	gravely.
“I	can’t	say	‘Thank	you’,	Tony,”	he	said.	“This	is	the	second	time	you	have	probably
saved	Valerie’s	 life.	One	 doesn’t	 thank	 a	 person	 for	 saving	 one’s	 own	 life,	 and	 her	 life
means	more	to	me	than	that	even.”
He	put	out	his	hand,	and	Tony	gripped	it	firmly,	saying	no	less	earnestly:
“I	know,	John.	You	see,	I	love	her	too.	Did	you	guess?”
“I	 suspected	 as	 much.	 Well,	 we’re	 too	 old	 friends	 to	 quarrel	 over	 her.	 She	 must
choose	for	herself.	Good	luck,	old	man.”
“Thanks,	John.	Now	look:	we	must	get	her	away	from	here	as	soon	as	possible.	After
last	 night	 I	 dare	 not	 let	 her	 stay	 an	 hour	 longer	 than	 is	 absolutely	 necessary.	 The	 sea
appears	to	be	a	little	less	rough	today.	It	will	be	dangerous	to	attempt	the	crossing,	but	not,
I	think,	so	dangerous	as	to	remain	here.	Are	you	game	to	risk	it?”
“Of	course,	if	you	think	best.	I’m	afraid	that	even	now	I	can’t	realize	the	meaning	of
all	this.”
“You	will	one	day.”	There	was	a	hint	of	sadness	in	Tony’s	voice.	“I’ve	seen	Valerie
this	morning	and	told	her,	so	when	she’s	ready	we’ll	try	to	get	across.”
Less	 than	 an	 hour	 later	 Tony	 and	 Hamilton	 stood	 waiting	 in	 the	 kitchen,	 wearing
oilskins.	Hamilton	 still	wore	 a	 vaguely	 puzzled	 expression,	 but	 the	 younger	man’s	 face
was	a	mask	of	grim	determination.
When	Valerie	joined	them,	her	face	pale	and	strained,	looking	ridiculously	small	in	a
macintosh	belonging	to	Tony,	Hamilton	started	towards	her,	saying:
“Are	you	all	right,	Valerie?	I	can’t	imagine	—	“
But	she	cut	him	short	with:
“Please,	John,	not	now.	I’ll	tell	you	all	about	it	afterwards.	I’m	ready,	Tony.”
Hamilton	 fell	back	abashed	and	 let	Tony	 lead	her	out.	Mrs.	Lorrimer	had	 followed
Valerie	downstairs	and	stood	watching	them,	her	kindly	face	lined	with	worry.	Hamilton
briefly	bade	her	good-bye	and	followed	the	others.
The	launch	was	waiting	at	the	landing-stage	with	her	engine	running.	Lorrimer	stood
by	and	helped	Valerie	aboard.	Tony	followed	her	and	sat	down	by	Tregellis,	who	was	at
the	wheel.	As	Hamilton	came	up	the	old	servant	said	softly:
“You	still	don’t	remember,	sir?”
Receiving	only	a	blank	stare,	he	shook	his	head	with	a	sigh	and	said:
“Good-bye,	sir,	and	a	safe	voyage.”
Hamilton	scrambled	on	board	and	sat	down	by	Valerie	 in	 the	stern.	Tregellis	 threw
the	screw	into	gear,	the	water	behind	the	boat	began	to	boil,	and	they	glided	away,	slowly
at	first,	but	with	gathering	speed	as	they	passed	through	the	narrow	harbour	mouth,	from
which	the	water-gate	had	now	been	removed.	Hamilton	looked	back	and	saw	Lorrimer,	a
forlorn	figure,	standing	watching	 them	go.	Then	they	reached	the	open	sea	and	 the	 long
struggle	began.
The	wind	had	dropped	 to	a	stiff	breeze,	but	 it	was	raining	heavily,	and	 there	was	a
strong	sea	running.	Twice	they	were	almost	dashed	against	the	rocks	before	they	reached
open	water.	Hamilton	 remembered	 vividly	 the	 last	 occasion	 upon	which	 he	 and	Valerie
had	 been	 in	 a	 boat	 together,	 and	 he	 looked	 down	 at	 her.	 It	 was	 evident	 that	 the	 same
thought	was	in	her	mind,	for	a	small,	cold	hand	crept	into	his,	and	he	held	it	fast.
The	 launch	 rolled	horribly	 and	 shipped	a	good	deal	of	water	 as	 it	wallowed	 in	 the
trough	of	the	long	rollers,	but	Tregellis	knew	his	job,	and	made	a	long	detour	to	the	south
to	 avoid	 the	 tide	 race	 between	 the	 island	 and	 the	mainland.	Perhaps	 three	 hours	 passed
before	they	began	to	fight	their	way	back	towards	Pentock.
When	at	last	they	reached	the	quay	they	found	the	waterfront	deserted	and	the	boats
beached.	Even	the	fishermen	had	been	forced	to	abandon	their	occupation	by	reason	of	the
great	storm.
At	the	steps	Hamilton	jumped	out	and,	turning,	caught	the	girl	as	she	followed.	Tony
remained	in	the	launch.	Hamilton	exclaimed:
“Aren’t	 you	 coming	with	 us,	 Tony?	 The	 rector	 will	 be	 very	 pleased	 to	 see	 you,	 I
know.”
“No,	John,	thank	you.	I	must	get	back	to	my	friends.	I	have	a	bone	to	pick	with	them.
Valerie	will	explain.”
“Say	good-bye	to	them	for	me,”	replied	Hamilton.	“I	quite	forgot.”
Tony	made	no	 reply,	but	 told	Tregellis	 to	put	about	and	make	 for	Kestrel.	Then	he
called	across	the	widening	space:
“Don’t	think	too	hardly	of	me,	John.	I’ve	done	my	best.”
“What	 does	 he	 mean?”	 Hamilton	 turned	 a	 puzzled	 face	 to	 Valerie,	 but	 she	 only
caught	his	arm,	saying:
“Do	hurry,	John.	We	must	get	to	the	rectory	before	anyone	sees	us	and	rushes	to	tell
Uncle	we’re	alive.	His	heart’s	not	too	good,	you	know,	and	the	shock	might	kill	him.	I’m
terribly	worried	as	it	is.”
He	 suffered	 her	 to	 lead	 him	 away,	 but	 still	 he	 kept	 looking	 back	 at	 the	 receding
launch,	with	Tony’s	figure	sitting	still	and	silent	beside	the	helmsman,	until	it	was	out	of
sight	behind	the	headland.
Since	their	path	did	not	lie	through	the	village	they	met	no	one	before	reaching	the
rectory.	The	girl’s	worry	over	her	uncle	had	communicated	itself	to	her	companion	by	this
time,	and	he	was	wondering	desperately	what	he	should	say	to	the	old	man.
The	front	door	was	unfastened	and	they	walked	in.	There	seemed	to	be	no	one	about,
so	 they	 went	 through	 into	 the	 kitchen,	 where	 they	 found	Mrs.	 Drew,	 the	 housekeeper,
washing	 crockery	 in	 the	 sink.	 She	 looked	 round	 as	 they	 entered,	 and	 for	 a	 moment	 it
seemed	as	though	she	would	faint,	but	she	recovered	herself	and	flung	her	wet	arms	round
Valerie,	crying:
“Thank	God,	Miss	Valerie,	thank	God!	We	thought	you	was	drowned	for	sure.”
Valerie	calmed	the	good	soul	and	asked	her	where	the	rector	was.
“In	church,	my	dear.	Where	else	should	he	be?	He	was	nigh	crazed	at	first,	but	now
he	does	naught	but	pray.”
“Come,	John,	we’ll	go	to	him.”
Hand	in	hand	they	went	out	into	the	dripping	garden	and	through	the	churchyard.
It	was	very	dark	in	the	little	church,	and	at	first	they	could	not	see	the	rector	at	all.
Then	they	made	out	a	slight	figure	kneeling	among	the	shadows	before	the	side	altar	upon
which	stood	the	Tabernacle.	By	a	common	impulse	they	quietly	went	up	to	him	and	knelt
down,	one	on	either	side.
So	rapt	in	prayer	was	he	that	he	was	unaware	of	their	presence	for	some	minutes.	At
last	he	raised	his	grey	head	and	looked	first	to	the	right	and	then	to	the	left.
Hamilton	 held	 his	 breath.	Would	 this	 second	 shock	 be	 too	much	 for	 him?	But	 the
serene	face	of	the	priest	never	altered,	save	that	his	mouth	lost	its	rigid	lines	and	softened
into	a	gentle	smile.	Stretching	out	his	arms,	he	put	one	round	each	of	them	and	drew	them
close.
“God	 has	 heard	 the	 prayers	 of	 an	 old	man,”	 he	whispered	 softly.	 “To	Him	 be	 the
glory!	They	told	me	there	was	no	hope,	but	they	were	wrong.”
*	*	*
Back	 in	 the	 house	 once	more,	 and	 sitting	 before	 a	 cheerful	 fire	 in	 the	 little	 study,
Hamilton	 told	 their	story,	blaming	himself	bitterly	 for	 the	original	expedition	which	had
ended	so	disastrously.
When	he	had	finished,	the	rector	said:
“I	expect	Valerie	was	as	much	to	blame	as	you,	John.	I	know	her	ways,	bless	her!	But
don’t	 talk	 of	 blame	 now.	 You	 have	 brought	 her	 safely	 back	 to	 me,	 and	 that’s	 all	 that
matters.	You	were	in	God’s	hands.	When	you	didn’t	come	back	to	dinner	I	began	to	worry,
thinking	you	were	lost	on	the	moors	in	the	storm;	but	when	they	told	me	you	had	gone	out
in	a	dinghy	we	gave	you	up	for	lost.	I	must	admit	that	it	was	one	of	the	very	few	occasions
upon	 which	 I	 have	 questioned	 the	 ways	 of	 the	 Almighty,	 but	 I	 got	 over	 that.	 I	 said	 a
requiem	for	you	this	morning.	I	don’t	suppose	it	did	you	any	harm.”
He	chuckled	softly,	but	there	were	tears	in	his	eyes	as	he	patted	Valerie’s	hand.
“And	 now,	my	 dear,”	 he	 said	 to	 her,	 “there	 is	 something	 sadly	 amiss	 with	 John’s
story.	I	am	very	puzzled.	Perhaps	you	can	help	me.	He	speaks	of	your	dreadful	adventure
of	last	night	as	if	he	hardly	believed	it	had	happened	at	all.	He	never	mentions	the	horror
you	must	both	have	felt	when	you	found	yourself	on	that	accursed	island,	with	Anthony
Lovell	and	his	beastly	friends.	Can	you	explain	this?”
Hamilton	sat	there	frowning.	The	priest’s	words	touched	some	lost	chord	in	his	mind,
but	he	could	not	grasp	it.	 It	was	as	 if	a	dense	fog	lay	over	part	of	his	brain.	He	listened
eagerly	to	Valerie’s	words.
“Yes,	Uncle,	 I	 think	 I	 can	help	—	a	 little,”	 said	 she.	 “I	was	 like	 that	 too	until	 this
morning.	It’s	awfully	hard	to	explain,	but	when	I	first	woke	up	on	Kestrel,	after	we	were
wrecked,	I	had	no	recollection	whatever	of	anything	you	or	John	had	told	me	about	those
two	monsters	who	have	got	poor	Tony	in	 their	power,	or	of	 the	true	nature	of	 the	secret
order	 to	which	 they	all	belong.	 I	 regarded	Dr.	Gaunt	as	an	ordinary,	kindly	professional
man,	and	his	friend,	Simon	Vaughan,	as	a	decent	psychic	investigator.	I	think	John	is	still
under	the	same	delusion.”
“Monstrous!”	 murmured	 the	 rector.	 “They	 undoubtedly	 worked	 upon	 your	 minds
while	you	lay	helpless	and	exhausted.	John,	do	you	mean	to	tell	me	you	remember	nothing
of	what	we	talked	of	so	many	times?”
Hamilton	knitted	his	brows.
“I’ve	been	trying	to	remember,”	he	said	hesitantly,	“and	now	I	do	seem	to	recollect
something	very	 vague	 about	 it.	But	 it	 all	 seems	 incredibly	 remote	 and	 fantastic.	 I	 can’t
bring	myself	to	believe	in	it	at	all	now.	Certainly	it	never	crossed	my	mind	while	I	was	at
the	Abbey.”
“Amazing!	Tell	me,	Valerie,	when	did	you	remember?”
“A	few	minutes	after	I	dropped	my	lamp	in	the	tunnel	last	night.	At	first	I	wasn’t	a	bit
frightened	—	only	worried	lest	I	should	be	lost	down	there.	Then,	all	at	once,	it	came	back
to	 me.	 I	 realized	 where	 I	 was,	 and	 in	 whose	 power	 we	 were.	 It	 was	 as	 if	 a	 veil	 had
suddenly	dropped	from	my	eyes.	Then	—	it	came!”	She	shuddered	violently	and	stopped.
The	rector	caught	her	hand.
“Don’t	think	about	that,”	he	commanded.	“What	happened	afterwards	—	when	you
were	safe?”
Mastering	her	emotion	with	a	struggle,	she	went	on:
“When	I	came	round	Tony	was	bending	over	me.	As	soon	as	I	saw	his	poor	face,	so
dreadfully	distressed,	I	knew	he	wasn’t	really	one	of	them	at	heart.	He	told	me	everything
this	morning	before	we	 left.	He	believes	 that	Dr.	Gaunt	 deliberately	made	me	go	down
into	the	caves	to	get	rid	of	me.	When	he	thought	I	was	at	the	mercy	of	that	horrible	thing
he	 must	 have	 released	 his	 control	 over	 my	 mind,	 and	 I	 remembered.	 That’s	 Tony’s
explanation,	anyhow.”
“But	why	should	Gaunt	do	such	a	 thing,”	asked	Hamilton	—	“even	supposing	 that
it’s	all	true?”
The	girl	blushed	and	lowered	her	eyes.
“Tony	 said	 probably	 because	 Gaunt	 thought	 he	 was	 getting	 too	 interested	 in	 me.
After	that	his	one	thought	was	to	get	me	away	as	soon	as	possible.	He	wouldn’t	let	me	see
them	again.	I	begged	him	to	give	up	the	whole	thing,	and	come	with	us,	but	he	said	he	was
bound	by	the	most	frightful	oaths,	and	couldn’t	possibly.	I	feel	dreadfully	sorry	for	him.”
“I	wish	he	had	come	with	you,”	said	 the	rector.	“It	 is	evident	 that	he	 is	not	wholly
with	them,	and	I	think	I	could	make	him	change	his	mind,	even	now.	His	act	in	saving	you
must	have	weakened	 their	hold	over	him	a	good	deal.	 I	only	hope	 it	won’t	make	 it	 any
harder	for	him.”
Hamilton	laughed	suddenly,	making	them	both	stare	at	him.
“I	think	you’re	both	taking	it	far	too	seriously,”	he	said.	“It’s	all	nonsense,	anyway.
Such	things	don’t	happen	nowadays,	if	they	ever	did,	which	I	very	much	doubt.	If	poor	old
Tony	has	gone	potty,	cooped	up	there	with	those	two	charlatans,	there	is	no	reason	why	we
should.”
“John,”	said	 the	rector	gravely,	“I	wish	you	would	make	an	effort	 to	overcome	this
state	of	mind	you	are	in.	It’s	going	to	be	a	great	source	of	weakness	to	us	if	you	don’t.”
“I	don’t	see	why	I	should	come	back	to	your	point	of	view	at	all,”	Hamilton	returned.
“It	only	seems	to	make	you	miserable.	Life’s	too	short	for	tears.”
“Jesus	wept,”	the	rector	reminded	him.
Hamilton	laughed	again,	this	time	so	rudely	that	Valerie	jumped	up	with	a	little	cry.
“John!	Don’t	be	a	beast!”	—	and,	bursting	into	tears,	she	fled	from	the	room.
“Excuse	me	a	moment,”	said	the	rector,	and	followed	her.
He	 found	 her	 in	 her	 bedroom,	 her	 face	 buried	 in	 the	 pillow,	 sobbing	 bitterly.	 He
touched	her	quivering	shoulder,	and	when	she	had	quieted,	he	said:
“Valerie,	my	dear,	 this	won’t	do.	 I	know	you	have	been	grievously	 tried	 today,	but
you	mustn’t	give	way	now.	John	can’t	help	himself;	I	rather	fancy	they’re	working	on	him
now.	That	damnable	link	between	his	mind	and	Gaunt’s	must	be	broken,	and	you’ve	got	to
help	me.	Do	you	understand?”
She	lifted	her	tear-stained	face	and	nodded.
“I’ll	try,	Uncle.	But	it	hurts	to	see	him	like	that.”
“Yes,	my	dear,	I	know;	but	be	brave.	Shall	we	go	down	now?	I’m	going	to	try	and	get
him	into	church.”
Downstairs	 Hamilton	 was	 sitting	 as	 they	 had	 left	 him.	 He	 felt	 vaguely	 sorry	 for
having	upset	Valerie,	but	uppermost	 in	his	mind	was	a	profound	feeling	of	contempt	for
the	rector’s	foolish	beliefs.	He	looked	up	at	the	crucifix	on	the	wall	and	it	was	all	he	could
do	 to	 keep	 himself	 from	 laughing	 aloud.	 That	 absurd	 little	 image!	What	 good	 did	 they
imagine	it	did?	Idolatry!	The	word	rose	to	the	surface	of	his	mind	like	a	bubble	of	gas	in	a
stagnant	pond.	They	worshiped	that	painted	doll,	these	foolish,	wicked	people.	He	became
filled	with	righteous	indignation,	and,	rising,	unhooked	the	thing.	As	soon	as	it	was	in	his
hands	a	fierce	hatred	boiled	in	his	veins,	and	he	flung	it	into	the	fire	with	an	exclamation
of	disgust.
At	that	moment	the	door	opened	and	the	rector	came	in.	Taking	in	the	situation	at	a
glance,	he	 stood	still,	blocking	 the	door,	 so	 that	Valerie,	behind	him,	 should	not	 see	 the
blazing	crucifix.
“Nice	work,	John!”	he	say	gaily.	“Why	not	come	into	the	church?	We’ve	lots	more	in
there	you	can	pull	down,	you	know.”
Hamilton	stared	at	him.	Was	this	stupid	old	fool	laughing	at	him?	No,	he	decided,	he
was	 not.	 For	 a	moment	 he	 toyed	with	 the	 idea	 of	 accepting	 the	 invitation,	 but	 a	 voice
within	 him	 peremptorily	 forbade	 it.	 Muttering	 an	 apology,	 he	 pushed	 past	 them	 both,
walked	quickly	to	the	front	door,	and	out	of	the	house.
“After	 him,	 Valerie,”	 the	 rector	 ordered.	 “Don’t	 let	 him	 get	 away.	 Bring	 him	 into
church	somehow.	His	soul	is	at	stake.”
Gathering	up	 the	 skirts	of	his	 cassock,	 the	old	man	 fairly	 ran	out	of	 the	back	door
towards	the	church.
The	girl	stood	still,	trembling	all	over.	Then	she	plucked	up	her	courage	and	followed
Hamilton.
He	had	only	got	as	far	as	the	lane	when	she	overtook	him.	Slipping	her	arm	through
his,	she	snuggled	against	him.	He	stopped.
What	 did	 she	want?	He	 stared	 down	 at	 her	 vaguely.	He	 had	 thought	 he	 loved	 her
once.	Silly	little	fool!
Then	she	turned	her	head,	and	her	glorious	eyes	looked	full	into	his.	He	felt	himself
slipping,	drowning	in	their	grey	depths.	Her	red	mouth	curved	invitingly.	A	great	wave	of
desire	swept	over	him,	and	he	caught	her	in	his	arms,	kissing	her	hungrily.	He	could	feel
her	sweet,	small	breasts	crushed	against	him.
Meekly	she	submitted,	and	when	he	let	her	go,	breathing	heavily	and	trembling	with
passion,	she	caught	him	by	the	hand.
“Come	with	me,	John,”	she	breathed.
Dumbly	he	let	her	lead	him	back,	through	the	churchyard.
At	 the	 door	 of	 the	 church	 he	 hesitated,	 but	 she	 looked	 back	 at	 him,	 and	 seeing
nothing	but	her	 lovely	 face,	he	 stumbled	 in	 after	her.	Like	a	 flash	 she	 swung	 the	heavy
door	shut,	turned	the	key,	and	flung	it	far	up	the	church.
As	 it	 tinkled	 on	 the	 floor	 a	 blind	 rage	 swept	 through	him.	Thought	 they’d	 trapped
him,	did	they?	He’d	show	them!	Turning,	he	began	to	batter	at	the	unyielding	door,	even
as	Valerie	had	beaten	at	the	altar-stone	on	Kestrel	not	so	long	before.
All	 at	 once	 the	 darkness	 of	 his	 fury	was	 pierced	 by	 the	 liquid	 tinkle	 of	 a	 bell.	He
swung	round,	caught	his	breath	in	a	great	sob,	and	fell	back	against	the	wall.
The	High	Altar	was	ablaze	with	light,	and	in	the	midst	of	the	golden	glow	stood	the
rector,	clad	in	his	sacerdotal	vestments,	the	shimmering	humeral	veil	about	his	shoulders
swathing	 those	 consecrated	hands	which	held	 aloft	 the	glittering	monstrance,	 rayed	 like
the	sun	in	splendour,	with	the	white	round	of	the	Host	gleaming	at	its	heart.
The	moment	his	eyes	fell	upon	the	holy	thing	Hamilton	felt	a	sharp	pang	of	agony,
like	the	thrust	of	a	flaming	sword,	run	through	his	whole	being,	and	when	the	priest	made
the	sign	of	the	cross	with	It	he	uttered	one	shrill	cry	of	anguish	and	fell	headlong	to	the
floor.
When	he	opened	his	eyes	again	the	rector	and	Valerie	were	kneeling	beside	him,	and
the	girl’s	face	was	wet	with	tears.
“Don’t	cry,	Val	darling,”	he	said	weakly,	“we’re	safe	now.	Did	the	dinghy	sink?”

Chapter	XVI	
I	
Nicholas	Gaunt	stood	at	one	of	the	narrow	windows	of	the	tower	room	watching	the
retreating	launch.	When	it	was	hidden	by	the	mist	of	rain	he	turned	to	his	companion,	who
sat	near	by,	smoking	his	eternal	cheroot.
“Well?”	he	queried.
“He	suspects,	I	think,”	said	Vaughan.
“Worse	—	he	knows.	I	did	not	anticipate	failure	when	I	 let	her	remember.	She	will
have	told	him	everything.	It	 is	significant	 that	he	has	taken	her	away	without	 letting	her
see	us	again.	He	will	be	difficult.”
“If	he	returns.”	Vaughan’s	tone	was	gloomy.
“He	will	return.	He	knows	the	penalty	for	desertion.	You	had	better	leave	this	to	me,
Simon.”
“With	the	greatest	pleasure	in	the	world,	Doctor.”
So	it	was	that	when	Tony	came	back	from	Pentock	he	found	only	the	doctor	awaiting
him,	standing	with	his	back	to	the	fire	in	the	great	hall,	his	hands	behind	him,	spread	out	to
the	blaze,	and	a	cigarette	drooping	carelessly	from	the	corner	of	his	mouth.
Tony	waited	until	Lorrimer	had	taken	away	his	dripping	oilskin	and	then,	white	with
rage,	he	approached	the	doctor	and	faced	him.
“Damn	you,	Gaunt!”	he	burst	out.
The	other	raised	a	deprecating	hand.
“One	moment,	Tony,”	he	said	quietly.	“You	are	angry,	and	justly	so.	I	should	not	have
taken	 such	 a	 step	without	 first	 consulting	 you.	 Please	 forgive	me;	 I	 acted	 for	 your	 best
interests.”
The	young	man	stared	at	him	in	frank	astonishment.
“You	admit	it,	then?	You	admit	your	responsibility	for	what	happened	last	night?”
“The	responsibility	was	yours,	not	mine,	Tony.	If	you	had	not	permitted	yourself	to
become	infatuated	with	this	girl	I	should	not	have	been	compelled	to	act	as	I	did.”
“To	 hell	 with	 that	 for	 a	 tale!	 I’ve	 been	 fooled	 by	 you	 and	 your	 precious	 friend
Vaughan	long	enough.	This	time	you	have	gone	too	far.	You	can’t	bluff	your	way	out	of
this.	Valerie	has	opened	my	eyes.”
“Blinded	 them,	 I	 think,	 Tony,	 to	 the	 eternal	 values	 which	 once	 you	 thought	 so
important.”
“Blast	you	and	your	eternal	values!	I	know	of	nothing	more	valuable	to	me	than	the
life	of	the	girl	I	love.	You	tried	to	take	her	from	me	last	night	and	failed,	fortunately	for
you.	If	you	had	succeeded	I	should	have	killed	you	with	my	bare	hands.”
Gaunt	smiled	gently.
“How	melodramatic!	I	would	not	advise	you	ever	to	try	anything	so	foolish.	Lay	but
a	hand	upon	me	and	it	would	be	you	who	would	die,	not	me.”
“I’m	not	at	all	sure	that	I	believe	that	now.	Anyhow,	it	doesn’t	matter.	I’m	through.
You	and	Vaughan	can	pack	your	bags	and	clear	out	just	as	soon	as	you	please.”
Controlling	 himself	 with	 a	 great	 effort,	 Tony	 turned	 away	 and	 went	 towards	 the
staircase.	Consequently	 he	 did	 not	 see	 the	 demoniacal	 rage	which	blazed	 for	 a	moment
from	 the	 doctor’s	 eyes.	 Gaunt’s	 voice	was	 still	 calm	 and	 perfectly	modulated	when	 he
spoke.
“One	moment,	Tony.	Would	you	cast	out	your	proved	friends	for	 this	girl	of	whom
you	know	nothing?	Does	she	love	you,	even?”
Tony	said	not	a	word,	but	began	to	mount	the	staircase.
Again	the	doctor	spoke.
“You	 poor	 deluded	 fool!	 Destroy	 yourself	 then	 in	 your	 own	 folly.	 At	 this	 very
moment	she	is	in	Hamilton’s	arms,	laughing	at	you.”
Tony	stopped	and	slowly	turned	his	head.
“That’s	not	true,”	said	he.
Gaunt	laughed	sarcastically.
“You	think	it	possible,	 then?”	he	sneered.	“Oh,	what	a	 trusting	lover	have	we	here!
How	little	you	know	of	women	and	their	ways!	They	are	all	whores,	and	Valerie	Bennett
is	no	better	than	the	rest.”
Tony	stood	very	still,	going	white	 to	the	lips.	Then	he	came	slowly	down	the	stairs
again	and	approached	the	doctor,	who	was	coolly	lighting	another	cigarette.	He	looked	up
as	the	young	man	approached	and	his	 lips	twisted	sardonically.	The	other	stopped	a	few
feet	away	and	said	very	quietly:
“Take	that	back,	please,	Dr.	Gaunt.”
The	doctor	laughed	softly	to	himself	and	blew	out	a	cloud	of	smoke,	watching	it	as	it
curled	upwards	to	the	roof.
“I’ll	give	you	one	more	chance,	Gaunt.	Take	back	what	you	said	about	Valerie	and
I’ll	 forget	 it.”	Tony’s	 voice	was	hardly	 above	 a	whisper,	 but	 he	was	 shaking	 like	 a	 leaf
with	the	fury	of	his	passion.	The	doctor	never	moved,	but	only	smiled	the	more.
“Very	well.	Don’t	say	I	didn’t	warn	you.”	As	the	young	man	raised	his	hand	to	strike
the	pale,	 sneering	 face,	 so	 the	doctor’s	narrowed	eyes	opened	wide,	blazing	with	a	cold
grey	light.	Tony	felt	as	if	he	himself	had	been	struck	a	violent	blow,	and	reeled	back,	his
hand	falling	helplessly	 to	his	side.	For	a	moment	he	stood,	his	 face	puckering	strangely,
then	he	flung	himself	down	upon	the	near-by	settee	and	burst	into	a	torrent	of	sobs.
He	felt	a	gentle	touch	upon	his	bowed	head,	and	looking	up	found	the	doctor	bending
over	him,	an	expression	of	tender	compassion	upon	his	face.
Tony	gulped.	“I	 raised	my	hand	against	you	master,”	he	whispered.	“Can	you	ever
forgive	me?”
“It	is	forgiven	already,	my	son.	Forgive	me,	too,	if	I	spoke	harshly,	but	I	had	to	break
the	spell	she	had	cast	over	you.”
“It’s	true,	then,	what	you	said?”
“Only	 too	 true,	 I	 fear.	 I	 spoke	 from	knowledge,	not	 at	 random.	Come,	 I	will	 show
you.”
“No,	no!	I	don’t	want	to	see.	I	believe	you.”
“You	must.	I	cannot	have	you	weakened	like	this.	Come!”
The	 doctor’s	 old	 ascendancy	 conquered,	 and	 Tony	 followed	 him	 up	 to	 his	 room.
There	Gaunt	took	out	his	crystal	and	set	it	upon	the	table,	motioning	Tony	to	look	into	it.
“Look,	my	son,”	said	he,	“and	behold	the	frailty	that	is	woman.	I	will	not	influence
you	at	all.	There	is	no	deceit.”
He	walked	 over	 to	 the	window	 and	 stood	 looking	 out,	 while	 Tony	 gazed	 into	 the
shadowy	 depths	 of	 the	 crystal,	 stretching	 his	mind	 out	 towards	Valerie.	 All	 at	 once	 he
stiffened	and	his	breath	came	faster.
What	he	saw	need	not	be	recorded.	Suffice	it	that	not	many	yards	away	Vaughan	was
sitting	 with	 the	 duplicate	 crystal,	 exercising	 his	 trained	 will	 to	 the	 uttermost,	 and
projecting	into	the	two	co-ordinated	spheres	a	vision	which	was	wholly	false,	born	in	the
dark	recesses	of	his	own	obscene	brain.
After	 a	 few	minutes	 Tony	 sprang	 up,	 his	 cheeks	 stained	 a	 dull	 red	 and	 his	mouth
twisted	with	pain.
“No	more!”	he	gasped.	“I	have	seen	enough.	Oh,	Valerie!	And	Hamilton	—	the	filthy
swine!”
Gaunt	regarded	him	with	quiet	satisfaction.
“Be	of	good	heart,	my	son,”	said	he.	“Our	great	faith	rises	above	such	little	 things.
You	can	have	her,	too,	you	know,	provided	you	do	not	let	her	dominate	your	soul.”
“No!	Not	 after	 that.	 I	 couldn’t	 touch	her.”	Angrily	Tony	dashed	 the	 tears	 from	his
eyes.
“Then,	Tony,”	pursued	the	doctor,	“there	only	remains	—	vengeance!”
“How?”
“We	will	say	the	Black	Mass	with	special	intention	for	their	destruction.”
“When?”	Tony	passed	his	tongue	over	his	dry	lips.
“Tonight.	 Afterwards	 their	 lives	 will	 not	 be	 worth	 the	 living.”	 He	 caught	 Tony’s
shoulders	 in	a	 firm	grip.	 “All	power	 is	given	unto	us.	Those	 two	shall	 rue	 the	day	 they
offended	you,	my	brother.”
Tony’s	lip	twisted	into	a	snarl.
“They	shall,”	he	muttered.
“Go	to	your	room,	then,	my	son,	and	pray	to	our	Lord	that	He	will	look	favourably
upon	our	sacrifice.	When	all	is	ready	I	will	summon	you.”
When	the	young	man	had	gone	Vaughan	rejoined	his	colleague.
“Did	I	do	well?”	he	inquired.
“Far	better	 than	 I	had	hoped.	You	were	 in	great	 form	 tonight,	Simon.	He	was	very
difficult	at	first,	but	now	he	thinks	only	of	revenge.	You	shall	say	the	Mass	tonight	and	he
will	help	you.”
“Magnificent!	In	the	meantime…	Hamilton?”
“Yes,	 I	 had	 thought	 of	 that.	We	will	 endeavour	 to	put	 a	 spoke	 in	 the	wheel	 of	 our
friend	 the	Reverend	 Father	Bennett.”	Gaunt	 chuckled.	 “Come,	 let	 us	 see	what	 is	 really
happening	there.”
They	sat	down	at	the	crystal	and	were	almost	immediately	watching	the	scene	in	the
rector’s	study,	where	Hamilton	was	relating	his	version	of	the	visit	to	the	Abbey.
For	 a	 long	 time	 they	 sat	 thus,	 the	 doctor	 occasionally	 moving	 his	 lips	 silently.
Suddenly	his	face	changed,	and	Vaughan	looked	up,	about	to	speak,	but	was	silenced	by	a
gesture.	The	mocking	 smile	had	disappeared	 from	Gaunt’s	 lips	 and	his	 eyes	were	wide.
His	 companion	 could	 feel	 the	 energy	 pouring	 from	 that	 rigid	 form	 into	 the	 crystal.	 A
strange	hush	came	over	the	room	and	the	pale	light	within	the	sphere	grew	stronger.	The
tension	increased	until	Vaughan	felt	that	he	could	bear	it	no	longer	—	that	he	must	scream
or	die.	A	faint	groan	came	from	Gaunt’s	lips,	and	the	sweat	glistened	on	his	brow.
Then,	with	a	splintering	crash,	the	quivering	crystal	burst	into	a	thousand	fragments,
and	Gaunt	sprang	up,	his	chair	going	over	behind	him.	He	stood	trembling	with	rage,	and
taking	out	his	handkerchief	began	to	dab	his	cheek,	where	the	blood	was	welling	from	a
gash	inflicted	by	one	of	the	slivers	of	flying	glass.
The	other	sat	huddled	up,	his	face	grey	with	terror	and	his	great	body	trembling	like	a
leaf.
“That	damned	girl	again,”	said	the	doctor	in	a	thick	voice;	“but	for	her	he	would	not
have	gone	in.”
“They	are	moving	against	us,”	whimpered	Vaughan.
“Yes,	and	we	must	move	faster.	Tonight	will	see	the	beginning	of	the	end.”
“Why	not	the	end	itself?”	Vaughan	urged.	“Why	must	we	wait	until	the	twenty-fifth?
I	know	you	have	 told	Tony	 that	 it	 is	because	 that	day	 is	 the	anniversary	of	 the	Abbot’s
curse,	but	what	has	that	to	do	with	it,	when	the	monstrosity	was	here	long	before	then?”
“Because	that	day	is	not	only	the	anniversary	of	the	Abbot’s	curse,	but	also,	by	what
at	first	seems	a	strange	coincidence,	the	anniversary	of	the	day,	centuries	before,	when	the
Veil	was	rent,	and	the	monstrosity	first	came	into	the	world.	It	is	really	no	coincidence,	for
these	matters	are	governed	by	laws	which	even	I	do	not	fully	understand,	but	I	do	know,
for	certain	weighty	cosmic	reasons	which	I	cannot	explain	to	you,	Simon,	that	upon	that
day	only,	at	twelve	noon,	can	the	monstrosity	be	released	from	this	rock	and	loosed	upon
the	world.	It	can	be	released	from	its	bondage	to	the	Lovells	at	any	time,	and	that	is	what
Tony	will	do,	all	unknowingly,	tonight.”
*	*	*
Shortly	 after	midnight	 the	 three	met	 again	 in	 the	 crypt.	Tony’s	 temporary	 rebellion
against	his	old	allegiance	had	left	him	more	devoted	to	the	occult	faith	than	ever	before,
and	he	was	determined	to	make	amends	for	his	lapse.	His	blind	rage	of	the	afternoon	had
been	 replaced	by	a	grim	resolve	 to	have	his	 revenge	upon	 the	girl	who	he	believed	had
been	responsible	for	his	infidelity,	and	who	had	been	proved	so	unworthy.
He	 vested	 rapidly,	 eager	 to	 begin	 the	 ceremony	 which	 he	 knew	 would	 effect	 his
purpose;	at	once	testifying	to	his	renewed	enthusiasm	and	bringing	disaster	upon	the	heads
of	the	unhappy	pair	who	had	wronged	him.	When	he	had	finished	he	began	to	prepare	the
incense,	lighting	the	necessary	charcoal	and	putting	it	into	the	thurible.	In	the	absence	of
servers	he,	as	subdeacon,	would	have	to	act	as	thurifer,	in	addition	to	his	other	duties.
While	 Tony	was	 thus	 engaged	Vaughan	 and	Gaunt	 put	 on	 their	 own	 vestments	 in
silence.	 The	 former	 wore	 the	 customary	 chasuble	 of	 the	 celebrant,	 and	 the	 latter	 the
deacon’s	dalmatic.	Their	attire	was	identical	with	that	of	the	sacred	ministers	at	a	Catholic
High	Mass,	and	the	vestments	had,	indeed,	been	used	for	that	purpose	at	one	time,	before
they	were	degraded	to	their	present	office.
The	altar	had	been	draped	with	a	dark	cloth	and	bore	six	tall	candles	of	black	wax,
which	burnt	with	a	 smoky,	bluish	 flame.	 In	 the	 centre	 stood	an	 inverted	crucifix	with	a
serpent	coiled	about	the	Figure.	One	of	Vaughan’s	trunks	served	for	a	credence	table,	upon
which	 stood	 chalice	 and	 paten,	 and	 the	 cruets	 of	wine	 and	water.	 The	 dim	 light	 of	 the
candles	was	reinforced	by	two	lamps	set	on	the	floor.
When	 all	 was	 ready	 the	 three	 took	 up	 their	 positions	 on	 the	 altar	 steps,	 and	 the
dreadful	 mockery	 began.	 Thick	 yellow	 clouds	 of	 pungent	 incense-smoke	 billowed	 up
against	the	low	roof.
Until	the	consecration	the	ritual	tallied	with	normal	Catholic	procedure,	save	that	the
prayers	 were	 invariably	 twisted	 into	 blasphemous	 contradiction,	 the	 great	 voice	 of	 the
apostate	priest	echoing	round	the	distant	walls	as	he	intoned	them.
What	must	Vaughan’s	thoughts	be?	Tony	wondered,	as	he	watched	him	bending	over
the	altar,	the	blue	glimmer	of	the	candles	shining	on	his	hairless	skull.	Did	he	remember
the	countless	times	he	had	performed	this	self-same	act,	with	how	different	an	intention,
before	he	had	joined	the	legions	of	Darkness?	But	Tony	had	never	been	a	Catholic,	and	the
peculiarly	monstrous	nature	of	the	contradiction	did	not	occur	to	him.	He	was	disposed	to
look	 upon	 all	 sacramental	 ceremony	 as	 somewhat	 childish	 and	 absurd,	 and	 did	 his	 part
automatically,	 as	he	had	been	 taught,	with	 little	 thought	 for	 the	deep	 significance	of	his
actions.
“Hoc	est	enim	corpus	meum…”	the	most	awful	words	that	the	lips	of	man	can	utter.
Tony	heard	them,	scarcely	realizing	the	tremendous	miracle	which	was	taking	place;	for,
whatever	his	crimes,	Vaughan’s	priestly	power	was	indestructible.
“Hic	est	enim	calix	sanguinis	mei	—	.”
The	 Sacred	 Body	 and	 the	 Precious	 Blood	 were	 on	 the	 altar.	 Vaughan	 did	 not
genuflect,	but	made	an	obscene	gesture,	then	turned	and	beckoned	Tony.	The	young	man
approached,	 took	 the	Chalice	 from	 the	priest,	 and	deliberately	poured	 its	Contents	upon
the	altar	steps.	The	Blood	splashed	as	it	fell,	spattering	the	white	skirt	of	his	alb	with	the
red	drops	of	guilt.	He	flung	the	empty	vessel	from	him,	and	as	it	rang	upon	the	stone	floor
the	echoes	of	its	fall	were	caught	and	flung	backwards	and	forwards	under	the	vaulted	roof
until	it	seemed	as	if	a	legion	of	fiends	was	gathered	in	the	shadows,	laughing,	laughing…
The	 brief	 clamour	 died	 away	 and	 a	 strange	 hush	 followed,	 as	 if	 all	 creation	were
watching	the	sacrilege	with	bated	breath.	For	a	moment	that	seemed	as	long	as	eternity	the
three	stood	motionless,	their	gorgeous	vestments	shimmering	in	the	dim	light.
Gaunt	was	 the	 first	 to	move,	 and	he	 too	mounted	 the	altar	 steps,	drawing	 from	his
girdle	a	small	dagger	of	peculiar	design,	which	he	handed	to	Tony.	As	his	fingers	closed
round	 the	 cold	 metal	 hilt	 a	 sudden	 pang	 shot	 up	 the	 young	 man’s	 arm	 and	 he	 all	 but
dropped	the	thing.	Recovering	himself,	he	faced	the	altar	once	more	and	raised	the	dagger
aloft.	 The	 candlelight	 glittered	 evilly	 along	 the	 triangular	 blade.	The	watching	 shadows
crowded	closer	upon	the	circle	of	light	about	the	altar.	The	hush	deepened	until	the	silence
seemed	to	press	in	upon	them	like	a	palpable	thing.	Tony’s	eyes	were	fixed	upon	the	Host,
which	lay	before	him	startlingly	white	against	the	dark	cloth.	Yet	again	a	thrill	of	anguish
ran	 through	 his	 veins	 like	 fire,	 but,	 clenching	 his	 teeth,	 he	 brought	 the	 dagger	 sharply
down,	transfixing	the	gleaming	disk	which	was	the	Heart	of	God.	His	own	heart	turned	to
ice	as	he	saw	the	crimson	stain	spreading	from	the	wound,	but,	swept	away	on	the	wings
of	ritual,	he	lifted	the	holy	Thing	and	cast	It	to	the	ground,	grinding	It	with	his	heel	into
the	dust.
Instantly	the	silence	was	broken	by	an	appalling	tumult	of	sound,	such	as	Tony	had
heard	once	before,	on	the	night	his	father	died.	Now	it	was	infinitely	louder	and	more	near
—	 beneath	 his	 very	 feet.	 At	 the	 same	 moment	 the	 solid	 rock	 began	 to	 heave	 like	 the
restless	sea	which	surrounded	it.
All	three	were	flung	to	the	ground,	and	lay	where	they	fell,	stunned	by	the	din.	The
great	 stone	 top	 of	 the	 altar	 was	 forced	 violently	 upwards,	 scattering	 the	 candles	 in	 all
directions.	And	a	mighty	wind	came	roaring	up	out	of	the	depths,	extinguishing	the	lamps
and	whirling	round	the	crypt	like	a	hurricane.
Gaunt	alone	kept	command	of	his	senses	during	those	awful	moments.	As	soon	as	he
was	able	he	began	 to	crawl	across	 the	 reeling	 floor,	 the	wind	plucking	at	his	 robes,	one
hand	outstretched,	searching	for	Tony	in	the	darkness.	At	last	he	found	him,	and	putting
his	lips	close	to	the	young	man’s	ear	he	shouted	at	the	top	of	this	voice:
“Quickly!	Make	 an	 act	 of	 renunciation	 of	 your	 power	 over	 this	 thing.	You	 can	 no
longer	control	it.	I	can.	Quickly,	our	lives	depend	upon	it.”
Painfully	Tony	gathered	his	scattered	wits	together,	and,	realizing	the	urgency	of	the
doctor’s	appeal,	strove	to	concentrate	all	his	energies	upon	the	matter.	Locking	his	hands
in	Gaunt’s,	he	 focused	his	will	upon	 the	other,	and	as	 their	minds	vibrated	 in	unison	he
uttered	the	words	with	his	whole	being:
“Whatsoever	power	 I	have	over	 this	monstrosity	 I	 renounce,	 and	yield	 it	 utterly	 to
thee.”
The	 thick	 darkness	 hid	 the	 dreadful	 grin	 of	 triumph	 on	 the	 doctor’s	 face	 as	 he
staggered	to	his	feet,	crying:
“Be	still,	thou	creature	of	the	Outer	Darkness,	be	still!	Thy	master	commands!”
Immediately	the	bellowing	ceased	and	the	wind	died	away.
The	quivering	of	the	rock	continued	for	a	while,	but	soon	even	that	was	stilled.
II	
Tony	 came	 down	 to	 breakfast	 in	 a	 thoughtful	 mood.	 He	 had	 had	 no	 further
conversation	with	the	doctor	since	the	celebration	of	the	Black	Mass,	for,	when	they	had
relit	the	lamps	and	secured	the	altar-stone	once	more,	all	three	had	retired	to	bed	at	once,
utterly	 exhausted	by	 the	 terrible	 experience	 they	had	undergone.	Tony	had	 fallen	 into	 a
heavy,	dreamless	 sleep	 the	moment	his	head	 touched	 the	pillow,	and	when	he	woke	 the
sun	was	high	over	the	sea.
His	rage	of	yesterday	against	Valerie	and	Hamilton	for	the	supposed	wrong	they	had
done	 him	was	 spent.	He	 scarcely	 thought	 of	 them,	 but	 racked	 his	 brains	 continually	 to
discover	 what	 Gaunt’s	 purpose	 had	 been	 in	 persuading	 him	 to	 assist	 at	 the	 fantastic
ceremony	 in	 the	 crypt.	 He	 told	 himself	 that	 the	 doctor	 must	 have	 known	 what	 would
happen;	 how	 the	 curse,	 its	 strength	 multiplied	 a	 thousandfold,	 would	 become
uncontrollable	by	him.	It	would	seem	that	 the	difficulties	of	banishing	it	from	the	island
were	now	almost	 insuperable,	 though	 the	bonds	which	had	bound	 the	horror	 to	himself
were,	apparently,	broken.	Badly	wanting	Gaunt’s	opinion	on	the	matter,	he	hurried	down
the	great	staircase	and	along	the	corridor	to	the	dining-hall.
To	his	surprise,	 the	table	was	not	 laid,	and	the	ashes	of	yesterday’s	fire	still	 littered
the	hearth.	He	glanced	at	his	watch,	saw	that	it	was	after	ten,	and,	frowning	slightly,	made
his	way	to	the	kitchen.
There	was	no	sign	of	the	Lorrimers,	and	no	fire	burnt	in	the	great	kitchen	range.	On
the	table,	however,	was	an	envelope	addressed	to	himself.	He	tore	it	open	and	quickly	read
the	brief	note	within:
Sir	Anthony,
We	are	more	sorry	than	we	can	say	to	leave	you	like	this,	but	my	wife	and
I	are	agreed	that	we	can	stay	no	longer	in	this	place.	Not	after	last	night,	sir.	We
shall	be	only	too	pleased	to	serve	you	in	London,	or	anywhere	else,	sir,	but	not
here	any	more.
Your	obt.	servant,
James	Lorrimer
P.S.	Tom	will	bring	the	boat	back,	sir.
Biting	his	lips,	Tony	crushed	the	letter	into	a	ball,	threw	it	into	the	grate,	and	returned
to	the	great	hall,	where	he	flung	himself	into	a	chair	and	lit	a	cigarette.
He	had	not	been	there	long	before	he	heard	voices	in	the	gallery	above,	and,	looking
up,	saw	Dr.	Gaunt	and	his	portly	colleague	descending	the	staircase.
He	was	 immediately	 struck	 by	 the	 contrast	 in	 their	 demeanours.	Vaughan’s	 flabby
face	seemed	to	have	fallen	in;	there	were	shadows	under	his	little	eyes	and	his	lips	were
grey.	He	dragged	his	feet	on	the	stairs.	Gaunt,	on	the	other	hand,	looked	jubilant,	in	spite
of	 the	sticking-plaster	on	his	cheek.	His	eyes	shone	 like	 twin	stars	and	his	 lips	 twitched
with	excitement.	He	fairly	tripped	down	the	stairs,	leaving	his	companion	far	behind,	and,
as	he	approached,	Tony	could	feel	the	atmosphere	of	power	which	radiated	from	his	body.
“Good	morrow,	Tony!”	he	cried,	with	a	cheerful	smile.	“Did	you	sleep	well?”
“Very	well,	 thank	 you,	Doctor,”	 answered	Tony.	 “But	 I’ve	 got	 some	 bad	 news	 for
you,	I’m	afraid.”
Gaunt	raised	an	eyebrow,	and	Tony	went	on:
“The	Lorrimers	have	cleared	off	and	left	us	in	the	lurch.	They	left	a	note	for	me.	It
seems	that	they	were	frightened	out	of	their	wits	last	night.”
“I	don’t	blame	them,”	said	the	doctor	with	a	laugh.	“Don’t	worry,	my	boy,	we	shall
be	able	to	fend	for	ourselves	for	a	while.	It	won’t	be	long	now,	eh,	Vaughan?”
The	 other,	 who	 had	 now	 joined	 them,	 merely	 grunted,	 looking	 at	 the	 floor,	 and
rubbing	his	hands	nervously	together.
“You	mean	we	shall	be	able	to	get	rid	of	the	curse	soon,	then,	Doctor?”	Tony	asked
eagerly.
“Yes,	 we	 shall	 be	 rid	 of	 it.”	 Gaunt	 smiled	 crookedly.	 “We	 shall	 free	 it	 from	 this
island,	even	as	it	was	freed	from	you	last	night.	It	is	in	my	hands	now.”
Tony	frowned,	puzzled	by	the	doctor’s	apparent	reversal	of	the	pronouns.	Surely	he
had	been	freed	from	the	curse,	not	the	curse	from	him?	He	let	the	question	pass,	and	asked
another:
“It’s	 been	 worrying	 me	 ever	 since	 I	 woke,	 Doctor.	 I	 can’t	 understand	 why	 you
permitted	last	night’s	ceremony	at	all.	Isn’t	the	curse	much	more	powerful	now?”
“The	curse,	as	you	persist	in	terming	it,	is	the	most	tremendous	evil	force	this	world
has	 ever	 known.	 I	 should	 remind	 you	 that	 it	 is	 actually	 a	 monstrosity	 of	 the	 Outer
Darkness,	an	intruder	from	the	chaos	which	exists	behind	the	Veil	of	dimensional	matter,
and	that	its	power	is	incalculable.”
“But	won’t	it	be	even	more	difficult	to	banish	now,	Doctor?”	Tony	was	very	puzzled.
“Who	spoke	of	banishment?	I	doubt	if	 it	could	be	banished.	But	it	will	be	a	simple
matter	to	release	it.”
Vaughan	coughed	and	took	a	step	forward,	but	Gaunt	raised	his	hand.
“No,	Simon,	it	is	right	that	he	should	know.	He	is	one	of	us	now,	and	will	rejoice	with
us	when	he	knows	what	he	has	done.”
“What	 do	 you	mean?”	 A	 dreadful	 suspicion	 was	 forming	 in	 Tony’s	 mind,	 and	 he
waited	breathlessly	for	Gaunt’s	reply.
“I	mean	that	I	have	no	intention	whatever	of	even	attempting	to	send	this	thing	back
whence	 it	 came.	 I	 propose	 to	 loose	 it	 upon	 the	world.	 It	will	 do	more	 for	 the	 ultimate
triumph	of	our	Lord	than	we	have	been	able	to	achieve	since	the	world	began.”
Keeping	his	voice	steady	by	a	great	effort,	Tony	asked:
“And	I,	what	have	I	done?”
“By	 assisting	 at	 the	Mass	 and	 committing	 the	 final	 sacrilege	 you	have	 set	 the	 seal
upon	your	renunciation	of	all	that	is	good,	and	thus	made	it	impossible	for	the	powers	of
light	 to	 assist	 you	 to	 control	 this	monstrosity,	 even	 if	 you	had	wished.	Furthermore,	 by
reason	of	 the	subtle	 link	which	 the	Abbot’s	words	 forged	between	your	 family	and	 it,	 it
shared	in	your	violation	of	the	Host,	 the	focus	of	Light	in	this	world,	and	it	awoke	once
more	to	knowledge	and	dire	hatred	of	its	adversary.	The	same	thing	happened	in	the	time
of	 your	 ancestor,	 James	 Lovell,	 but	 you	 were	 more	 fortunate	 than	 he,	 who,	 unable	 to
control	it,	was	destroyed	by	it.	You	were	able	to	sever	the	connection	and	pass	the	reins	to
me,	who,	by	reason	of	my	greater	knowledge,	could	check	its	fury.”
Tony’s	head	was	bowed.	When	he	spoke	again	his	voice	was	hardly	above	a	whisper.
“What	will	happen	when	you	release	it?”
A	far-away	look	came	into	the	doctor’s	eyes,	and	his	voice	rang	out	like	a	trumpet:
“It	will	 spread	 in	 a	 thinning	 cloud	over	 the	whole	 earth,	 and	mankind	will	 turn	 its
face	 from	God	 and	 sink	 into	 the	 darkness	 of	 the	 Pit.	 There	will	 be	 ceaseless	wars	 and
revolutions	until	civilization	is	lost	in	anarchy.	Every	spark	of	goodwill	in	the	heart	of	man
will	be	utterly	quenched;	and	he	will	at	 last	 lose	his	semblance	of	divinity,	his	 immortal
soul,	and	revert	to	the	level	of	the	beasts.	Evolution	will	be	reversed!”
Tony	stared	 incredulously	at	 the	pale	face	before	him,	 lit	with	 the	fire	of	prophecy.
Was	this	the	teacher	he	had	known	and	loved?	The	doctor’s	face	lost	its	prophetic	fire,	and
he	looked	full	into	the	eyes	of	the	young	man,	his	lean,	handsome	features	twisting	into	a
satanic	smile.	Tony	groaned	aloud.
“I	cannot	—	I	will	not	permit	it!”	he	gasped.
“So!”	Gaunt’s	 voice	 sank	 into	 a	 snarl.	 “Is	 this	 the	 stuff	 you	 are	made	of,	Anthony
Lovell?	 I	 always	 feared	 you	were	 not	worthy	 of	 our	 great	 brotherhood.	Do	 you	 shrink
from	the	triumph	of	our	Lord	like	a	girl	from	the	sight	of	blood?”
“No	—	no!	I	wanted	His	Kingdom	to	come	upon	earth	—	I	want	it	still,	but	not	like
this!	I	desired	knowledge,	power,	a	god	to	worship;	you	gave	them	to	me.	I	wanted	to	pass
on	my	wonderful	discovery	to	all	men,	to	release	them	from	the	crushing	bondage	of	the
Nazarene,	 and	 the	Church	 he	 left	 behind	when	we	 found	 him	out	 and	 destroyed	 him.	 I
wanted	to	see	mankind	rise	glorious	and	proud;	strong	in	the	ancient	wisdom;	casting	off
the	yoke	of	the	Crucified;	not	blasted	for	ever.”
“Words	 —	 words!”	 Gaunt	 broke	 in.	 “How	 little	 you	 know	 of	 us!	 Do	 you	 not
understand	 that	 this	world	 is	 itself	 a	 creation	 of	 the	 Power	which	we	 defy?	 It	must	 all
perish	before	we	conquer.	But	that	is	your	weakness,	Anthony	Lovell;	inconsistency.	All
you	want	of	 religion	 is	hope	and	 faith,	 prayer	 and	praise;	 you	cannot	 face	 the	ultimate.
You	were	never	one	of	 them	because	you	never	believed	 their	 faith	was	real.	You	could
not	envisage	the	logical	outcome	of	their	beliefs	—	the	winning	of	the	world	for	Christ.”
He	 spat	 viciously.	 “And	 now	 you	 cannot	 be	 one	 of	 us	 because	 you	 dare	 not	 face	 the
consummation	of	our	faith,	the	winning	of	the	world	for	Satan.”
He	 turned	 away,	 for	 Tony	 stood	 speechless,	 gazing	 at	 the	 ground.	His	 self-created
world	was	 crashing	 about	 his	 ears;	 he	 felt	 utterly	 desolate,	 friendless,	 and	 alone.	Gaunt
turned	again.
“One	last	chance	I	will	give	you,	Tony,	because	I	have	loved	you	well.	Be	with	us,
help	us	in	this	great	blow	we	are	about	to	strike	for	our	Lord,	and	share	with	us	the	sweet
fruits	of	victory.	We	shall	not	be	forgotten	when	He	comes	into	His	Kingdom.”
Tony	shook	his	head.
“Not	that	way!”	he	said	in	a	choked	voice.
Gaunt	shrugged	his	shoulders.
“I	pity	you	most	profoundly,”	said	he;	“outcast	from	both	worlds	you	stand,	helpless
because	you	dare	not	face	the	truth.	Come,	Simon;	let	us	leave	the	fool	to	his	folly.”
Vaughan	 looked	 up	 sharply.	 During	 the	 whole	 of	 the	 argument	 he	 had	 remained
motionless,	his	head	downcast,	his	fingers	twisted	together.	Now	Tony	saw	that	upon	his
face	there	was	an	expression	he	could	not	analyze:	there	was	sullen	defiance	in	it,	veiled
sympathy,	and	a	great	horror.
Their	 eyes	met;	 the	 apostate	 priest,	 foul,	 degraded,	 the	marks	 of	 his	 sins	 showing
plainly	in	his	countenance,	and	the	young	man	whose	faith	had	failed	him;	and	over	that
vast	gulf	which	yawned	between	them	flashed	the	divine	spark	of	sympathy.	Brothers	in
adversity,	their	glances	locked	and	held.
Vaughan	opened	his	lips	to	speak.	What	he	would	have	said	must	remain	for	ever	a
mystery,	for	a	remembered	voice	cut	sharply	into	their	midst:
“Keep	perfectly	still,	all	of	you,	please!”
In	 the	 entrance	 to	 the	 corridor	 beyond	 the	 staircase	 stood	 John	Hamilton,	 pistol	 in
hand;	and	behind	him	loomed	the	bulky	form	of	Tom	Tregellis.

Chapter	XVII	
John	 Hamilton	 was	 eating	 a	 hearty	 breakfast	 in	 the	 back	 parlour	 of	 the	 Three
Fishermen	when	the	landlord’s	round	red	face	appeared	at	the	door.
“There’s	 a	 lady	 and	 gentleman	 to	 see	 you,	 sir,”	 said	 he.	 “I	 think	 they’re	 from
Kestrel.”
“Bring	them	in.”	Hamilton	rose	to	his	feet.
“They	won’t	come,	sir.	Say	they’ve	got	a	train	to	catch.”
“Right.	 I’ll	come	out.”	Hamilton	dropped	his	napkin	on	the	table	and	went	 through
the	bar	into	the	street.
There	 he	 found	 a	 market	 cart,	 laden	 with	 luggage,	 and	 Mrs.	 Lorrimer	 perched
insecurely	 on	 top.	 Her	 husband	 stood	 on	 the	 narrow	 pavement	 nervously	 fingering	 his
hard	black	hat.
“Good	morning!”	Hamilton	greeted	them.	“You	wished	to	see	me?”
“Yes,	sir,”	Lorrimer	answered	hesitantly.	“We’re	leaving.”
“So	I	see.	Have	things	got	too	much	for	you	at	last?”
“That	they	have	—	but	—	are	you	all	right	now,	sir?”
“Why,	what	do	you	mean?”
“Well,	sir,	last	time	I	spoke	to	you	about	—	about	Sir	Anthony	and	his	friends,	you
didn’t	seem	to	remember	that	we’d	talked	of	it	before.”
“That	would	be	when	Miss	Bennett	and	I	were	wrecked	on	Kestrel?”
“Yes,	sir.”
“I	hope	I	didn’t	say	anything	offensive,	Lorrimer.	I’m	afraid	I	was	not	quite	myself.	It
seems	 that	Dr.	Gaunt	 somehow	made	me	 forget	everything	 I	knew	 to	his	discredit	 then.
Since	I	got	back	I	have	remembered	it	all	—	how	I	came	over	when	they	were	away	and
talked	with	you,	and	how	we	went	down	into	the	crypt.	I	had	forgotten	all	that.”
“There,	you	see,	James,”	Mrs.	Lorrimer	interjected,	“I	told	you	Mr.	Hamilton	didn’t
know	what	he	was	doing.”
“I	was	offensive,	then	—	I’m	terribly	sorry,”	said	Hamilton	quickly.
“That’s	all	right,	sir,	now	that	we	know	what	it	was.	It	 just	shows	how	those	devils
can	work	on	a	man.	It	makes	it	easier	to	understand	how	they	got	Sir	Anthony.	Perhaps	we
shouldn’t	have	left	him,	after	all,	my	dear.”	He	looked	up	at	his	wife	doubtfully.
“We	 couldn’t	 have	 stayed,”	 she	 replied	 firmly,	 “not	 after	 last	 night.	 Tell	 Mr.
Hamilton.”
Lorrimer	looked	about	cautiously,	and,	seeing	no	one	within	earshot,	told	his	tale	in	a
low	voice.
“Last	night	 it	 came	again,	 sir,	 that	 awful	noise	we’ve	heard	 twice	before,	only	 this
time	worse	than	it’s	ever	been.	The	whole	place	was	shaking,	fit	to	bring	it	down,	sir.	We
thought	 it	was	 the	end	—	honest	we	did.	And	after	 it	had	stopped	 the	feeling	 that	came
over	us!	Horrible	it	was.	Like	you	felt	in	the	crypt,	sir;	and	up	in	our	own	room	where	it
had	never	come	before.	And	the	wicked	 thoughts	 that	came	with	 it,	 too!	It	seemed	as	 if
nothing	was	worth	while	any	more,	sir.	We	couldn’t	even	pray.	So	we	knew	then	 that	 it
was	time	for	us	to	go.”
“I	don’t	blame	you	in	the	least.	Does	Sir	Anthony	know	you’ve	left?”
“I	was	coming	to	that,	sir.	That’s	another	thing.	I’m	no	coward,	as	you’ll	bear	me	out,
sir,	having	been	down	in	that	crypt	with	me;	and	when	it	was	light	again,	and	I	felt	a	bit
more	like	myself,	I	went	to	Sir	Anthony’s	room	to	tell	him	we	was	going.	I	wouldn’t	do	a
think	 like	 that	 behind	 his	 back.	Well,	 I	 knocked,	 sir,	 but	 he	was	 so	 sound	 asleep	 that	 I
couldn’t	wake	him,	so	I	went	in.	And	the	first	thing	I	saw	was	a	kind	of	white	robe	on	the
floor,	where	he’d	dropped	it	before	going	to	bed.	And	believe	me,	sir”	—	Lorrimer’s	voice
sank	to	a	whisper	—	“there	was	blood	on	it,	as	sure	as	I’m	standing	here.”
Hamilton	stiffened,	and	a	cold	shudder	went	down	his	spine,	despite	the	warm	sun.
“Blood!	Are	you	sure,	man,	are	you	sure?”	He	gripped	the	other’s	arm.
“I	wouldn’t	take	my	oath	on	it,	sir,	but	it	looked	like	blood;	I	didn’t	stay	to	make	sure.
I	just	couldn’t	bring	myself	to	touch	him,	for	all	that	he	lay	sleeping	like	an	innocent	babe.
There’s	blood	on	his	gown,	I	said	to	myself,	and	blood	on	his	hands,	most	like.	So	I	ran
down	those	stairs	faster	than	I	came	up;	and	we	just	left	a	note	saying	we’d	gone.”
Hamilton	relaxed.	A	thought	had	struck	him.
“Did	 you	 notice	 anything	 else	 in	 Sir	Anthony’s	 room?”	 he	 asked.	 “Any	 smell,	 for
instance?	And	any	other	clothes	laying	about?”
Lorrimer	scratched	his	head.
“Yes,	sir,”	he	said	at	last,	“now	you	come	to	mention	it;	there	was	that	same	smell	I
told	you	I	noticed	about	the	other	two’s	clothes;	incense,	they	call	it,	don’t	they,	sir?”
Hamilton	nodded.
“Yes,	incense.	And	anything	else	besides	the	white	robe?”
“I	didn’t	 stay	 long,	as	 I’ve	 told	you,	 sir.	 I	 thought	 to	myself,	 ‘There’s	been	murder
done	last	night;	this	is	no	place	for	us.’	But	I	do	seem	to	recollect	something	else	on	the
floor	 along	with	 the	 robe;	 an	embroidered	 sort	of	 thing,	 red	and	gold,	 like	one	of	 those
fancy	waistcoats	the	gentry	used	to	wear.	But	I	only	caught	a	glimpse;	I	couldn’t	swear	to
the	shape.”
“That’s	good	enough.”	Hamilton	almost	choked	with	relief.	“For	a	moment	I	thought
—	but	no,	it	wasn’t	blood,	Lorrimer;	there’s	been	no	murder	done.	Something	far	worse
than	mortal	murder,	 in	one	respect,	but	something	 that	 is	not	altogether	 irreparable.”	He
saw	the	lack	of	comprehension	in	the	other’s	eyes,	and	explained	briefly:
“Those	splashes	were	not	blood,	but	wine:	consecrated	wine,	I’m	afraid,	used	at	one
of	 their	 abominable	 ceremonies.”	 He	 knew	 that	 the	 sturdy	 Nonconformist	 would	 not
understand	the	sacrilege,	and	left	it	at	that.
Relief	showed	plainly	in	the	faces	of	both	Lorrimer	and	his	wife.
“Thank	God	for	 that!”	said	the	old	man.	“I	couldn’t	believe	my	eyes	—	thank	you,
sir.”	He	was	almost	overcome	with	emotion.
“What	are	your	plans?”	Hamilton	asked.
“We’re	going	 to	London,	 sir,”	Mrs.	Lorrimer	explained.	 “I’ve	got	 a	 sister	 there	we
can	stay	with	until	we	can	get	another	job.”
“Good.	Send	me	your	address,	and	I’ll	let	you	know	how	things	go	on.	Did	Tregellis
bring	you	across?”
“Yes,	sir.	He’ll	take	the	boat	back,	and	leave	it	there.	They’ve	plenty	of	tinned	stuff
and	the	likes	of	that.	He	doesn’t	say	much,	but	I	know	he	feels	as	we	do.”
“Is	he	still	in	the	harbour?”
“Yes,	sir,	he’s	waiting	for	a	friend	of	his	with	a	dinghy	he	can	borrow	to	come	back
in.”
“Splendid.	Well,	good-bye	and	good	luck.	You’ve	been	bricks,	both	of	you.”
“Good-bye,	sir.	What	are	you	going	to	do,	if	I	may	make	so	bold	as	to	ask?”
“I’m	going	across	with	Tom	to	fetch	Sir	Anthony	back;	by	force,	if	necessary.”
Lorrimer’s	face	slowly	whitened.
“Oh,	be	careful,	sir,	for	God’s	sake!”	said	he.	“There’s	more	on	that	island	than	three.
If	you	ask	me,	I’d	say	their	name	was	legion.”
“I’ll	be	careful.	Good-bye!”
“Good-bye,	and	God	bless	you,	sir!”
Lorrimer	 climbed	 up	 beside	 his	 wife,	 gathered	 the	 reins	 together,	 and	 they	 drove
slowly	away	up	the	hill.	Hamilton	turned	on	his	heel,	went	quickly	into	the	inn,	and	up	to
his	room.
Unlocking	his	 suitcase,	 he	 took	out	 the	 automatic	pistol	which	Lorrimer	had	given
him,	slipped	it	into	his	pocket,	and	went	out	of	the	house.
Down	by	the	harbour	he	found	Tom	Tregellis	sitting	on	an	upturned	boat	thoughtfully
chewing	tobacco.	He	looked	curiously	at	Hamilton	and	nodded.
“Tregellis”	—	Hamilton’s	voice	was	crisp	and	determined	—	“I’m	going	over	there
to	bring	Sir	Anthony	back,	by	hook	or	by	crook.	He’s	in	great	danger.	Will	you	help	me?”
The	other	went	on	chewing	silently	 for	a	moment,	 then	 rose,	 spat	adroitly	over	 the
wall	into	the	sea,	and	rubbed	his	hands	on	his	corduroy	trousers.
“Ay,	sir,	I’m	with	you,”	he	growled,	and,	without	more	ado,	went	down	the	steps	and
clambered	into	the	launch	moored	there.	Hamilton	joined	him;	he	started	the	engine	and	in
less	than	five	minutes	they	were	in	the	open	sea.
Though	the	sun	shone	brightly,	a	strong	breeze	was	still	blowing,	and	the	water	was
choppy.	Hamilton	sat	watching	the	approaching	island,	wondering	whether	he	should	have
consulted	 the	 rector	 before	 undertaking	 this	 rather	 desperate	 mission.	 He	 decided	 that
Valerie	would	only	have	been	worried	on	his	account	had	she	known,	and	concluded	that
he	had	taken	the	best	course	in	the	circumstances.	He	slipped	his	hand	into	his	pocket	and
caressed	the	smooth	steel	of	the	pistol.	Let	anybody	try	any	funny	business	this	time,	and
they	would	find	they	had	taken	on	more	than	they	bargained	for!
The	 launch	 nosed	 its	way	 into	 the	 narrow	 harbour	 and	 scraped	 along	 the	 landing-
stage.	Hamilton	 jumped	out,	 caught	 the	painter	which	Tregellis	 threw	him,	 and	made	 it
fast.	The	latter	shut	off	his	engine	and	followed.
Hamilton	remarked:
“We	may	have	to	use	force.	Don’t	be	surprised	at	whatever	happens,	but	just	follow
my	lead	and	we’ll	soon	have	Sir	Anthony	in	safety,	or	I’ll	know	the	reason	why.”
Tregellis	 contented	 himself	 with	 a	 grunt	 in	 reply,	 but	 he	 spat	 on	 his	 hands,	 and,
bending	down,	drew	a	short	iron	mooring-bar	from	its	socket	in	the	rock.	Swinging	it	in
his	right	hand,	he	followed	Hamilton	up	the	long	stairway.
They	reached	the	courtyard	round	the	Abbey	without	meeting	anyone,	and	made	their
way	 to	 the	 back	 of	 the	 building.	 Here	 they	 found	 an	 unfastened	 door	 and	 entered	 the
kitchens.
As	 soon	 as	 they	were	 inside	Hamilton	became	 aware	 of	 the	 intense	 atmosphere	 of
evil	which	lay	like	a	blight	upon	the	place.	It	was	almost	identical	with	that	which	he	had
felt	in	the	crypt,	but	instead	of	fluctuating,	coming	and	going	in	waves	as	it	had	done	then,
it	now	remained	constant,	 fixed,	 like	 the	menace	of	a	 loaded	gun.	Overcoming	 the	deep
horror	which	began	welling	up	in	his	heart,	Hamilton	went	on	towards	the	corridor	which
led	to	the	hall.
It	 was	 evident	 that	 Tregellis	 had	 noticed	 something	 too,	 for	 he	wriggled	 his	 great
shoulders	 and	 glanced	 round	 uneasily.	 Then	 he	 turned	 up	 his	 collar,	 spat	 again	 on	 his
hands,	and,	gripping	his	iron	club,	followed	Hamilton.
They	marched	boldly	along	the	passage	and	emerged	into	the	great	hall.	Over	against
the	fireplace	Tony	stood	facing	Vaughan	and	Gaunt.	None	of	them	was	speaking,	but	they
appeared	 to	 be	 quite	 unaware	 of	 the	 intrusion,	 until	 Hamilton,	 drawing	 his	 pistol,
announced	his	presence	with	the	command:
“Keep	perfectly	still,	all	of	you,	please!”
Three	pairs	of	astonished	eyes	turned	towards	him.	There	was	an	electric	pause,	then:
“Ah,	 the	 ubiquitous	 Mr.	 Hamilton,”	 said	 Gaunt.	 “Good	 morning	 to	 you.	 Put	 that
ridiculous	thing	away.	We	won’t	eat	you.”
Hamilton	frowned,	but	he	did	not	lower	the	weapon.
“Stand	back,	please,”	he	said	curtly;	“I’ve	come	to	fetch	Tony,	and	nothing’s	going	to
stop	me.”
Gaunt	laughed	sharply.
“I	 shall	 not	 even	 attempt	 to	 dissuade	 you,”	 he	 countered.	 “Take	 him,	 with	 my
blessing.”
Hamilton	frowned	still	more.	This	was	too	easy!	However:
“Come	along,	Tony,”	he	said.	“Get	a	move	on!”
Tony	had	been	standing	motionless,	staring	dumbly,	but	now	he	broke	out	with:
“No,	no,	John!	You	don’t	understand.	I	can’t	go	now.”
“Can’t	 be	 damned!	You’re	 coming,	Tony,	whether	 you	 like	 it	 or	 not.	Do	 I	 have	 to
drag	you	out	by	the	scruff	of	your	neck?”
“No,	please,	John,	don’t	make	me	go.	You	don’t	know	what	you’re	doing.”
“Don’t	 I?”	Hamilton	walked	quickly	across	 the	 intervening	space,	his	heels	 ringing
on	the	flagstones.	The	doctor	and	his	companion	fell	back	before	the	threat	of	 the	pistol
and	he	stopped	a	pace	in	front	of	Tony.
How	strange	the	boy	looked,	he	thought.	Were	those	tears	in	his	eyes?	His	mouth	was
trembling	like	that	of	a	child.	In	a	gentler	tone	he	spoke	again.
“Don’t	be	a	fool,	Tony!	You’re	coming	with	me,	so	don’t	argue.	I’m	taking	you	out	of
this	infernal	hole	for	good.	Those	two	devils	can	stay	and	rot,	for	all	I	care.”
Tony	hesitated,	 his	 brain	working	 at	 lightning	 speed.	 If	 he	 stayed,	 there	was	 just	 a
chance…	But	he	couldn’t	hope	to	convince	John	now.	Besides…	No!	He	must	stay.	His
face	hardened	and	he	folded	his	arms	defiantly.
“Sorry,	John,”	he	said	firmly,	“but	I’m	not	coming.”
“Is	that	so?”	The	sunlight	glinted	on	Hamilton’s	pistol	as	he	swung	it	up.	Then,	with
a	sharp	crack,	the	hard	steel	descended	on	Tony’s	unprotected	head,	and	without	a	sound
the	young	man	crumpled	up	and	fell	at	his	feet.
“Sorry,	old	boy,”	Hamilton	murmured,	and	turned	to	the	gaping	Tregellis.
“Take	him	to	the	boat,”	he	ordered.
The	 other	 ambled	 across,	 reluctantly	 surrendered	 his	 bludgeon,	 picked	 up	 the	 limp
figure	as	if	it	had	been	that	of	a	child,	and	made	off	down	the	corridor.
Gaunt	smiled	sardonically.
“I	must	say	you	have	a	way	with	you,	Mr.	Hamilton,”	he	remarked.	“You	have	saved
me	a	lot	of	bother.”
Not	 troubling	 to	 reply,	Hamilton	 followed	 his	 henchman.	He	was	 careful	 to	 avoid
even	looking	at	Gaunt,	for	he	knew	full	well	the	power	of	those	terrible	eyes.
He	did	not	permit	himself	to	relax	until	the	launch	was	out	of	the	harbour,	and	then
he	put	away	his	gun	and	examined	his	prisoner.
Tony	lay	quite	still	in	the	bottom	of	the	boat,	his	face	deadly	pale	and	his	eyes	closed.
There	was	a	 thin	 line	of	 scarlet	 trickling	 from	one	nostril.	Hamilton	 felt	 a	vague	alarm.
Had	he	hit	too	hard?	Hurriedly	unbuttoning	Tony’s	shirt,	he	thrust	his	hand	in	and	felt	his
heart.	It	was	beating	faintly,	but	steadily.	With	a	sigh	of	relief	he	began	bathing	the	bruised
head	with	sea-water.	He	could	feel	a	lump	like	an	egg	beneath	the	flaxen	hair.
What	 a	 pity	 Tony	 had	 been	 so	 obstinate,	 he	 reflected.	 Gaunt	 hadn’t	 even	 tried	 to
interfere.	Why	 not?	He	 remembered	 the	 rector’s	 theory	 that	 the	 two	Satanists	were	 not
really	very	much	concerned	over	Tony,	but	wanted	Kestrel	for	themselves.	If	that	were	so,
they	had	got	it	now,	for	what	use	it	was.
Then	 it	 occurred	 to	 him	 that	 they	were	 now	marooned	 on	 the	 island,	 since	 he	 had
interfered	with	Tregellis’	plan	of	returning	the	launch	with	a	dinghy	in	tow	to	come	back
in.	The	launch	was	Tony’s	property,	and	must	remain	at	Pentock	until	he	decided	what	to
do.	Hamilton	gazed	at	the	white,	still	face	and	sighed.	What	would	he	decide?	Time	alone
could	tell.
Tony	was	still	unconscious	when	they	arrived	at	Pentock,	but	since,	the	fishing-boats
were	out,	they	managed	to	get	him	to	the	rectory	without	attracting	undue	attention.
Valerie	must	have	seen	their	approach	from	a	window,	for	she	was	at	the	door	as	soon
as	they,	crying:
“Why,	John,	whatever’s	happened?”
“I’ll	explain	later.	We	must	get	him	to	bed	at	once.”
At	this	juncture	the	rector,	hearing	the	commotion,	emerged	from	his	study.	Taking	in
the	situation	at	a	glance,	he	led	the	way	upstairs	to	his	own	room,	and	there	they	laid	Tony
on	the	bed.	Tregellis	was	then	dispatched	post-haste	for	Dr.	Pellew.
While	 he	 was	 gone	 Hamilton	 briefly	 explained	 what	 had	 happened.	 Valerie	 was
bathing	Tony’s	head,	and	made	no	comment	throughout	the	narrative,	though	she	caught
her	breath	sharply	when	Hamilton	said	he	had	been	to	Kestrel.	The	rector	sat	on	the	edge
of	the	bed	polishing	his	glasses.	When	the	tale	was	told	he	put	them	on,	saying:
“There	is	a	saying	about	fools	and	angels,	John,	but	perhaps	that	 is	a	 little	harsh	in
this	instance.	It	was	very	brave	of	you	to	venture	there	again	for	the	sake	of	your	friend,
and	I	honour	you	for	it.	But	you	are	lucky	to	be	here	to	tell	the	tale,	I	think.	There	must	be
a	special	Providence	which	watches	over	—	impetuous	fellows	like	yourself.”	He	smiled,
then	his	 face	became	grave	again.	“I	pray	God	you	have	not	played	 into	 their	hands	by
doing	 this.	 It	 is	 certainly	 very	 odd	 that	 they	 offered	 no	 resistance.	 If	 Tony	 were	 their
master	card	I	feel	they	would	not	have	let	him	go	so	easily.	Ah,	well,	he	shall	be	our	chief
consideration	now,	poor	lad.	It	we	can	heal	his	wounded	soul	as	easily	as	that	bump	on	his
head	I	shall	be	very	happy.”
When	the	doctor	arrived	he	examined	Tony	briefly	and	announced	that	there	was	no
cause	for	alarm.
“He’s	 had	 a	 nasty	 crack,	 though,	 and	 there	 is	 a	 slight	 concussion.	Rest,	 quiet,	 and
cold-water	 bandages,	 Miss	 Bennett.	 It	 will	 probably	 be	 some	 hours	 before	 he	 comes
round.	I’ll	call	again	later.”
He	asked	no	questions	as	to	how	Tony	had	come	by	his	injury,	but,	since	the	rector
had	told	him	something	of	the	happenings	upon	Kestrel,	he	probably	had	his	suspicions.
All	that	night	Valerie,	Hamilton,	and	the	rector	took	turns	to	watch	by	the	sick-bed;
but	when	day	broke	the	patient	was	still	unconscious.
At	three	o’clock	in	the	afternoon	Valerie,	who	had	been	asleep	all	morning,	noticed	a
change	in	Tony’s	appearance.	He	was	breathing	faster,	and	a	little	colour	was	creeping	into
his	cheeks.	The	doctor,	who	had	been	in	twice	during	the	day,	still	maintained	there	was
no	need	to	worry;	but	she	had	to	confess	that	she	was	growing	a	little	anxious.	Now	she
bent	forward	and	watched	the	young	man’s	face	eagerly.
Presently	his	eyes	opened	and	he	stared	up	wonderingly	at	her.
“Valerie?”	he	whispered	doubtfully.
She	smiled	reassuringly.
“Yes,	Tony.	Don’t	worry.	You	are	in	my	uncle’s	house.	John	brought	you	yesterday.”
He	lay	quiet	for	a	moment,	taking	it	in.	Then	his	hand	crept	up	to	his	head	and	he	felt
the	bandages,	wincing	as	he	touched	the	damaged	place.
“What	happened?”	he	asked	wearily.
“You	refused	to	come	away	with	him,	you	know,	and	he	thought	it	best	to	bring	you,
whether	you	wanted	to	or	not.	I’m	afraid	he	hit	you	rather	hard,	but	he	didn’t	mean	to	hurt
you.	There’s	no	serious	harm	done.”
All	at	once	Tony’s	blue	eyes	widened,	and	he	sat	up,	only	to	fall	back	with	a	groan	of
pain.
“What’s	the	date?”	he	demanded	surprisingly.
She	thought	for	a	moment,	then:
“The	twenty-first,	I	think,”	she	said.	“Why?”
“Four	days	to	go	—	only	four	days	—	less!	I	must	get	back.	Can	I	see	John?”
“I	think	he’s	asleep	now.	Is	it	so	very	important?”
“It’s	vital.	Please	fetch	him	at	once.”
The	urgency	 in	 his	weak	voice	 silenced	 the	 girl’s	 questions,	 and	 she	went	 into	 the
adjoining	room	and	woke	Hamilton,	who	presently	appeared,	clad	in	a	dressing-gown,	and
sat	on	the	edge	of	the	bed.
“I’m	glad	to	see	you’re	better,	old	boy,”	said	he.	“Sorry	I	had	to	lay	you	out,	but	you
were	so	darned	obstinate	there	was	nothing	else	for	it.”
Tony	smiled	wryly	and	held	out	his	hand.	His	friend	took	it	silently,	and	he	said:
“I	wish	you	hadn’t,	 John,	 all	 the	 same,	because	now	I	must	get	back	as	quickly	as
possible.”
Hamilton	sighed.
“Do	we	have	to	go	over	all	this	again,	Tony?”	he	asked.
“No,	 you	 don’t	 understand.	When	 you	 came	 butting	 in	 like	 a	 great	 bull	 yesterday
Gaunt	had	just	cast	me	off,	after	I	had	refused	to	help	in	what	he	proposed	to	do.”
“What,	you’re	through	with	him?”
“I	can	never	be	through	with	him	altogether	—	I	am	bound	by	oath	—	but	I	refused
to	go	on	with	this	particular	job.”
“And	this	is…?”
Tony	replied	with	a	quiet	emphasis	more	convincing	than	any	rhetoric:
“The	releasing	of	the	curse-monstrosity	upon	its	anniversary	date,	the	twenty-fifth	of
this	month.”
Hamilton	considered.
“That’s	 four	 days	 from	 today.	 But	 why	 the	 excitement?	 I	 thought	 that	 was	 your
intention	all	along.”
“I	was	deceived	in	this	as	in	many	things.	I	believed	we	were	to	send	the	curse	back
whence	it	came	out	of	this	world	for	good.	But	Gaunt	means	to	release	it	into	the	world.”
Hamilton	stared.
“What	will	that	mean?”	he	asked.
“The	ruin	of	the	human	race,”	said	Tony	quietly.
“Good	God!”	Hamilton	was	on	his	feet.	Then	he	sat	down	again,	saying:
“How	do	I	know	this	is	true?	You	may	be	just	pulling	my	leg	in	order	to	get	back.”
“No,	John,	I	swear	it’s	deadly	serious.	That	thing	is	an	evil	entity	of	frightful	power.
Once	it	gets	loose	there’s	no	telling	what	may	happen.”
Hamilton	got	up	again	slowly.
“You	sound	serious	enough,	Tony,	but	Heaven	help	you	if	there’s	a	catch	in	this.	I’ll
fetch	the	rector,	and	see	what	he	has	to	say.”
“That	priest?	What	good	will	he	do?”
“He	knows	more	about	these	matters	than	I	do,	Tony;	and,	I	suspect,	more	than	you
do	yourself.”
Tony	laughed	bitterly.
“I	 doubt	 it,”	 said	 he,	 “but	 bring	 him	 along	 if	 you	must.	 Perhaps	 I	 can	make	 him
realize	how	serious	this	all	is.”
Shrugging	his	shoulders,	Hamilton	went	out.	Tony	lay	staring	up	at	the	ceiling	with
burning	eyes.	Could	he	convince	these	people	of	the	dreadful	urgency	of	the	matter?	And
even	if	he	could	and	did	manage	to	get	back	to	the	Abbey,	could	he	stop	Gaunt?	Knowing
the	doctor’s	power,	he	doubted	it.	He	gnashed	his	teeth	in	an	agony	of	impotence.
The	rector	came	in	alone.
“Feeling	 better,	 Sir	Anthony?”	 he	 inquired.	 “John	 tells	me	 you’ve	 something	 very
important	to	tell	me.”
Rapidly	Tony	repeated	what	he	had	told	Hamilton.	When	he	had	finished	the	rector
got	up	and	paced	the	floor	several	times,	beating	his	brow	with	his	clenched	fist.
“Why	didn’t	I	think	of	this?”	he	exclaimed.	“Fool	that	I	am!	I	knew	that	it	wasn’t	you
yourself	they	wanted,	but	I	never	dreamed…	Can	you	stop	them	if	you	go	back?”
“I	don’t	know,”	Tony	groaned.	“I	can	 try.	By	myself	 I	could	do	nothing;	 I	have	no
power	over	that	thing	now,	but	there	is	just	one	chance.	I	have	an	idea	that	Vaughan	is	no
happier	over	the	whole	business	than	I	am;	the	two	of	us	might	perhaps	be	able	to	stand
against	Gaunt.”
“I	shouldn’t	count	on	Simon	Vaughan,”	said	the	rector;	“he	was	ever	a	weak	vessel.	I
knew	him	of	old.	But	something	must	be	done;	that	is	evident.	As	soon	as	you	are	a	little
stronger	I	will	go	back	with	you;	but	that	will	not	be	today.	You	must	rest	now;	perhaps
tomorrow	the	doctor	will	let	you	get	up.”
“But	time	is	getting	so	short,”	Tony	persisted.	“There	are	only	four	days	to	go.”
“Does	it	matter	so	very	much	how	long	before	the	actual	date	you	get	back?”	asked
the	rector.	“Surely	another	day	will	not	make	much	difference.”
“I’m	not	so	sure,”	Tony	answered.	“You	see,	sir,	every	hour	the	curse	grows	stronger,
until	it	reaches	its	maximum	at	noon	on	the	twenty-fifth.	The	sooner	I	attempt	to	interfere,
the	better.”
“I	see.	Tell	me,	Sir	Anthony,	why	are	you	so	anxious	to	prevent	this	occurrence?	You
are	one	of	them,	are	you	not?”
“I	don’t	know	what	I	am.”	Tony’s	voice	was	weary	and	hopeless.	“I	believed	I	was,
but	now	that	I	cannot	face	the	consummation	of	their	faith	they	will	have	no	more	to	do
with	me.”	He	turned	his	face	away,	but	not	before	the	rector	had	seen	the	tears	in	his	eyes.
A	deep	pity	stirred	in	the	heart	of	the	old	priest.
“Give	this	soul	to	me,	dear	Lord,”	he	prayed	silently,	“that	I	may	bring	him	back	to
Thee.”
He	sat	down	beside	the	bed,	and	said	gently:
“Tell	me	how	it	all	began.”
The	need	 for	 sympathy	was	 so	 strong	 in	Tony	 that	he	poured	out	his	pitiful	 tale	at
once.
“My	life	was	empty,	meaningless,”	he	said;	“I	realized	that	when	my	father	died.	And
the	awful	responsibility	of	Kestrel	was	more	than	I	could	bear	alone.	I	turned	to	Nicholas
Gaunt,	 and	 he	 offered	me	 knowledge	 and	 power	whereby	 I	 could	 rid	 the	world	 of	 that
horrid	thing	for	ever.	More	than	that,	he	offered	me	a	new	philosophy	which	would	show
me	the	meaning	of	everything,	and	give	me	something	definite	to	live	for.	I	believed	him.
He	 taught	me.	 I	 have	 learnt	many	 strange	and	wonderful	 things	 from	him,	 things	 that	 I
could	never	have	found	by	any	other	means	—	good	things,	noble	things,	spiritual	truths,
things	 that	 even	now	 I	 can	 find	no	 fault	with.	But	 all	 the	while	 he	was	 subtly	 at	work,
altering	my	sense	of	proportion,	lowering	my	moral	standards.	I	can	see	it	all	now,	but	at
the	time	I	was	blinded	by	the	light	of	new	knowledge.
“He	 showed	 me	 his	 faith	 in	 its	 most	 attractive	 aspect,	 suppressing	 all	 that	 was
unpleasant.	 I	 came	 to	 believe	 that	 humanity	was	 on	 the	wrong	 track;	 that	 the	God	 you
worship	was	false,	non-existent,	merely	called	into	a	sort	of	phantasmal	being	by	centuries
of	misguided	worship;	and	that	Christ	was	an	insane	egotist,	blinded	by	his	own	conceit,
who	had	somehow	managed	to	foist	a	ridiculous	creed	on	to	his	followers.	A	creed	which,
with	 its	 insistence	 upon	 humility	 and	 gentleness,	 had	 been	 the	 ruin	 of	 civilization,
suppressing	 the	 god-like	 pride	which	 is	 the	 birthright	 of	man,	 and	 reducing	 him	 to	 the
level	 of	 a	 slave,	 meekly	 accepting	 tyranny	 and	 oppression.	 You	 know	 that	 poem	 of
Swinburne’s:	‘Before	a	Crucifix’?”
“Yes,	I	know	it,”	the	priest	replied,	quoting:	“	‘Thou	hast	conquered,	O	pale	Galilean,
And	the	world	has	grown	grey	in	thy	breath.’	Very	specious,	but	quite	untrue.	Please	go
on,	if	it	isn’t	tiring	you	too	much.”
“No,	no,	I	must	tell	you	the	whole	story	now,”	Tony	said	with	breathless	eagerness.
“Well,	eventually	I	came	to	be	initiated.	You	must	remember	that	all	this	time	Gaunt	had
offered	me	no	other	 form	of	worship	 in	place	of	 that	which	he	had	shown	 to	be	 false.	 I
must	admit	I	felt	the	need	of	something	more	than	mere	knowledge,	however	wonderful,
and	at	the	ceremony	it	was	revealed	to	me.	I	can’t	possibly	describe	it	—	words	are	quite
useless	—	and	in	any	case	I	am	under	oath	not	to,	but	it	suddenly	dawned	upon	me	what	it
was	all	about,	that	Satan	was	the	one	true	Lord,	to	whom	I	was	bound	for	ever.
“I	 gladly	 accepted	my	 new	 bondage,	 and	 until	Valerie	 and	 John	 came	 to	Kestrel	 I
believed	that	all	my	troubles	were	over,	and	that	I	had	reached	harbour	at	last.
“Then	there	came	that	awful	business	when	Gaunt	tried	to	destroy	Valerie	by	means
of	 the	 curse.	 I	must	 frankly	 admit	 that	 she	 had	 upset	my	 altered	 ideas	 of	 life;	 they	 no
longer	seemed	all	in	all;	but	I	couldn’t	bring	myself	to	believe	that	the	wanton	sacrifice	of
her	life	was	in	accordance	with	the	high	principles	that	Gaunt	had	laid	down.	I	told	him	as
much,	 and	he	assured	me	 that	he	had	acted	 for	my	good	and	 that	 she	was	not	 all	 I	had
thought	her.”
“He	 lied,”	 interrupted	 the	 priest	 angrily;	 “she	 is	 all	 that	 is	 good	 and	 pure.	 I	 know
that.”
“Yes,”	Tony	agreed	sadly,	“I	know	it	 too	now.	As	soon	as	I	saw	her	face	again	this
afternoon	I	knew	the	wrong	I	had	done	her	 in	believing	Gaunt.	But	such	was	his	power
over	me	that	he	convinced	me	at	 the	 time,	particularly	since	he	gave	me	what	I	 thought
was	visible	proof	of	her	unworthiness.”
“What	do	you	mean?”	asked	the	priest	sharply.
“I	saw	a	vision	in	the	crystal	—	oh,	it’s	too	beastly	to	describe	—	it	must	have	been	a
trick;	but	I	thought	I	knew	them	all.”
Tony	 lay	 silent,	 brooding	 on	 his	 unhappy	memories.	Overcoming	 the	wrath	which
had	surged	up	in	him	at	the	slur	on	his	niece,	the	rector	inquired	if	there	were	any	more	to
tell.
Wondering	what	on	earth	was	making	him	confide	all	the	secrets	of	his	troubled	soul
to	this	man	whom	he	scarcely	knew,	Tony	went	on:
“I	was	very	angry	with	Valerie	and	John	 for	 the	wrong	which	 I	 imagined	 they	had
done	me,	and	Gaunt	persuaded	me	to	assist	at	a	Black	Mass	offered	for	their	destruction.”
The	 rector	 started	 violently,	 and	 only	 by	 a	 tremendous	 effort	 of	will	 succeeded	 in
remaining	 silent.	 He	 knew	what	 the	 Black	Mass	 entailed,	 and	 his	 soul	 sickened	 at	 the
knowledge	 of	 the	 enormity	 which	 this	 wretched	 boy	 had	 been	 dragged	 into.	 His	 rage
against	the	two	who	had	been	ultimately	responsible	made	the	blood	thunder	in	his	ears	to
such	an	extent	that	he	had	difficulty	in	hearing	Tony’s	words.
“I	think	I	was	deceived	again,”	the	young	man	continued,	“because	all	that	happened
was	that	the	curse-monstrosity	was	whipped	into	frightful	fury,	and	in	the	pandemonium
Gaunt	made	me	relinquish	whatever	control	I	had	over	it	to	him.
“After	 that	I	suppose	 they	had	no	further	use	for	me.	I	 refused	to	help	when	Gaunt
told	me	of	his	further	plans,	and	they	cast	me	out.	I	have	been	deceived	all	along	the	line.
One	 thing	 Gaunt	 said	 when	 I	 expostulated	 with	 him	 has	 shown	 me	 that	 much	 of	 his
teaching	 about	 his	 own	 creed	must	 have	 been	 quite	 untrue.	 He	 had	 always	 denied	 the
existence	of	your	God,	but	when	 I	 protested	 against	 the	 ruining	of	 this	 lovely	world	he
said,	‘This	world	was	created	by	the	Power	which	we	defy,	and	must	perish	at	the	last.’	”
A	 long	 silence	 fell	while	 the	 priest	 racked	 his	 brains	 for	 the	 best	way	 in	which	 to
approach	this	problem.	At	last	he	said:
“Well,	Tony,	there	is	only	one	thing	left	for	you	to	do.	Deny	them	as	they	have	denied
you;	 as	 they	 have	 cast	 you	 out,	 so	 cast	 their	 abominable	 bondage	 from	 your	 soul,	 and
come	back	to	us.”
Tony	turned	his	sad	eyes	to	the	priest.	He	shook	his	head.
“I	do	not	think	I	shall	ever	believe	anything	any	more,”	said	he.	“I	cannot	tell	which
is	true	and	which	is	false.	It’s	all	so	hopeless.	I	shall	go	back	and	make	one	last	attempt	to
undo	the	harm	I’ve	done,	and	then	I	hope	I	die.	At	least	I	shan’t	be	able	to	do	any	more
harm	then.”
“Nonsense!”	said	the	rector	sharply.	“You	have	been	sadly	deceived,	but	that	is	all	the
more	 reason	 for	coming	back	 to	 the	old	 faith.	After	all,	 it	 is	 the	one	stable	 thing	 in	 this
unhappy	world.”
“What	can	you	offer	me?”
“Nothing.	They	offered	you	the	world	and	the	glory	of	it	in	exchange	for	your	own
soul,	and	it	turned	to	dust	and	ashes	in	your	mouth.	I	offer	you	only	perpetual	bondage	in
the	sweet	yoke	of	Christ.	He	will	give	you	the	glory	of	His	service,	the	burning	reality	of
His	great	love,	and	the	peace	which	passeth	all	understanding.	Moreover,	He	will	give	you
your	own	soul	back	again.”
“It	all	sounds	so	vague,	so	full	of	aspiration,	but	achieving	so	little.”
“So	says	the	world.	But	we	are	not	of	the	world.	The	martyrs	found	the	faith	strong
enough	 to	 support	 them	 in	 the	 flame	—	 they	 knew	 it	was	 no	 illusory	 promise,	 lacking
fulfillment.”
“They	gave	me	power	and	strength.”
“He	 gives	 you	 service	 and	weakness,	 the	 contradiction	 of	 all	 they	 teach;	 truth	 and
beauty,	pity	and	kindliness;	all	the	lovely	things	which	they	reject.	We	rely	not	on	our	own
poor	mortal	strength,	but	upon	the	infinite	power	of	the	Most	High	God,	who	was	Himself
content	to	suffer	at	our	ignorant	hands.”
“There	was	a	certain	sombre	glory	in	their	worship,”	Tony	ventured.
“The	 sombre	 glory	 of	 damnation,”	 the	 priest	 countered	 instantly.	 “Our	 worship	 is
glorious	enough	with	its	ancient	ritual,	which	they	pervert	to	blasphemy,	but	more	glorious
than	this	is	the	inner	knowledge	of	a	soul	at	one	with	the	Creator	of	all	things.”
“I	wish	I	could	believe	as	you	do,	sir,”	said	Tony	in	a	voice	tremulous	with	self-pity,
“but	I	just	can’t,	that’s	all.”
“That	 is	 not	 to	 be	 wondered	 at,	 my	 son.	 You	 have	 never	 been	 instructed	 in	 the
mysteries	of	our	great	 faith,	 and	you	are	 still	 soiled	by	contact	with	 their	abominations.
Will	you	put	yourself	unreservedly	in	my	hands?	I	can	promise	you	new	life,	new	hope,
and	everlasting	salvation.”
“Gaunt	said	just	the	same.	But	I’ll	give	it	a	trial	—	afterwards.	First	I	must	get	back
to	Kestrel.”
While	they	had	been	talking	the	room	had	been	growing	steadily	darker,	and	even	as
Tony	spoke	a	distant	mutter	of	thunder	stirred	the	air.	The	rector	went	over	to	the	window
and	looked	out.
The	sky	was	heavily	overcast	and	the	wind	was	rising.	Already	the	sea	was	showing
its	teeth	in	the	white	crests	of	the	waves.
“Not	today,	I’m	afraid,	my	boy,”	said	he;	“there’s	another	storm	brewing.”
Tony	struggled	 into	a	 sitting	position,	one	hand	 to	his	bandaged	head.	Panic	 stared
from	his	eyes.
“A	storm?”	he	gasped.	“It’s	his	doing.	 I	might	have	known.	 I	 shall	never	get	back,
and	the	world	is	doomed!”
“Nonsense!”	snapped	the	rector.	“No	man	can	control	God’s	sea.”
“You	 don’t	 know	Gaunt,”	 Tony	 groaned,	 falling	 back	 on	 his	 pillow.	 “Sometimes	 I
wonder	if	he	is	a	man	at	all,	or	a	fiend	in	human	form.”
“Don’t	 imagine	 such	 vain	 things.	 This	 will	 be	 over	 well	 before	 the	 twenty-fifth;
there’s	plenty	of	time.	At	the	moment	your	own	soul	is	of	far	greater	importance.	Lie	still
and	rest,	and	think	over	what	I	have	told	you.”
He	went	out,	leaving	Tony	alone.	For	a	long	time	the	young	man	lay	there	listening	to
the	sound	of	the	rising	storm,	which	mirrored	so	truly	the	battle	raging	in	his	own	heart.

Chapter	XVIII	
Dr.	Pellew	gave	Tony	permission	to	get	up	next	morning,	and	after	breakfast	he	sat
by	the	fire	in	the	rector’s	study,	a	prey	to	the	most	gloomy	imaginings.
The	 first	violence	of	 the	 storm	had	passed	with	 the	night,	but,	 though	 the	 rain	had
ceased	and	 the	 thunder	was	 silent,	 the	wind	 still	 roared	 tempestuously	 round	 the	house,
and	the	booming	of	the	surf	penetrated	to	every	room.
Presently	Valerie	came,	wearing	a	mackintosh,	a	prayer-book	in	her	hand.	His	heart
leapt	at	the	sight	of	her,	for	his	love	had	been	reborn	in	all	its	strength	with	the	passing	of
the	shadows	which	had	come	from	Vaughan’s	evil	mind,	but	he	did	not	allow	himself	to
show	it,	deeming	himself	unworthy	for	ever	having	doubted	her.
“I’m	going	to	church,	Tony,”	she	announced.	“Would	you	care	to	come?”
A	 refusal	 leapt	 automatically	 to	 his	 lips,	 then	 he	 stopped.	 After	 all,	 why	 not?	 He
would	be	close	to	her,	at	least,	and	it	would	be	interesting	to	see	what	all	this	business	was
that	they	made	so	much	of.
With	sweet	solicitude	she	helped	him	into	a	mackintosh:	his	own,	in	point	of	fact,	the
one	he	had	lent	her	when	she	had	left	Kestrel.	She	pointed	this	out	 to	him	gaily,	but	his
answering	smile	was	sombre.
He	 was	 scarcely	 aware	 of	 their	 passage	 through	 the	 rectory	 garden	 and	 the
churchyard.	 His	 whole	 being	 seemed	 torn	 in	 two	 struggling	 halves:	 one	 frantically
rebelling	from	the	idea	of	entering	that	small	grey	building,	with	its	squat	tower,	the	other
consumed	by	a	strange	longing.	In	the	porch	he	hesitated,	but	she	tugged	at	his	arm,	and
they	went	in.
They	 slipped	 into	 a	 pew	 at	 the	 back,	 and	 she	 knelt	 to	 pray.	He	 sat	 down,	 silently
refusing	to	make	a	show	of	reverence	he	did	not	feel.
It	was	Sunday,	and	the	little	church	was	nearly	full.	One	or	two	of	the	villagers	near
by	glanced	curiously	in	his	direction,	recognizing	the	young	master	of	Kestrel,	but	for	the
most	 part	 they	 did	 not	 heed	 him,	 for	 the	 corner	 in	 which	 he	 sat	 was	 dark	 and
inconspicuous.
He	glanced	 round	at	 the	 images	and	pictures,	 and	all	 the	paraphernalia	of	worship,
but	 without	 great	 curiosity,	 for	 he	 had	 been	 here	 once	 before,	 on	 the	 occasion	 of	 his
father’s	 funeral.	 Looking	 at	 the	 High	 Altar,	 with	 its	 six	 lights	 and	 snowy	 cloth,	 he
remembered	the	last	time	he	had	seen	an	illuminated	altar,	and	his	lips	twitched	slightly,
but	whether	in	sorrow	or	amusement	he	scarcely	knew	himself.
The	 bell	 ceased	 its	 tolling,	 scarcely	 audible	 above	 the	 sound	 of	 the	wind,	 and	 the
sacristy	bell	tinkled.	The	congregation	rose	like	one	man	as	the	little	procession	came	out
of	the	vestry	and	wound	its	way	into	the	sanctuary.	First	the	thurifer,	with	his	diminutive
boat-boy,	and	the	acolytes,	splendid	in	scarlet	and	lace;	then	the	rector,	very	dignified	in
his	 glittering	 vestments,	 preceded	 by	 the	 master	 of	 ceremonies,	 clad	 in	 a	 plain	 black
cassock	 and	 short	 linen	 surplice.	 Tony	 was	 surprised	 to	 recognize	 Hamilton	 in	 this
unfamiliar	garb.	He	had	not	realized	that	John	was	keen	on	this	sort	of	thing.
The	organ	burst	into	song,	and	the	boys’	choir	joined	their	high,	clear	voices	with	its
deep	melody.
After	 the	 Preparation	 the	 thurifer	 came	 forward,	 a	 silver	 censer	 twinkling	 in	 his
gloved	hands;	 the	priest	blessed	 incense,	and	scattered	 the	grains	of	aromatic	gum	upon
the	 glowing	 charcoal.	 The	 blue	 smoke	 rose	 in	 clouds,	 ringing	 the	 candle-flames	 with
golden	haloes,	and	the	fragrant	odour	quickly	permeated	the	whole	building.	It	occurred	to
Tony	 that	 this	must	be	different	 incense	 from	 that	which	he	had	burnt	 in	 the	dark	crypt
beneath	the	Abbey	—	less	pungent,	more	sweet,	not	stupefying.
With	quickened	interest	he	watched	the	intricate	ceremonial.	How	like,	and	yet	how
unlike,	 the	 dark	mysteries	 he	 had	 assisted	 at!	Here	was	 no	 double	meaning,	 no	 sinister
intention.	All	was	simple	and	direct,	showing	forth	as	in	a	mirror	the	worship	of	God	in
the	 beauty	 of	 holiness.	He	 observed	 the	 simple	 faces	 of	 the	 servers	 as	 they	went	 about
their	business	with	the	precision	of	well-drilled	soldiers.	They	believed	all	 this!	Strange.
His	mind	stood	apart,	remote,	watchful.	The	Mass	went	on.
After	 the	Creed	 had	 been	 sung	 the	 rector	 removed	 his	 chasuble	 and	went	 into	 the
pulpit.	Tony	half	expected	that	the	sermon	would	be	directed	at	himself,	and	waited,	rather
resentfully,	 for	 the	 opening	words.	But	 the	 rector	 delivered	 a	 discourse	 on	 the	 devotion
due	 to	 the	 Blessed	 Virgin,	 a	 subject	 which	 Tony	 felt	 was	 rather	 remote	 from	 his	 own
immediate	needs.	Apparently	he	was	not	the	most	important	person	in	the	world!	Amused
at	his	own	childishness,	he	let	his	attention	wander,	and	his	eyes	strayed	to	the	figure	of
the	Virgin	which	stood	on	the	left	of	the	chancel	screen.
He	 considered	 the	 cold	purity	of	 the	 sculptured	 features,	mentally	 comparing	 them
with	the	warm,	living	face	of	the	girl	at	his	side.	Stealing	a	glance	at	her,	he	was	surprised
to	note	a	certain	resemblance.	Odd,	he	thought;	and	then	with	a	sudden	rush	of	contrition
he	acknowledged	that	it	was	meant	that	it	should	be	so.	That	statue	represented	the	highest
and	 holiest	 form	 of	 womanhood	 that	 these	 people	 could	 imagine.	Was	 it	 not	 just	 that
Valerie,	who	stood	 in	his	mind	for	all	 that	was	good	and	pure,	should	show	forth	 in	her
face	that	same	glory	which	had	shone	from	the	countenance	of	her	whom	they	called	the
Mother	of	God?
This	recognition	awoke	in	his	mind	some	faint	perception	of	the	innate	naturalness	of
the	Christian	religion,	and	he	felt	his	attitude	changing	imperceptibly	as	the	bonds	of	that
other	worship	slackened	about	his	heart.
The	 sermon	 ended,	 the	 rector	 took	 his	 place	 once	 more	 at	 the	 altar,	 and	 the
interrupted	service	continued.	The	bread	and	wine	were	offered	to	 their	Creator,	and	the
moment	 of	 Consecration	 approached.	 All	 at	 once	 Tony	 became	 aware	 of	 a	 new
atmosphere	in	the	church.	His	clairvoyant	faculties,	trained	and	intensified	by	long	weeks
of	 preparation,	 revealed	 to	 him	 the	 eager	 expectancy	 which	 gripped	 the	 kneeling
congregation.	On	every	side	of	him	minds	were	reaching	out	towards	the	altar,	as	with	a
quivering	earnestness	the	people	prepared	to	worship	the	coming	Presence.
Despite	himself	a	sense	of	awe	began	to	steal	over	Tony.	Angrily	he	strove	to	shake	it
off	 —	 this	 was	 unreal,	 auto-suggestion,	 mass-hypnotism!	 There	 was	 no	 God,	 only	 a
shadowy	 thought-form	 conjured	 up	 by	 credulous	 worshipers;	 there	 could	 be	 no	 real
Presence	in	the	sacrament.	But,	strive	as	he	would,	he	could	not	deny	the	inner	knowledge
that	grew	steadily	stronger	in	his	heart:	something	tremendous	was	about	to	happen,	and
every	soul	in	the	church	knew	it,	welcomed	it,	but	he.
“Blessed	is	He	that	cometh	in	the	Name	of	the	Lord:	Hosanna	in	the	highest!”	rang
out	 the	 clear	 voices	 of	 the	 choir.	 The	 organ	 ceased	 its	 playing,	 and	 an	 almost	 painful
silence	fell	within	the	building.	From	the	sanctuary	came	the	low,	continuous	muttering	of
the	priest	as	he	recited	the	Canon	of	 the	Mass.	The	censer	swung	rhythmically,	emitting
little	puffs	of	smoke	beside	the	altar;	the	six	golden	spears	of	the	tall	candles	burnt	with	an
unwavering	flame.	The	supreme	moment	was	at	hand.
Tony	 felt	 as	 if	 he	 were	 stretched	 upon	 the	 rack,	 the	 already	 well-nigh	 unbearable
tension	 increasing	 every	 second.	An	 awful	 chasm	 of	 suspense	 yawned	 in	 the	 pit	 of	 his
stomach.	He	gripped	the	back	of	the	seat	before	him	until	his	fingernails	grew	white	with
the	pressure,	as	with	startling	eyes	he	glared	at	the	bowed	figure	of	the	priest.
The	murmuring	voice	ceased,	and	the	rector	bent	his	head	to	whisper	the	miraculous
words.
The	 sanctuary	 bell	 tinkled	 softly	 thrice,	 and	 the	 chains	 of	 the	 censer	 rattled	 as	 the
kneeling	 thurifer	 censed	 the	Host.	The	 priest	 genuflected,	 then	 raised	 the	Sanctissimum
high	above	his	head	for	all	to	see.	A	great	wave	of	adoration	swept	over	the	people,	like
the	wind	over	a	field	of	corn,	and	every	head	was	bowed.	The	Presence	of	God	throbbed
and	quivered	upon	the	altar.
With	 the	breaking	of	 the	 tension	Tony’s	attitude	of	mind	changed	abruptly.	A	blind
rage	swept	through	him:	rage	against	that	holy	Thing	these	people	worshipped.	He	wanted
to	rend,	destroy,	defile	It.	Shaking	with	fury,	he	half	rose	from	his	knees.	Quickly	Valerie
laid	her	hand	upon	his.
At	the	touch	of	her	cool	fingers	sanity	returned,	and,	quelling	his	anger,	he	sank	down
once	more.
Then	 followed	 the	consecration	of	 the	Chalice,	 and	at	 the	 second	Elevation	Tony’s
eyes	were	opened,	and	he	saw	that	which	is	rarely	given	to	mortal	sight.
What	 happened	 he	 could	 never	 afterwards	 remember,	 but	 the	 impression	 of	 that
moment	remained	with	him	till	he	died.	For	a	fraction	of	time	the	painted	shadows	of	this
material	world	faded	from	his	eyes,	and	he	beheld	the	awful	reality	which	lies	behind	the
Sacramental	Presence.
Perhaps	he	saw	an	anguished	Body,	writhing	upon	a	rough	cross	of	wood,	surrounded
by	a	jeering	multitude;	perhaps	a	manger,	with	a	tiny	Babe,	and	grave-eyed	kings	adoring;
perhaps	even	an	effulgent	Throne,	flanked	by	rank	upon	serried	rank	of	guardian	figures,
with	folded,	mighty	wings.
For	an	instant	of	Time,	for	an	age	of	Eternity,	those	terrible,	gentle	eyes	looked	into
his,	and	his	soul	cried	out	in	agony.	Then	the	vision	passed,	the	world	resumed	its	sway,
and	he	was	in	the	little	church	once	more,	and	the	choir	were	singing	Agnus	Dei.
The	remainder	of	the	service	passed	like	a	dream,	and	long	after	it	was	over	and	the
people	had	all	gone	Tony	remained	motionless	on	his	knees.	At	last	Valerie	touched	him
gently.
Slowly,	 painfully,	 he	 lifted	 his	 head	 and	 stared	 at	 her.	 She	 smiled	 uncertainly,	 half
frightened	by	his	blank,	unseeing	gaze.	Recognition	crept	slowly	back	into	his	eyes,	and	in
a	hoarse	whisper	he	told	her	that	he	must	speak	to	the	rector	at	once.
As	they	went	up	the	aisle	he	staggered	like	a	drunken	man,	and	she	caught	his	arm.
He	clung	to	her	gratefully,	and	together	they	reached	the	sacristy	door,	just	as	the	rector,
who	had	finished	unvesting,	came	out.
He	gave	one	glance	at	Tony’s	ravaged	face,	 then	gestured	 to	Valerie	 to	 leave	 them.
Bereft	of	her	support,	Tony	sank	down	on	to	a	bench.	As	soon	as	she	was	gone	the	rector
sat	down	beside	him:
“Well,	Tony,	what	is	it?”	he	asked	gently.
The	young	man	turned	his	head	stiffly	and	stared	at	him.	The	rector	was	shocked	at
his	appearance.	His	face	was	rigid,	and	pale	as	death.	His	eyes	were	sunk	in	their	sockets,
and	burned	with	 an	unnatural	 lustre.	He	opened	his	 lips,	 and	 spoke	 in	 a	 voice	 that	was
scarcely	audible:
“At	the	Consecration	—	I	saw	—	Oh,	God	help	me!”
The	last	exclamation	was	a	cry	of	agony.	Abruptly	he	fell	on	his	knees,	burying	his
face	 in	 the	priest’s	 lap.	His	whole	 frame	was	 racked	with	harsh,	dry	 sobs.	The	old	man
stroked	his	hair	as	gently	as	a	woman,	saying:
“I	 prayed	 that	 this	 would	 happen,	 my	 son.	 Be	 of	 good	 heart,	 the	 Mercy	 has	 not
failed.”
“Is	there	any	hope	for	me?”	Tony’s	voice	was	muffled	by	the	priest’s	cassock.
“There	 is	 always	 hope.	 You	 will	 make	 your	 confession	 now,	 and	 I	 will	 give	 you
Absolution,	for	I	can	see	that	you	are	truly	penitent.”
“But	I	have	committed	the	unforgivable	sin:	I	have	defiled	the	Blessed	Sacrament!”
“So	did	we	all	nineteen	hundred	years	ago,	on	Calvary.	It	shall	be	forgiven.	There	is
no	sin	beyond	forgiveness	save	the	ultimate	rejection	of	the	love	of	God.”
“But	I	am	bound	to	them	by	oaths	which	may	not	be	broken.	If	I	reject	them	I	shall
be	instantly	destroyed.”
“They	lied	when	they	told	you	that,	as	they	have	lied	since	their	Master	first	rebelled
against	the	One	True	God.	Come,	my	son!”
The	 authority	 in	 the	 priest’s	 voice	was	 irresistible,	 and	 together	 they	went	 into	 the
confessional.
Much	that	Tony	told	him	was	a	repetition	of	what	he	had	heard	the	previous	day,	but
the	 rector	 remained	silent	as	a	priest	 should	until	 the	miserable	 tale	was	 finished.	Then,
being	satisfied	of	his	penitent’s	contrition,	he	gave	the	Absolution.
“…	And	by	His	authority	committed	unto	me,	I	absolve	thee	from	all	thy	sins,	in	the
Name	of	the	Father,	and	of	the	Son,	and	of	the	Holy	Ghost.”
As	the	blessed	words	were	uttered	Tony	felt	peace	such	as	he	had	never	dreamed	of
descend	upon	his	tortured	soul.	The	battle	was	over,	Light	had	conquered,	and	Darkness
was	vanquished	for	ever.
Early	next	morning	Tony	made	his	Communion,	and	his	repentance	was	sealed.
He	 remained	 alone	 in	 the	 church	 for	 some	 time	 after	 the	 short,	 simple	 service,
reflecting	upon	the	great	change	which	had	so	suddenly	come	upon	him.
Even	 now	 he	 could	 scarcely	 realize	 that	 he	was	 no	 longer	 a	member	 of	 that	 dark
brotherhood,	vowed	 to	wage	war	continually	against	 the	religion	of	Christ,	but	he	knew
that	he	had	at	last	found	that	which	he	had	been	seeking	—	a	purpose	in	life	and	a	sense	of
fulfillment	and	peace.
He	recognized	that,	hate	him	how	he	would,	he	was	nevertheless	indebted	to	Gaunt
for	many	things.	Good	had	come	out	of	evil	in	his	case,	for	the	ancient	curse	of	his	family
had	passed	from	him,	and	had	made	his	repentance	easier.	He	carried	no	secret	burden	as
his	ancestors	had	done;	his	soul	was	free.	Whether	this	could	have	come	to	pass	without
his	passing	through	the	Valley	of	the	Shadow,	so	close	to	everlasting	damnation,	he	did	not
know,	but	he	was	filled	with	deep	thankfulness	that	it	was	so.
He	 had	 had	 a	 long	 talk	with	 the	 rector	 on	 the	 previous	 day,	 and	 the	 old	man	 had
assured	him	that	he	was	not	entirely	to	blame	for	the	wrong	turning	which	he	had	taken,
for	the	continual	drain	of	power	and	virtue	which	the	curse	had	made	upon	him,	as	upon
all	 his	 predecessors,	 had	made	Gaunt’s	 task	 of	 leading	 him	 astray	 all	 the	 easier.	 In	 the
circumstances	he	could	scarcely	have	resisted	the	doctor’s	will,	so	intent	had	he	been	upon
dominating	him.
He	was	 also	 surprised	 to	 find	 that	 his	 powers	 of	 intense	mental	 concentration	 and
clairvoyance	 had	 not	 departed	 from	him,	 as	 he	 had	 half	 expected	 them	 to	 do,	 upon	 his
conversion.	 Only	 the	 instinctive	 use	 of	 them	 in	 the	 service	 of	 evil	 was	 gone.	 He
recognized	 that	 they	 were	 not	 wrong	 in	 themselves,	 and	 that	 he	 could	 now	 use	 his
awakened	 transcendental	 faculties	 for	 their	 proper	 end	 —	 namely,	 in	 the	 mystical
approach	to	God.
He	 looked	 towards	 the	 curtained	 Tabernacle	 and	was	 instantly	 aware	 of	 the	 living
Presence	within	it.	He	could	feel	the	Sacred	Heart	beating	there	in	unison	with	That	which
lay	in	his	own	breast.	Humbly	thanking	God	for	this	wonderful	gift	of	spiritual	insight,	he
rose,	genuflected,	and	left	the	church.
Coming	out	into	the	open,	he	observed	that	the	wind	had	almost	ceased	and	that	the
sky,	 though	 still	 clouded,	was	bright	with	 the	 sun	behind.	 It	 seemed	 that	 the	 storm	was
over,	and	that	he	would	be	able	to	return	to	Kestrel	well	before	the	eleventh	hour	and	do
what	 yet	 remained	 for	 him	 to	 prevent	Gaunt	 carrying	 out	 his	 fiendish	 plan	 at	whatever
cost.	With	this	resolve	strong	in	his	heart	Tony	went	into	the	rectory.
He	found	that	the	others	had	waited	for	him,	and	soon	the	four	of	them	were	sitting
round	 the	 breakfast-table,	 eating	 and	 talking	 cheerfully.	The	 rector	 had	 told	Valerie	 and
Hamilton	 that	Tony	had	made	his	peace	with	God	at	 the	young	man’s	own	 request,	 but
even	if	he	had	not	done	so	the	inward	light	which	shone	through	his	eager	face	would	have
told	its	own	story.
His	blue	eyes	were	calm	and	happy	and	his	 lips	were	set	 in	firm	lines,	but	with	no
trace	of	grimness.	This	was	 the	old	Tony,	 thought	Hamilton;	but	 there	was	a	repose	and
sense	of	purpose	about	him	which	had	been	lacking	in	the	old	days.	There	was	humility
also	in	the	manner	in	which	he	deferred	to	the	old	priest	over	some	trivial	matter,	which
almost	brought	a	 lump	 into	his	 friend’s	 throat,	 so	different	was	 it	 from	 the	arrogant	and
carefree	boy	he	used	to	know.
When	the	meal	was	over	and	tobacco-smoke	was	perfuming	the	air	of	the	study	Tony
broached	the	matter	of	his	return	to	the	Abbey.
The	rector	took	his	pipe	from	his	mouth	and	regarded	him	steadily.
“You	still	feel	that	the	matter	is	important,	then?”	he	asked.
“Tremendously	important,	Father,”	Tony	answered	with	quiet	emphasis.	“You	do	not
know	Gaunt	as	I	do.	His	power	is	terribly	real,	and	he	is	absolutely	certain	that,	when	he
releases	this	horror,	it	will	do	incalculable	harm.”
“If	that	is	so	I	cannot	think	that	God	will	permit	it,”	said	the	old	man,	“but	since	you
feel	to	some	extent	responsible	it	is	only	right	that	you	should	endeavour	to	prevent	him.
How	you	will	set	about	it	I	do	not	profess	to	know.	You	know	more	about	these	matters
than	 I	do.	At	all	 events	 the	 storm	seems	 to	be	practically	over.	We	will	go	down	 to	 the
harbour	this	morning	and	see	what	the	sea	looks	like.”
Shortly	afterwards	Hamilton,	Tony,	and	the	rector	set	off.	As	soon	as	they	reached	the
cliff	path	they	could	see	that	there	was	little	hope	of	making	a	crossing	at	once.	Although
the	wind	had	dropped	to	a	mere	breeze,	the	waves	were	mountainous,	and	dashed	upon	the
rocks	below	with	terrific	force.
Down	at	 the	harbour	 the	position	was	even	clearer.	All	 the	boats,	 including	Tony’s
launch,	had	been	beached,	and	the	harbour	mouth	was	impassable.	The	rector	asked	one	of
the	little	knot	of	fishermen	standing	on	the	quay	if	there	were	any	possibility	of	getting	to
the	island,	but	the	man	shook	his	head	decidedly.
“Not	today,	Father,”	he	said.	“I’ve	never	seen	a	sea	like	this,	not	in	thirty	year.	’Taint
natural,	not	after	such	a	little	blow.”
Tony	 looked	 sharply	 at	 his	 companions,	 as	 much	 as	 to	 say,	 ‘I	 told	 you	 so!’	 But
without	further	words	they	returned	to	the	rectory.
Before	going	in	they	stopped	on	the	steep	path	and	looked	across	to	where	the	island
lay.	It	looked	so	near,	but	it	was	as	remote	—	cut	off	by	that	stretch	of	heaving	water	—	as
if	it	had	been	on	the	moon.	Tony	wondered	desperately	what	was	going	on	there,	but	he
said	nothing.
After	 lunch	 Hamilton	 and	 the	 rector	 went	 for	 a	 walk,	 leaving	 Tony,	 who	 seemed
disinclined	for	exercise,	sitting	by	the	study	fire.	He	stared	into	the	heart	of	the	glowing
coals,	 smoking	 cigarette	 after	 cigarette,	 gradually	 sinking	 deeper	 into	 the	 pit	 of
despondency.	After	his	exaltation	of	the	morning	this	setback	was	all	the	more	depressing.
He	was	roused	from	his	gloomy	reverie	by	a	light	touch	on	his	shoulder,	and	Valerie
sat	down	on	the	settee	beside	him.	He	offered	her	a	cigarette,	and	when	it	was	lit	she	said:
“Tony,	you	mustn’t	give	way	like	this.	Everything	will	be	all	right.	Things	can’t	be	as
bad	as	you	think.”
“But	 they	 are	—	 perhaps	 worse,”	 he	 countered.	 “If	 I	 can’t	 get	 over	 there	 in	 time
there’s	no	telling	what	may	happen.”
“Uncle	seems	to	think	that	God	won’t	let	them	do	any	harm,”	she	reminded	him.
“I	know,	but	I	can’t	feel	so	sure.	It	would	entail	direct	intervention,	you	see,	and	it	is
an	axiom	among	these	Satanists	that	no	direct	intervention	has	taken	place	since	the	birth
of	Christ.	There	must	always	be	a	human	agent	to	carry	out	the	Divine	Will.	I	had	hoped
to	be	that	agent	in	this	case.”
“And	if	God	doesn’t	choose	you	you	will	lose	your	trust	in	Him?	Oh,	Tony,	I	thought
better	things	of	you	than	that!”
“I	want	to	justify	your	faith	in	me,	Valerie.	That	wish	has	been	the	mainspring	of	my
actions	ever	since	you	came	to	Kestrel.”
“I’m	glad,”	she	said	simply.	“But	you	must	accept	God’s	providence.	He	will	do	what
He	thinks	best,	in	His	own	time.”
“I’ll	try,	but	it’s	desperately	hard.	You	are	very	good	to	me,	Valerie.”
“You	have	been	good	to	me,	Tony.	Twice	you	have	saved	me,	once	from	death	and
once	from	something	far	worse.	I	can	never	repay	you	for	that.”
“God	knows	I	want	no	repayment.	 I	would	 lay	down	my	life	for	you	—	you	know
that,	Valerie.	I	have	loved	you	from	the	first	moment	I	set	eyes	upon	your	blessed	face.	Do
you	think	you	could	care	for	me	a	little?”
There	was	 infinite	pleading	 in	his	voice,	but	he	did	not	 look	at	her.	Touched	 to	 the
heart,	she	laid	her	hand	on	his.
“I’m	terribly	fond	of	you,	Tony.”
Quickly	he	turned	and	caught	her,	incredulous	wonder	in	his	eyes.
“You	mean	that,	my	darling?”
“Of	course	I	mean	it,”	she	answered	softly.
“I	never	dared	to	hope	—	I	can’t	believe	—	If	—	when	all	this	is	over,	will	you	marry
me?	I	need	you	so!”
She	had	not	meant	all	 that	he	 took	 for	granted,	but	 faced	with	 the	eagerness	 in	his
eyes	she	knew	that	she	could	not	draw	back.	Refusal	would	hurt	him	horribly.	Very	quietly
she	whispered:
“Yes,	Tony,	I’ll	marry	you	if	you	want	me.”
“My	precious	darling!”
He	 drew	 her	 close,	 kissing	 her	 sweet	 mouth,	 tenderly	 at	 first,	 then	 passionately,
straining	her	against	him	as	if	he	would	never	let	her	go.	For	a	moment	she	only	submitted
to	his	ardour,	then	the	young	passion	rose	in	her	also	and	her	arms	went	about	his	neck.
So	they	remained	for	many	minutes	while	the	world	went	by	unheeded,	but	at	last	he
released	her	and	she	lay	quiet	in	his	arms,	her	eyes	closed.	His	senses	were	reeling	as	he
kissed	her	hair,	whispering:
“Dear	heart,	I	can	face	anything	now.	I’ll	never	be	afraid	any	more.”
She	looked	up	at	him	shyly,	but	said	nothing,	hiding	her	lovely	face	in	his	breast.
When	 they	 heard	 the	 sound	 of	 the	 rector	 and	 Hamilton	 coming	 in	 she	 gently
disengaged	his	arms	and	stood	up,	patting	her	disheveled	curls	into	place.
“Let	me	tell	John,	Tony	dear,”	said	she.	“I’m	afraid	he’s	in	love	with	me	too,	and	this
will	be	rather	a	blow	for	him.”
“Of	 course.”	 Tony	 was	 all	 sympathy.	 “Poor	 old	 John,	 I	 can	 understand	 how	 he’ll
feel.”
So	when	Hamilton	 entered,	 bringing	with	him	a	breath	of	 the	keen	 fresh	 air,	Tony
slipped	out	without	a	word.
“What’s	 the	matter	with	him?”	 inquired	Hamilton,	sitting	down	beside	 the	girl;	“he
looked	a	bit	queer.”
“It’s	all	right,	John,”	she	answered;	“I’ve	got	something	to	tell	you,	and	I’m	afraid	it’s
going	to	hurt	you	rather.”
He	looked	at	her	sharply,	and	she	went	on:
“Tony	has	asked	me	to	marry	him,	and	I	have	agreed.”
Hamilton	 sat	 like	 a	graven	 image.	Not	 a	muscle	of	his	 face	moved.	His	voice	was
perfectly	controlled	as	he	said:
“I’m	glad,	Valerie.	I	hope	you	will	be	very	happy.”
“Thank	 you,	 John	 dear.	 I	 knew	 you’d	 take	 it	 well.	 You’re	 such	 a	 splendid	 sport.
There’s	no	need	to	pretend.	I	know	you	love	me,	and	I’m	tremendously	proud,	but	Tony
needs	me	so	much	more	than	you	do.	He’s	so	helpless	and	weak	sometimes.	You	are	so
strong,	 so	 self-sufficient.	 You	will	 get	 over	 it	—	 he	wouldn’t.	 I	 just	 couldn’t	 turn	 him
down;	he’s	had	so	much	trouble	lately,	and	this	would	have	broken	his	heart.”
“Do	you	love	him?	Forgive	me,	but	I	have	the	right	to	ask.”
“I	can,	 I	must.	 I’m	 frightfully	 sorry	 for	him,	and	most	awfully	 fond.	 I	 shall	do	my
best	to	make	him	happy.”
“I	know	that,	bless	you.	If	it	was	anyone	but	Tony	I	would	not	give	you	up	so	easily,
but	since	 I	 love	you	both	 I	must	accept	your	decision.	My	dear,	you	have	a	great	heart.
God	grant	it	may	never	be	broken.”
He	took	her	hand	and	raised	it	to	his	lips.	Then	he	stood	up,	smiling	slightly	to	hide
the	pain,	and	went	out,	his	head	erect.
Valerie	thought	he	had	never	looked	so	fine	as	he	did	then:	his	face	pale	beneath	its
tan,	and	his	crisp	dark	hair	 ruffled	slightly	with	 the	wind.	A	sudden	pang	of	 regret	 shot
through	 her	 heart,	 but	 she	 stifled	 it	 resolutely.	 She	 had	made	 her	 choice,	 and	 she	must
abide	by	it	or	be	for	ever	shamed.

Chapter	XIX	
Tony	 awoke	with	 a	 feeling	 that	 something	 very	wonderful	 had	 happened.	Then	 he
remembered	—	Valerie	loved	him	and	had	promised	to	marry	him.	He	lay	still	and	thought
of	the	happy	hours	they	had	spent	together;	how	Hamilton	had	shaken	him	warmly	by	the
hand,	frankly	envious	of	his	good	fortune;	and	how	the	rector	had	blessed	them	both.	A
deep	sense	of	happiness	pervaded	his	whole	being,	and	he	thanked	God	for	this	great	gift
with	a	full	heart.
It	was	some	minutes	before	he	realized	how	hot	it	seemed	and	how	strange	was	the
early-morning	light	that	filtered	in	through	the	window.
He	got	out	of	bed	with	something	of	an	effort	and	flung	the	casement	wide,	leaning
out.	 There	was	 no	wind,	 and	 the	 still	 air	 was	 dry	 and	 parched.	 The	 sun	was	 invisible,
hidden	by	a	thin	haze,	through	which	it	shone	with	a	dull	coppery	light.	How	still	it	was!
No	birds	were	singing	in	the	garden,	no	gulls	crying	about	the	cliffs.	Perhaps	the	sea	also
would	be	calm,	and	he	would	be	able	at	last	to	get	back	to	Kestrel.	There	was	little	time	to
spare,	he	thought,	beginning	to	dress	slowly;	today	was	the	twenty-fourth	and	at	noon	on
the	morrow	Gaunt	would	set	his	fiendish	plan	in	operation.
Valerie	 was	 pale	 and	 quiet	 when	 she	 appeared	 at	 the	 breakfast-table.	 The	 heat
oppressed	 her,	 she	 said,	 and	 she	 had	 a	 headache.	 It	 was	 generally	 agreed	 that	 the
extraordinary	change	in	the	weather	must	have	come	at	about	three	o’clock	that	morning,
for	 the	 rector	 remembered	 having	 woken	 at	 about	 that	 hour,	 throwing	 some	 of	 the
coverings	from	off	his	bed.
When	 the	meal	was	over	 they	all	went	out	on	 to	 the	cliffs	 in	 front	of	 the	house.	A
dense	haze,	of	the	same	hue	as	the	sky,	hung	over	the	sea.	They	could	just	make	out	the
water	at	the	foot	of	the	cliffs,	and	it	appeared	to	be	dead	calm,	but	farther	out	the	mist	was
impenetrable,	and	the	island	was	hidden	from	their	anxious	eyes.	Full	of	hope,	Tony	led
the	way	down	to	the	harbour.
Here	they	found	an	extraordinary	state	of	affairs.	Every	able-bodied	member	of	 the
village’s	 small	population	 seemed	 to	be	on	 the	waterfront.	They	were	 standing	about	 in
groups,	talking	excitedly	and	pointing	out	to	sea.	The	mist	was	thickening	rapidly,	pouring
in	through	the	harbour	mouth	in	great	clouds.
Who	 first	observed	 the	 little	party	 from	 the	 rectory	 it	was	 impossible	 to	 say,	but	 it
was	only	a	matter	of	seconds	before	everyone	knew	of	their	presence.	The	talking	ceased
abruptly	and	scores	of	pairs	of	eyes	were	turned	towards	them.
The	 rector	 spoke	 sharply,	 asking	 the	 nearest	 what	 the	 matter	 was,	 but	 they	 only
shuffled	 their	 feet,	 avoiding	 his	 gaze.	 From	 the	 back	 of	 the	 crowd	 a	 sudden	muttering
sprang	up,	to	be	instantly	silenced	as	the	old	man	turned	his	eyes	in	that	direction.	Spying
one	of	his	own	servers,	he	made	for	him,	the	people	falling	back	to	let	him	through.
Taking	the	boy	by	the	arm,	he	spoke	to	him.	The	other	hesitated	for	a	moment	then
burst	into	voluble	speech,	flinging	his	arm	seawards.	His	tones	were	too	low	for	Hamilton
and	his	companions	to	hear	what	he	said,	and	Valerie	moved	closer	to	Tony,	catching	his
hand.
“What	does	it	mean?”	she	whispered	anxiously.
Tony	shook	his	head.
“We	shall	soon	know,”	he	answered,	for	the	rector	was	returning,	his	face	grave.
“Come,”	he	said	when	he	reached	them,	“we	can’t	talk	here.”
They	turned	back	towards	the	rectory,	and	as	soon	as	they	were	out	of	earshot	of	the
crowd	he	told	them	what	he	had	learned.
“It	seems	that	just	before	sunrise	this	morning	two	of	the	men	went	down	to	the	quay
to	find	out	how	rough	the	sea	was.	To	their	surprise,	a	dead	calm	had	fallen,	and	they	were
just	 going	back	 to	 their	 homes	when	one	of	 them	noticed	 the	Abbey,	 just	 visible	 in	 the
dawn.	It	sounds	incredible,	I	know,	but	they	swear	that	a	heavy	mist	was	pouring	from	the
battlements	and	spreading	over	the	sea	about	the	island.	They	thought	at	first	that	the	place
was	on	fire,	and	that	it	was	smoke	they	saw,	but	no	flames	appeared,	and	the	mist	went	on
spreading.	Soon	the	island	was	hidden,	and	now	it	has	reached	the	land,	though	it	doesn’t
seem	to	come	any	further.	It’s	getting	thicker	on	the	water	every	minute.”
Tony,	white	to	the	lips,	uttered	one	word:
“Gaunt!”
“That’s	 what	 the	 people	 think,”	 continued	 the	 rector.	 “They	 know	 that	 your	 two
former	friends	are	still	on	Kestrel	and	they	are	convinced	that	they	are	working	witchcraft.
I	expect	Tregellis	has	been	talking.”
“They’re	probably	quite	 right,”	Tony	groaned.	“He	couldn’t	keep	 the	storm	up	any
longer,	so	now	he	has	hidden	the	island	in	a	fog.	I	couldn’t	find	it	now,	no	matter	how	I
tried.”
“Oh,	I’ve	no	doubt	it’s	still	there;”	the	rector	made	a	valiant	attempt	to	be	cheerful.
“Don’t	let	us	rate	his	power	too	high.	But	the	tide-race	is	far	too	treacherous	to	navigate
blind.	You	would	be	hopelessly	lost.”
No	 one	 said	 anything	 further	 —	 there	 seemed	 to	 be	 nothing	 to	 say.	 This	 last
demonstration	of	Gaunt’s	power	—	for	it	was	impossible	to	regard	it	as	anything	else	—
had	swept	away	the	last	shred	of	scepticism	from	the	minds	of	them	all.
They	climbed	slowly	back	 towards	 the	 rectory,	Valerie	clinging	 to	Tony’s	arm,	and
Hamilton,	with	the	rector,	a	few	paces	behind.	The	scene	was	indescribably	weird.	There
was	the	rectory,	with	the	church	behind,	and	the	brow	of	the	hill	beyond,	all	clear	in	the
ruddy	light.	On	the	other	side	of	the	path,	a	few	yards	of	grass	extended	to	the	edge	of	the
cliff,	and	beyond	that	there	was	nothing	but	an	impenetrable	wall	of	copper-coloured	fog,
rising	sheer	to	the	sky	above,	where	it	merged	into	the	thin	haze	veiling	the	sun.
Hamilton	 climbed	 over	 the	 wire	 fence	 and	 walked	 perilously	 close	 to	 the	 brink,
thrusting	out	his	arm.	His	hand	and	wrist	were	hidden	in	the	dense	vapour.
“It	 feels	 hot,”	 he	 reported	 when	 he	 rejoined	 them,	 “and	 smells	 rather	 peculiar.
Something	like	the	smoke	from	a	slag-heap.”
They	went	 indoors	 and	 discussed	 the	 problem	 until	 lunch-time	without	 arriving	 at
any	conclusion.	The	most	fantastic	methods	of	reaching	the	island	were	suggested,	from
aeroplane	to	submarine,	but	all	were	rejected	as	valueless.	The	rector	spent	some	time	in
church,	but	when	he	came	back	they	could	see	at	once	that	he	had	had	no	sign.
All	 that	 day	 the	 heat	 grew	 stronger,	 until	 by	 evening	 the	men	 had	 discarded	 their
jackets,	 and	were	 stretched	 out	 in	 deck-chairs	 on	 the	 lawn,	 their	 shirt-collars	 loosened,
moving	as	little	as	possible.	The	very	idea	of	food	was	nauseating,	but	Valerie,	wearing	a
brief	 tennis	 frock,	 brought	 cooling	 drinks,	 and	 they	 all	 sat	 together	 talking,	 talking
interminably.
The	 fog	over	 the	 sea	had	not	 changed	 at	 all,	 and	hung	 in	 a	 great	 curtain	 for	miles
along	 the	 coast.	 Not	 a	 breath	 of	 air	 stirred;	 all	 animal	 life	 was	 hushed,	 and	 a	 deathly
silence	lay	upon	the	sweltering	land.
Although	 the	 day	 had	 been	 dull	 the	 night	was	 unusually	 light,	 for	 a	 queer	 reddish
glow	 appeared	 to	 emanate	 from	 the	 fog-bank	 and	 from	 the	 veiled	 sky.	 They	 tried
desperately	to	behave	naturally,	but	each	knew	that	the	world	stood	on	the	brink	of	some
terrible	cataclysm.	They	went	to	bed	at	the	usual	hour,	but	no	one	closed	his	eyes	during
the	long	watches	of	that	awful	night.
Hamilton,	 lying	 practically	 naked	 on	 top	 of	 the	 bed-clothes,	 his	 body	 damp	 with
sweat,	stared	into	the	crimson	gloom,	thinking	of	Faustus’	last	words.
“Stand	 still,	 you	 ever-moving	 spheres	 of	 heaven,	 that	 time	may	 cease,	 and	midday
never	come!”	he	paraphrased.	However	slowly	the	hours	dragged,	they	still	went	far	too
fast,	 for	 every	 tick	 of	 the	 clock	 brought	 nearer	 that	 fated	 moment	 when	 death	 and
destruction	would	be	loosed	upon	mankind.
There	was	no	hope	for	the	world	now,	unless	God	intervened,	he	told	himself.	He	had
not	 intervened	 to	 stop	 the	 countless	 wars	 and	 famines,	 earthquakes,	 plagues	 and
desolations	of	 the	past.	Would	He	come	now,	 in	 all	His	might	 and	majesty,	 to	 save	His
children	 from	 the	 final	 victory	of	 the	Adversary?	Desperately	Hamilton	 tried	 to	 believe
that	He	would.	He	clenched	his	teeth,	praying	fiercely,	savagely	almost.
At	last,	unable	to	bear	the	inaction	any	longer,	he	got	up	and	poured	the	contents	of
his	wash-stand	 jug	 over	 his	 head.	The	water	was	 lukewarm	 and	 unrefreshing.	He	 dried
himself,	slipped	on	some	clothes,	and	went	quietly	downstairs	and	out	into	the	garden.
The	light	from	the	glowing	sky	was	almost	as	strong	as	that	of	a	full	moon,	and	he
walked	up	and	down	for	a	while,	smoking	his	pipe.	The	air	was	stale	and	flat,	burning	the
lungs.
Presently	 he	 knocked	 out	 his	 pipe	 and	went	 into	 the	 church,	 the	 door	 of	which	 he
found	unlocked.
Inside	it	was	very	dark,	but	he	groped	his	way	to	a	seat	and	sank	down	gratefully.	It
seemed	a	little	cooler	here,	and	not	so	difficult	to	breathe.	A	solitary	white	flame	flickered
before	the	Tabernacle,	giving	little	illumination	but	shining	brightly	on	the	silver	crucifix
behind.	He	fixed	his	eyes	upon	this	eternal	symbol	of	hope	and	in	a	little	while	fell	asleep.
When	he	awoke	a	dim	reddish	light	was	struggling	in	through	the	small	windows	of
the	 nave.	 He	 stretched	 painfully,	 stiff	 from	 his	 cramped	 position.	 His	 sleep	 had	 not
refreshed	him,	and	there	was	an	unpleasant	metallic	taste	in	his	mouth.
He	became	aware	of	a	faint	whispering	from	one	of	the	pews	on	the	opposite	side	of
the	church,	and	was	able	 to	make	out	 the	figures	of	Tony	and	Valerie,	sitting	very	close
together.	They,	 too,	 had	 sought	 this	 sanctuary	during	 the	night.	They	were	 aware	of	his
presence,	 for	when	 he	moved	his	 feet	 on	 the	 stone	 floor	Tony	 looked	 round	 and	 called
softly:
“Are	you	awake,	John?”
Receiving	an	affirmative	reply,	he	went	on:
“You	looked	so	peaceful	we	hadn’t	the	heart	to	disturb	you.	The	rector	will	be	here
presently	to	say	Mass.”
Hamilton	 looked	 at	 his	 wrist-watch,	 the	 luminous	 figures	 glowing	 brightly	 in	 the
gloom.	It	was	after	six	—	the	morning	must	be	unusually	dark,	he	thought.
They	did	not	speak	to	each	other	again,	but	sat	still,	each	busy	with	his	own	thoughts.
Hamilton	 found	 himself	wondering	 if	 this	were	 the	 last	morning	 the	world	would	 ever
know.	Was	evil	to	triumph	thus?	He	could	not	believe	it,	and	yet	what	hope	was	there?	In
less	 than	 six	 hours’	 time	 Nicholas	 Gaunt	 would	 loose	 his	 hellish	 powers,	 and	 the	 old,
joyful	world	would	 be	 blasted	 for	 ever.	Never	would	 the	 happy	 birds	 sing	 again,	 never
would	he	see	the	light	on	the	face	of	a	child.	His	heart	was	like	lead	in	his	breast,	and	his
thoughts	moved	sluggishly,	like	footsteps	in	a	dream.
When	at	last	the	rector	came,	opening	the	door	to	let	in	no	flood	of	early	sunlight	but
only	an	angry	crimson	glow,	Hamilton	got	slowly	to	his	feet	and	followed	the	priest	into
the	little	sacristy.
The	 old	man	 said	 no	 word,	 but	 began	 to	 vest	 at	 once.	 Hamilton	 saw	 that	 he	 was
putting	on	red	vestments,	and	knew	that	he	intended	to	say	the	Mass	of	the	Holy	Ghost	in
a	last	appeal	to	the	love	of	God.
He	himself	put	on	cassock	and	surplice,	and,	taking	a	taper,	he	went	out	to	light	the
altar	 candles.	 It	 was	 so	 dark	 that	 he	 lit	 the	 tall	 standard	 candles	 in	 the	 sanctuary	 also,
making	a	little	pool	of	light	in	the	midst	of	the	obscurity.
Tony	and	Valerie	formed	the	only	congregation,	and	Hamilton	could	see	their	faces
as	 two	 pale	 blurs	 beyond	 the	 chancel	 screen.	 Even	 in	 the	 church	 the	 heat	 was	 now
appalling,	and	Hamilton	marveled	at	the	rector’s	apparent	unconcern,	clad	as	he	was	in	the
heavy,	clinging	garments	of	his	office.	But	the	old	man	said	the	Mass	with	the	same	care
and	 concentration	which	 he	 had	 always	 known.	 It	was	 a	 tremendous	 encouragement	 to
watch	his	precise,	ordered	movements,	and	to	hear	his	low,	clear	voice	as	he	stood	at	the
altar,	 seemingly	 quite	 unmoved	 by	 the	 approaching	 catastrophe.	 His	 faith	 was	 truly
inspiring,	 and	 as	 the	 service	 proceeded	 all	 three	 felt	 their	 faltering	 spirits	 raised	 by	 his
heartening	example.
A	 disconcerting	 little	 incident	 occurred	 at	 the	 Consecration,	 for	 when	 Hamilton
attempted	 to	 ring	 the	 handbell	 to	 announce	 the	 coming	 of	 the	 Presence	 it	 emitted	 no
sound.	Why,	he	never	discovered.	It	may	have	been	some	quite	trivial	mechanical	defect,
but	at	 the	 time	it	made	a	profound	impression	upon	his	mind,	more	so	even	than	all	 the
other	weird	phenomena	which	had	gone	before.	 It	 seemed	 to	him	 that	matter	 itself	was
now	leagued	against	the	God	Who	had	created	it.
They	 all	 made	 their	 Communion	 together,	 but	 Hamilton,	 at	 least,	 felt	 that	 he	 had
never	made	so	unprofitable	a	use	of	the	Sacrament.	The	sublime	act	of	union	with	Christ
made	no	impression	upon	him	whatsoever.	His	spiritual	faculties	seemed	quite	dead.	Truly
this	was	the	dark	night	of	the	soul.
When	it	was	over	the	rector	unvested	and	knelt	for	a	while	before	the	Tabernacle	to
say	his	thanksgiving.	The	others	left	the	church	together.
If	 it	 had	 been	 almost	 unbearably	 hot	 within	 the	 building	 it	 was	 a	 thousand	 times
worse	in	the	open	air.	For	a	moment	all	three	stood	aghast,	reeling	against	the	sides	of	the
porch.	 The	 still	 air	 was	 like	 the	 breath	 of	 a	 furnace,	 and	was	 full	 of	 the	 smell	 of	 fire.
Overhead	the	lowering	sky	shone	like	a	sea	of	blood,	and	the	great	wall	of	fog	reflected	its
lurid	glow.	An	ominous	silence	hung	over	the	whole	earth.
As	they	dragged	their	weary	limbs	towards	the	rectory	Valerie	pointed	mutely	to	the
flower-beds,	where	the	blooms	hung	black	and	withered	from	their	stems.	The	unspoken
thought	throbbed	in	each	mind:	if	this	is	but	a	presage	of	the	coming	disaster,	what	will	the
ghastly	reality	be	like?
They	were	making	a	miserable	pretence	of	eating	when	the	rector	came	in.	At	once
they	were	aware	of	a	new	atmosphere	 in	 the	room,	an	atmosphere	of	hope.	Breathlessly
they	waited	for	him	to	speak.	He	stood	for	a	moment	in	the	doorway,	looking	at	them,	a
little	smile	on	his	lips.	Then	he	said:
“Do	not	despair,	my	children;	all	may	yet	be	well.	God	will	not	suffer	His	people	to
perish	utterly.	He	spoke	to	me	this	morning,	as	He	has	always	spoken;	not	in	words,	you
understand,	but	through	the	inward	sense.	We	will	go	to	Kestrel	at	once.”
For	a	moment	there	was	a	stupefied	silence,	broken	by	Tony,	who	asked:
“But	how,	Father?	You	said	yourself	that	we	could	never	find	it	in	the	fog.”
“I	spoke	hastily,	my	son.	Guidance	will	be	given	 if	we	have	 faith.	God	has	chosen
one	of	us	as	His	agent,	but	which	one	I	do	not	know.	We	will	all	go	together.”
“Valerie,	too,	Father?”
“Yes.	 She	 will	 be	 in	 no	 more	 danger	 there	 with	 us	 than	 here	 alone,	 whether	 we
succeed	or	fail.	But	I	do	not	think	we	shall	fail.”
Tony	said	no	more,	but	stood	up	with	a	gesture	of	resignation.	The	thought	was	in	his
mind	that	perhaps	the	frightful	tension	of	the	last	few	hours	had	unhinged	the	old	man’s
brain,	but	he	did	not	give	it	voice.
Impelled	by	a	sudden,	unaccountable	impulse,	Hamilton	excused	himself	and	rushed
upstairs	to	his	room,	where	he	got	out	the	pistol	which	had	stood	him	in	good	stead	once
before.	 Making	 sure	 that	 it	 was	 ready	 for	 use,	 he	 thrust	 it	 into	 his	 pocket.	 Whatever
Gaunt’s	 superhuman	 powers,	 seven	 heavy	 leaden	 bullets	 in	 his	 vitals	 might	 prove	 a
powerful	argument	if	all	else	failed,	he	thought,	even	if	silver	bullets	were	the	traditional
ammunition	against	such	as	he.
When	he	joined	them	the	others	were	ready	to	start,	and	so	the	four	of	them	set	out:
two	men,	a	frail	old	priest,	and	a	girl,	against	all	the	panoply	of	hell.

Chapter	XX	
I	
Simon	Vaughan	flung	the	empty	sardine-tin	among	its	fellows	on	the	floor	and	lit	his
last	cheroot.	Soon	it	would	be	time	for	him	to	join	his	colleague	in	the	crypt,	and	he	was
weary	unto	death.
For	 four	 days	 he	 had	 assisted	Gaunt	 in	 his	 efforts	 to	 prevent	 Tony’s	 return	 to	 the
island,	and	the	strain	was	beginning	to	tell.	Neither	of	them	had	slept	at	all,	but	whereas
the	doctor	 seemed	 to	 thrive	on	 the	unnatural	 life,	Vaughan’s	 flabby	 face	was	drawn	and
sunken,	 and	 there	were	 purple	 stains	 beneath	 his	 red-rimmed	 eyes.	 Even	 now	 his	 great
head	nodded,	and	the	cigar	hung	limply	from	his	lips.
The	 kitchen	 where	 he	 sat	 was	 in	 a	 state	 of	 disorder	 that	 would	 have	 wrung	Mrs.
Lorrimer’s	heart.	A	pile	of	gutted	tins	and	broken	bottles	showed	how	the	two	had	lived
since	they	had	been	left	alone,	and	the	remains	of	a	fire	smouldered	on	top	of	a	great	heap
of	ashes	in	the	hearth,	for	it	was	very	cold	within	the	Abbey	walls.	An	untrimmed	lamp
flickered	on	the	bare,	dirty	table.
Presently	the	cheroot	fell	from	Vaughan’s	lips	and	he	roused	himself	and	picked	it	up
with	a	sigh.	Resting	his	head	on	his	hands,	he	began	to	go	through	the	same	sequence	of
thoughts	which	 had	weighed	 upon	 him	 ever	 since	 that	 fateful	morning	when	Tony	 had
rebelled	against	Gaunt.	How	he	envied	the	young	man,	free	and	out	of	the	doctor’s	power
for	ever!	Would	 that	he	himself	had	 the	courage	 to	 follow	in	his	 footsteps,	but	he	knew
that	 he	 had	 not.	 He	 would	 go	 through	 with	 it	 to	 the	 end,	 helping	 to	 bring	 about	 a
consummation	 he	 had	 no	 real	 desire	 to	 see.	 He	 knew	 now	 that	 he	 had	 been	 deluding
himself	ever	since	he	had	become	one	of	the	brotherhood	of	Darkness.	He	had	delighted	in
foulness	and	blasphemy	unspeakable	against	his	former	faith,	but	deep	in	his	heart	he	had
never	made	the	ultimate	rejection	of	beauty	and	every	work	of	God	which	was	the	mark	of
the	true	Satanist.	He	did	not	wish	to	see	the	world	blasted	any	more	than	Tony	did	—	he
was	too	fond	of	his	own	comfort.	What	of	wine	and	the	beauty	of	women?	Were	they	of
no	account?
He	 realized	 that	he	had	never	 loved	evil	 for	 its	own	sake,	 as	Gaunt	did,	 living	 life
almost	monastic	in	its	severity.	He	had	merely	welcomed	this	creed	as	an	excuse	to	give
his	sensual	desires	full	rein,	while	at	the	same	time	it	gave	him	temporal	power,	which	he
loved,	and	an	elaborate	ritual	of	worship	which	he	delighted	in.	Gaunt’s	condemnation	of
Tony	 included	him	also.	He	could	not	welcome	 the	ultimate	 triumph	of	Satan	any	more
than	he.
Had	he	never	been	a	priest,	he	 thought,	he	might	have	married	and	 lived	a	normal
life;	a	 trifle	 intemperate	and	passionate,	perhaps,	but	no	worse	 than	 thousands	of	others.
But	he	had	been	unable	to	endure	the	rigorous	continence	of	the	Roman	priesthood,	and
his	passions,	 turned	 from	 their	proper	channels,	had	 led	him	 into	unseemly	perversions.
He	had	been	exposed,	cast	out,	and	 the	swing	of	 the	pendulum	had	carried	him	into	 the
hands	of	Nicholas	Gaunt	and	the	Order	of	Satan.	The	continual	demand	in	that	quarter	for
apostate	 priests	 to	 celebrate	 the	Black	Mass	 had	made	him	 a	welcome	 addition	 to	 their
ranks.	And	now	here	he	was,	a	lecherous	old	man,	for	he	shuddered	to	think	how	old	he
really	was,	trembling	before	the	imminent	destruction	of	the	only	world	he	knew.
He	lifted	his	head	sharply.	The	wordless	summons	had	sounded	in	his	brain:	Gaunt
was	ready	and	waiting	for	him.	With	something	very	like	a	groan	he	hauled	himself	to	his
feet	and	made	his	way	slowly	down	to	the	crypt.
Gaunt	was	kneeling	before	the	altar,	clad	in	his	ceremonial	robes	of	white	linen,	with
their	 symbolic	embroidery	 in	 red.	A	 flaring	 lamp	beside	him	cast	his	 shadow	across	 the
diagram	on	the	floor.	As	the	other	approached	he	raised	his	head	and	looked	at	him.	His
face	was	leaner	than	ever,	and	the	thin	nose	stood	out	like	the	beak	of	a	predatory	bird.	His
sunken	eyes	glowed	like	live	coals,	following	Vaughan’s	ponderous	movements	as	he	bent
over	the	open	trunk,	taking	out	his	own	vestments	and	putting	them	on	hastily.
The	doctor	rose	from	his	knees	and	came	down	the	altar	steps,	stopping	a	few	paces
short	of	his	colleague.	His	eyes	never	left	the	other’s	face.	So	challenging	was	his	attitude
that	Vaughan,	after	glancing	at	him	uneasily	several	times,	finally	stood	still	and	met	his
gaze.
“Are	you	ready,	Simon?”	the	doctor	purred.
“Yes,	Master.”	Vaughan’s	eyes	dropped,	and	he	shuffled	his	feet.	Gaunt’s	lip	curled,
and	he	went	on:
“And	willing?”
“Of	course!”
“Good!	You	will	have	more	to	do	than	I	anticipated.”
“What	do	you	mean?”	A	thin	note	of	alarm	crept	into	Vaughan’s	voice.
“I	have	been	watching	 them.	 Intervention	 is	on	 the	way.	They	are	coming,	 through
the	mist,	guided	by	the	ministers	of	Light.	They	will	be	here	before	noon.”
“But	they	cannot	get	in.	The	gates	are	barred.”
“I	know,	but	we	must	take	no	chances	now.	They	may	be	given	power	—	I	could	not
see,	the	future	was	hidden.	So	I	propose	to	put	my	alternative	plan	into	operation,	Simon.”
The	other	stood	motionless,	his	eyes	dilating	with	terror.
“Not	—	not	the	Veil?”	he	quavered.
“Yes.	 If	 I	merely	release	 the	monstrosity	 it	may	be	days	—	months	even	—	before
there	is	any	effect.	Much	may	happen	in	the	interim	—	even	Judgment.	It	is	too	slow	to
rely	upon.	Therefore	I	am	going	to	use	the	affinity	of	the	monstrosity	for	its	own	kind	to
reopen	 the	 breach	 in	 the	Veil.	 That	will	 be	 the	 end,	 Simon.	Nothing	 can	withstand	 the
influx	of	chaos	and	destruction	which	will	instantly	take	place.”
“No	—	no	—	not	that!”	Vaughan	almost	choked	with	fear.
Gaunt’s	head	sank	between	his	narrow	shoulders,	and	his	fingers	clawed.	His	voice
was	a	menacing	whisper.
“Twice	you	have	resisted	me,	Simon.	I	promised	that	a	third	time	would	be	the	last.”
Vaughan	 cowered	 and	 finished	 his	 robing	 with	 shaking	 hands.	 When	 the	 leaden
circlet	was	on	his	brow	and	he	had	taken	up	his	wand	he	looked	at	Gaunt.
“The	unction?”	he	asked.	Gaunt	nodded	briefly	and,	turning,	strode	towards	the	other
trunk,	which	stood	at	some	little	distance.	Vaughan	watched	him	go	with	narrowed	eyes,
his	noisy	breathing	suddenly	hushed.	The	moment	 the	doctor	was	beyond	 the	outermost
ring	of	 the	diagram	upon	 the	 floor	 the	other	 sprang,	 hurling	his	 great	 body	up	 the	 altar
steps.	Setting	his	back	against	the	stone,	he	raised	the	rod	in	his	left	hand	and	uttered	one
word	in	an	unknown	tongue.
Gaunt	 stopped	 in	 his	 tracks	 and	 slewed	 his	 head	 round,	 staring	 back	 over	 his
shoulder.	 Slowly	 his	 body	 followed,	 then,	 his	 face	 twisting	with	 anger,	 he	 started	 back
towards	his	colleague.	But	he	got	no	farther	than	the	outer	circle	of	the	diagram,	finding
his	progress	barred	by	the	same	immaterial	barrier	which	Hamilton	and	Lorrimer	had	once
encountered.	For	a	moment	 it	 seemed	as	 if	his	 rage	would	get	 the	better	of	him,	and	he
made	one	frantic	effort	to	force	his	way	through	by	sheer	strength.	But	his	self-control	was
too	great	for	blind	fury	to	master	him,	and	he	stepped	back,	folding	his	arms	and	glaring	at
the	man	who	was	defying	him.
“So,”	he	 snarled,	 “rebellion!	 I	might	have	known.	Once	a	priest,	 always	a	priest.	 I
should	never	have	trusted	you,	Simon.”
Vaughan	 made	 no	 reply,	 but	 continued	 to	 bend	 all	 the	 power	 of	 his	 will	 upon
maintaining	the	invisible	wall	of	force	round	the	circle.	Normally	he	knew	that	he	could
not	have	withstood	the	doctor’s	will	for	a	moment,	but	he	himself	had	made	this	diagram,
and,	knowing	how	powerful	it	was,	he	relied	utterly	upon	its	protection.	At	the	back	of	his
mind	was	 a	 tremendous	 feeling	 of	 astonishment	 at	 himself	 for	 having	 at	 last	 burnt	 his
boats	by	defying	his	erstwhile	master	in	this	decisive	fashion.	He	could	hardly	believe	that
he	had,	indeed,	done	so,	and	he	could	not	imagine	whence	had	come	the	sudden	influx	of
courage	which	had	prompted	him.	He	wondered	what	Gaunt	would	do	now,	and	watched
with	 vague	 curiosity	 as	 the	 doctor	went	 to	 the	 trunk,	which	 had	 been	 his	 undoing,	 and
began	to	rummage	in	its	interior.	With	sudden	horror	he	saw	him	straighten	up,	a	curiously
contrived	apparatus	in	his	hands.
Gaunt	 turned	 the	 thing	over	speculatively.	He	had	never	used	 it	before,	and	he	was
doubtful	of	its	efficacy	in	this	case,	but	if	it	operated	as	it	should	it	would	save	him	a	great
deal	of	trouble,	and	energy,	which	he	wished	to	conserve	for	the	great	work	he	had	to	do	at
noon.
The	instrument	was	actually	a	‘blasting-rod’,	similar	to	those	used	by	the	witches	of
old,	 and	 consisted	 of	 a	 hazel	 staff,	 symbolically	 carved,	 terminating	 in	 three	 prongs	 of
iron,	 bound	 to	 it	 with	 copper	 wire.	 It	 resembled	 in	 appearance	 the	 top	 of	 a	 lightning
conductor,	though	its	purpose	was	the	exact	opposite	of	that	humane	contrivance.
Holding	it	firmly	in	both	hands,	he	leveled	it	at	his	mutinous	colleague	and	began	to
speak	the	words	of	the	appropriate	ritual.	Vaughan	thrust	all	doubts	and	difficulties	from
his	mind	and	concentrated	his	whole	energy	against	this	new	threat.
For	 some	 minutes	 there	 was	 absolute	 silence	 in	 the	 gloomy	 crypt,	 then	 a	 low
humming	 sound	 began,	 proceeding	 from	 the	 rod	 itself,	which	 simultaneously	 started	 to
vibrate.	Gaunt	observed	that	a	bluish	glow	was	gathering	about	the	prongs.	This	was	as	it
should	be,	and	with	a	smile	of	triumph	he	opened	his	lips	again	and	spoke	the	last	phrase
of	the	ritual.
Instantly	 a	 stream	 of	 livid	 fire	 leapt	 from	 the	 end	 of	 the	 rod,	 burst	 through	 the
invisible	barrier,	and	fell	full	upon	the	hapless	Vaughan	with	a	crash	like	a	thunderclap.	He
gave	one	stricken	cry	and	fell	writhing	to	the	ground.	Gaunt	walked	quietly	up	to	him	and
stood	looking	down	curiously.
“I	 am	 sorry,	 Simon,”	 he	 said	 calmly,	 “but	 you	 shouldn’t	 have	 tried	 to	 resist	me.	 I
warned	you	many	times.	On	your	own	head	be	it!”
The	other	gazed	up	at	him,	his	face	twisted	with	anguish,	but	a	strange	dignity	in	his
eyes.
“I	have	failed,”	he	muttered,	“but	at	least	I	tried	to	stop	you.	You	cannot	go	on	with
this,	Gaunt.	They	will	not	allow	you	to.”
Gaunt	threw	back	his	head	and	laughed	aloud.
“Let	them	try	to	stop	me!”	he	cried,	and,	stepping	over	Vaughan,	he	lifted	the	altar-
stone.	In	a	moment	he	had	climbed	over	the	side	and	disappeared,	leaving	the	dying	man
alone.
Vaughan	struggled	feebly	on	to	his	knees	and	began	to	crawl	up	the	altar	steps.	He
managed	 to	catch	 the	edge	of	 the	 front	 slab	and	 tried	desperately	 to	drag	himself	 to	his
feet,	but	his	strength	failed	and	he	fell	back,	groaning.
In	a	voice	so	low	that,	had	there	been	any	human	ears	to	hear,	they	would	scarce	have
caught	the	words,	he	murmured:
“Have	mercy,	Jesu!”	Then	he	sighed	once	and	lay	still.	The	unquiet	spirit	had	passed
beyond	mortal	judgment.
II	
The	launch	chugged	steadily	on	through	the	fog,	which	was	so	thick	that	none	of	the
four	occupants	of	 the	boat	could	see	another,	 save	as	vague	shadows	 in	 the	gloom.	The
water	was	dead	still	and	black	as	ink.	Its	very	nature	seemed	to	be	subtly	changed,	for	it
did	not	foam	in	their	wake,	but	surged	sluggishly	round	the	stern	like	thick	oil.
Tony	 crouched	 over	 the	 wheel,	 his	 face	 only	 a	 few	 inches	 from	 the	 illuminated
compass	 by	 which	 he	 was	 endeavouring	 to	 steer	 a	 course.	 Hamilton	 sat	 beside	 Tony,
glaring	into	the	dazzling	funnel	of	radiance	thrown	into	the	fog	by	the	bow	searchlight.	He
very	much	doubted	if	it	would	pick	up	an	obstacle	in	time	to	avert	a	collision,	but	he	was
hoping	for	the	best.	Valerie	and	the	rector	sat	together	in	the	stern.
When	they	had	arrived	at	the	harbour,	some	fifteen	minutes	before,	they	had	found	a
small	knot	of	villagers	on	the	quay,	gloomily	regarding	the	wall	of	fog	which	shut	off	the
sea.	No	attempt	had	been	made	either	to	help	or	hinder,	and	they	had	watched	Hamilton
and	Tony	drag	the	launch	into	 the	water	without	comment.	Hamilton	supposed	that	 they
were	in	the	grip	of	the	same	deadly	lethargy	against	which	he	himself	was	struggling	so
fiercely.	Every	movement	was	an	effort.	It	seemed	so	much	easier	to	stay	still	and	just	let
things	take	their	course.	But,	driven	by	their	indomitable	purpose,	the	four	had	at	last	got
the	boat	afloat	and	climbed	aboard.
They	had	been	immediately	swallowed	up	by	the	fog,	and	had	to	feel	their	way	out	of
the	narrow	harbour	mouth	with	boat-hooks.	Once	they	were	in	the	open	sea	the	rector	had
advised	a	compass	course	due	north-west,	which,	he	maintained,	would	leave	them	very
close	to	Kestrel	at	the	end	of	thirty	minutes.
Since	then	they	had	exchanged	no	more	than	a	couple	of	words,	sitting	staring	with
smarting	 eyes	 into	 the	 incredible	 denseness	 of	 the	 ruddy	 cloud	 which	 covered	 them.
Denser	than	any	fog	they	had	ever	known	it	was	—	worse	than	London	at	its	damnedest,
as	Hamilton	had	remarked	grimly.	It	was	not	damp,	as	water	vapour	is,	but	dry	and	hot,
burning	 the	 eyes	 and	 lungs,	 smelling	 sulphurous	 and	 bitter,	 like	 the	 smoke	 from	 a
smouldering	heap	of	pit	refuse.
The	dead	calm	made	navigation	easier,	but	Tony	doubted	very	much	 if	 they	would
get	within	a	mile	of	 the	 island.	 It	was	unlikely	 that	 the	 tide-race	had	ceased	 to	 run,	and
they	would	 probably	 be	 swept	miles	 out	 of	 their	 course.	Nevertheless,	 he	 kept	 his	 eyes
fixed	to	the	compass,	dimly	seen	beneath	its	hooded	lamp,	and	each	time	the	illuminated
card	swung	to	left	or	right	he	corrected	the	movement	by	a	compensating	deflection	of	the
rudder.
To	Valerie,	beside	the	silent	figure	of	her	uncle,	it	seemed	that	this	dream-like	voyage
had	 lasted	 since	 the	 beginning	 of	 time	 and	would	 continue	 through	 all	 eternity.	Utterly
isolated	 from	 the	 world,	 and	 from	 their	 own	 kind,	 they	 glided	 on	 through	 the	 endless,
blood-red	gloom.	Tony’s	dim	figure	at	the	helm	might	have	been	that	of	a	modern	Charon,
piloting	 them	 over	 the	 black,	 fathomless	 waters	 of	 Lethe	 itself.	 Indeed,	 the	 girl	 found
herself	wondering	if	the	catastrophe	had	come,	unseen	and	unheralded,	and	they	were,	in
fact,	 all	 dead	 and	 in	 another	world.	A	 great	weariness	 and	 desolation	 lay	 heavy	 on	 her
soul.	The	boat	crept	on,	its	engine	purring	gently.
Tony	spoke	abruptly,	shattering	the	illusion.
“We	have	missed	 it.	We	must	be	 three	miles	out	now.”	His	voice	 sounded	muffled
and	hollow.
The	rector	lifted	his	head.	He	had	been	praying	silently,	desperately	almost.	For	the
little	gleam	of	light	which	had	come	to	him	at	the	Mass	had	died	out,	leaving	him	alone	in
the	darkness.
“We	must	not	miss	it,	Tony,”	he	said	simply.	“Change	your	course	and	try	again.”
Tony	spun	the	wheel	to	port	and	the	boat	swung	round	obediently.	Keeping	its	head
southwards	now,	he	slowed	the	engine	still	more.
Hamilton	 strained	his	 eyes,	 peering	 in	 every	direction,	but	 there	was	nothing	 to	be
seen	save	the	all-pervading	mist.
Five	minutes	 passed	without	 incident,	 then	Tony	 put	 the	 launch	 about	 unprompted
and	steered	due	north.	Hamilton	looked	anxiously	at	his	watch;	it	was	half	past	ten.	Time
was	getting	desperately	short.	The	rector’s	lips	moved	ceaselessly.
All	 at	 once	Valerie	 stiffened.	Was	 it	 only	 imagination,	 or	 could	 she	 really	 hear	 the
engine	of	another	boat,	somewhere	away	to	the	left?	She	called	to	Tony,	and	he	cut	out	the
motor.	 They	 drifted	 along	 silently,	 but	 there	 was	 no	 sound	 to	 be	 heard	 save	 their	 own
quick	 breathing.	 Hamilton	 cupped	 his	 hands	 round	 his	 mouth	 and	 gave	 a	 hail.	 Almost
immediately	the	echo	was	flung	back.	They	were	close	under	the	cliffs	of	Kestrel,	and,	but
for	the	girl’s	sharp	ears,	would	have	passed	it	by	unseen.
Hope	springing	up	in	his	heart,	Tony	started	the	engine	and	they	crept	cautiously	in.
A	 great	 shadow	 loomed	 up	 out	 of	 the	 obscurity,	 and	 Hamilton	 swung	 the	 searchlight,
picking	up	the	rocks,	dangerously	close.
It	was	anxious	work	seeking	the	entrance	to	the	harbour,	but	the	fog	seemed	a	little
less	dense	close	to	the	island,	and	they	found	it	at	last.	Boat-hooks	out,	ready	to	fend	off
the	rocky	walls,	they	glided	in.	It	was	but	a	moment’s	work	to	make	fast	and	disembark,
and	together	they	climbed	the	stairway.
The	fog	was	left	behind	the	moment	they	set	foot	on	land,	and	as	they	mounted	the
island	presented	a	fantastic	spectacle.	On	every	side	great	cliffs	of	vapour	shut	it	in,	and	it
lay,	as	it	were,	at	the	bottom	of	a	vast	pit	of	lurid	light.	The	rocks	appeared	black	as	coal,
and	the	Abbey	made	a	picture	of	horrifying	splendour,	towering	monstrously	above	them.
The	effort	 of	 climbing	 in	 the	 terrific	heat	was	 terribly	 exhausting,	 and	by	 the	 time	 they
reached	the	platform	before	the	great	gateway	their	clothes	were	wringing	with	sweat.
After	a	moment’s	pause	to	regain	their	breath	they	approached	the	gate,	each	with	a
nameless	apprehension	gnawing	at	his	heart.	Then	they	stopped	dead	and	stood	rooted	in
their	 tracks.	Not	only	was	the	wicket	 in	 the	great	door	shut,	but	some	feet	 in	front	of	 it,
barring	every	hope	of	entrance,	the	portcullis	had	been	dropped.
Speechless	 with	 dismay,	 they	 crowded	 forward	 and	 examined	 it.	 Constructed	 of
massive	iron	bars,	it	must	have	weighed	many	tons,	and	the	force	of	its	fall	had	driven	the
pointed	ends	of	the	vertical	bars	deep	into	the	ground.
“No	good,”	said	Hamilton	at	last.	“We	might	have	forced	the	door	somehow,	but	that
—	never.”
“I’ve	never	seen	 it	down	before,”	Tony	said.	“It	must	be	centuries	since	 it	was	 last
used	—	the	windlasses	in	the	gatehouse	are	rusted	solid	—	they	will	have	cut	the	chains.”
With	a	gesture	of	despair	he	turned	away.
“Is	there	no	other	way	in?”	asked	the	rector.
“None,”	Tony	answered.	“The	outer	wall	is	only	pierced	at	this	point.”
Hamilton	looked	up	at	the	top	of	the	arch.	It	might	be	possible	to	climb	the	grating	of
the	portcullis,	but	 the	wall	of	 the	gatehouse	 jutted	out	 too	 far	above	 it	 to	permit	 further
progress.	He	walked	back	a	few	paces	and	studied	the	great	wall	itself.	It	was	fully	thirty
feet	high,	and	though	the	granite	blocks	of	which	it	was	built	had	been	much	weathered	by
hundreds	of	years	of	wind	and	rain,	 they	were	 too	closely	 jointed	to	offer	safe	foothold.
Moreover,	the	battlements	overhung	in	such	a	way	that	it	would	have	been	impossible	to
negotiate	them.
“Is	there	a	rope	in	the	launch?”	he	asked.
Tony	followed	the	direction	of	his	gaze,	and	his	interest	quickened.
“The	mooring-ropes	would	be	too	short,”	said	he,	“but	there	is	the	anchor	chain.”
“Too	heavy,”	Hamilton	decided.	“We	could	never	throw	it	up.	Now,	a	light	grappling-
hook	—	if	we	had	such	a	thing.”
“But	we	have!”	cried	Tony.	“In	the	boat-house.	I’ve	wondered	what	it	was	for	many	a
time.	I’ll	get	it;	there	may	be	a	rope	as	well.”	He	set	off	down	the	steps	at	a	run.
The	others	said	no	word	while	he	was	gone,	but	in	each	heart	hope	was	running	high.
At	last	he	came	back,	panting,	with	a	rusty	iron	grapnel	in	one	hand	and	a	coil	of	rope	in
the	other.
“Fine!”	 Hamilton	 greeted	 him,	 and	 quickly	 they	 made	 the	 hook	 fast	 to	 the	 rope.
Hamilton	whirled	it	 round	his	head	and	let	go.	The	iron	clattered	against	 the	wall,	some
feet	 from	 the	 top,	 and	 fell	 back.	 Again	 he	 tried,	 and	 yet	 again,	 and	 at	 the	 third	 throw
caught	the	parapet.
Kicking	off	his	shoes	and	digging	his	toes	into	the	crevices	of	the	wall,	he	began	to
climb	 hand	 over	 hand	 up	 the	 rope.	 Breathlessly	 they	 watched	 him,	 Valerie	 clinging
nervously	to	Tony’s	sleeve,	her	face	white.
Hamilton	had	reached	the	top	and	was	negotiating	the	overhanging	battlement	when
the	 rope,	 rotten	 with	 age	 and	 frayed	 against	 the	 edge	 of	 the	 stone,	 broke,	 leaving	 him
hanging	by	his	hands.	Tony	swore	under	his	breath,	and	the	girl	hid	her	face	in	his	coat.
But	Hamilton	did	not	fall.	In	perfect	physical	condition,	he	was	able	to	draw	himself	up	by
sheer	strength	of	arm	and	in	a	few	seconds	stood	safely	on	the	broad	parapet.	He	looked
down	at	their	white	faces	and	grinned	cheerfully.
“Acrobatic	performance	number	one!”	he	remarked.	“Now,	Tony,	have	a	look	at	that
rope.”
Obediently	Tony	went	to	the	foot	of	the	wall	and	picked	up	the	fallen	coil.	He	ran	it
through	 his	 hands	 and	 shook	 his	 head.	 It	 had	 stretched	 badly	 and	 several	 strands	were
broken.	It	would	be	madness	to	trust	to	it	again.
“All	right,”	said	Hamilton,	when	this	intelligence	was	conveyed	to	him.	“I’ll	go	down
and	see	what	 I	can	find.	 If	 I	see	another	 rope	I’ll	come	back	and	haul	you	up;	 if	not	—
well,	I’ll	carry	on	and	see	what	I	can	do	alone.”
Feverishly	they	tried	to	persuade	him	not	to	venture	into	the	Abbey	unaccompanied,
but	for	answer	he	flourished	his	pistol	in	the	air	and	disappeared	behind	the	parapet.
“He’ll	 not	 come	 back,”	 said	 Tony;	 “the	 dear	 fool	means	 to	 go	 through	with	 it	 by
himself.”
They	looked	helplessly	at	one	another.
“We	must	do	something,	Tony,”	exclaimed	Valerie.
The	young	man	cast	out	his	hands	in	a	gesture	of	despair.
“What	can	we	do?”	he	demanded.
The	rector	spoke.
“I	 don’t	 think	we	 should	worry	 overmuch	 about	 his	 safety.	He	may	 be	 the	 chosen
one,	you	know.	But	at	the	same	time	I	do	not	think	we	should	stay	here	and	make	no	effort
to	help.	You	are	quite	certain,	Tony,	 that	 there	 is	 absolutely	no	other	way	 in?	No	secret
entrance	or	anything	of	that	sort?”
Tony	stared.	Like	a	 flash	 the	memory	of	his	visit	 to	 the	caves	with	his	 two	 former
associates	came	back	to	him.
“Yes!”	he	cried.	“Why	didn’t	I	think	of	it	before?	There	is	another	way.	Down	on	the
other	side	of	the	island	—	a	cave	leading	up	into	the	crypt.”
“The	crypt,”	echoed	Valerie;	“he	will	be	there.	Come	quickly.”
There	was	need	for	haste,	for	as	they	piled	into	the	launch	the	hands	of	Tony’s	watch
stood	at	five	minutes	past	eleven.
The	voyage	round	the	island	was	a	hair-raising	experience,	and	time	after	time	they
avoided	the	razor-edged	rocks	by	inches.	They	dared	not	venture	far	from	the	cliffs	 into
the	denser	fog	lest	they	lose	the	island	altogether.
Eventually	they	reached	the	sheer	cliff	on	the	western	side,	and	by	the	merest	stroke
of	 luck	 found	 the	 entrance	 to	 the	 cave	 almost	 at	 once.	 Tony	 made	 the	 boat	 fast	 to	 a
projecting	knob	of	rock	and	drew	himself	up	the	four	or	five	feet	into	the	yawning	mouth
of	the	cavern.	He	then	lay	down	and,	stretching	out	his	arms,	helped	first	Valerie	and	then
the	rector.	The	calmness	of	 the	sea	made	the	 task	less	hazardous,	and	presently	all	 three
were	walking	over	the	sandy	floor	into	the	innermost	recesses	of	the	cave.	Tony	had	taken
a	torch	from	the	locker	of	the	boat,	and	after	a	little	searching	found	the	crevice	which	led
into	the	low	tunnel	beyond.
Bending	double,	they	crawled	along.	The	air	was	stifling,	and	the	very	rock	felt	warm
to	the	touch.	Soon	they	found	the	way	barred	by	the	iron-bound	door.	This	was	fastened
on	the	inside,	so	Tony	picked	up	a	piece	of	fallen	rock	and	battered	a	hole	in	the	ancient,
decaying	wood,	through	which	he	was	able	to	reach	the	bar.
As	 they	passed	 through	the	 torrid	heat	was	exchanged	for	cold	so	 intense	 that	 their
sweat-damp	clothes	clung	clammily	to	their	shivering	bodies.	There	was	a	vile	smell	in	the
air,	 and	wreaths	of	yellowish	vapour	hung	 in	 the	beam	of	 the	 torch.	The	 sense	of	 some
monstrous	 spiritual	 evil	 close	 at	 hand	 was	 so	 great	 that	 the	 rector	 crossed	 himself
involuntarily,	and	Valerie	clung,	half	fainting,	to	her	lover.	The	rest	of	the	journey	through
the	passages	was	a	nightmare	to	her,	at	least,	for	her	mind	was	full	of	the	memory	of	her
dreadful	experience	in	this	same	spot.
The	rector	and	Tony	did	not	spare	her,	but	hurried	forward,	one	on	either	side,	almost
dragging	 her	 along.	 They	 hardly	 noticed	 her	 distress,	 so	 oppressed	 were	 they	 by	 the
double	anxiety	for	their	comrade	Hamilton	and	for	the	whole	world,	which	every	second
brought	nearer	to	inconceivable	disaster.
At	 the	 triple	 fork	Tony,	who	by	some	odd	 trick	of	 the	memory	had	overlooked	 the
significance	 of	 the	 great	 cavern,	 led	 them	 straight	 on	without	 a	 pause.	 Soon	 they	were
climbing	the	steps	up	to	the	crypt.

Chapter	XXI	
I	
Hamilton	hurried	down	the	stairway	in	 the	gatehouse	turret,	shutting	his	ears	 to	 the
shouts	of	his	friends.	As	Tony	had	surmised,	he	had	no	intention	whatever	of	attempting	to
get	 them	over	 the	wall;	 the	 broken	 rope	 had	 been	 an	 admirable	 excuse.	His	motives	 in
undertaking	 this	 forlorn	hope	by	himself	were	 twofold.	 In	 the	 first	 place	he	desperately
wanted	to	shield	both	Valerie	and	Tony,	since	she	loved	him,	or	seemed	to,	from	all	harm.
If	anyone	had	to	be	hurt	he	would	far	rather	it	were	he,	even	if	death	should	be	his	reward.
And	secondly,	in	spite	of	everything,	he	still	thought	that	the	others	rated	Gaunt’s	powers
too	high.	He	wanted	to	prove	to	his	own	satisfaction	that	the	man	was	but	mortal	after	all,
and	would	prove	as	amenable	to	force	as	anyone	else.
Sprinting	across	the	courtyard,	he	cocked	his	pistol,	and	the	tiny	click	of	the	bolt	sent
a	 furious	 joy	 flooding	 through	 his	 veins.	 Let	Gaunt	 give	 him	 but	 half	 a	 chance	 and	 he
would	see	who	was	the	stronger.
The	 doors	 were	 all	 locked	 and	 the	 ground-floor	 windows	 shuttered,	 but	 he	 had
anticipated	this	and	laid	his	plans	accordingly.	One	of	those	precious	bullets	was	sufficient
to	shatter	the	fastening	of	the	shutter	on	one	of	the	kitchen	windows,	and	the	butt	of	the
pistol	did	the	rest.	The	noise	seemed	shockingly	loud	in	the	silence,	and	Hamilton	stood
waiting	for	several	minutes	before	climbing	in,	but	nothing	stirred.
He	found	the	cool	interior	a	welcome	change	from	the	oppressive	heat	outside,	and	lit
a	 cigarette	 before	 proceeding	 farther.	 He	 surveyed	 the	 disorder	 of	 the	 kitchen	 with	 a
disdainful	smile.	Why,	the	two	alleged	wizards	had	lived	like	pigs,	and	very	human	pigs	at
that!
The	 ashes	 on	 the	 hearth	 were	 still	 smoking,	 and	 the	 glass	 of	 the	 table-lamp	 was
warm.	They	could	not	have	been	gone	long.	He	set	off	along	the	corridor	to	the	great	hall.
Until	 now	he	 had	 noticed	 nothing	 unusual	 in	 the	 atmosphere	 of	 the	 place,	 perhaps
because	he	was	full	of	disdain	and	self-confidence,	but	with	each	step	he	took	towards	the
crypt	he	felt	his	courage	draining	away.	This	place	was	not	as	it	should	be.	The	loaded	gun
simile,	which	had	occurred	to	him	before,	now	came	back	with	redoubled	force.	But	this
was	no	gun,	he	thought;	it	was	a	powder-mine,	and	the	train	was	already	lit	—	he	could
almost	see	the	fatal	spark	creeping	along	the	fuse.
He	entered	the	great	hall	and	made	for	the	open	trap.	Then	he	stopped	short,	his	heart
hammering	in	his	throat.	He	could	have	sworn	that	something	had	moved	in	the	yawning
hole.	No,	there	was	nothing.	He	took	another	step.	Yes,	there	was!	He	blinked,	and	it	was
gone.	Then,	as	he	watched,	it	came	again,	a	thin	coil	of	yellow	vapour	drifting	up	out	of
the	depths.
H’m,	 more	 devilry,	 he	 supposed,	 but	 nothing	 very	 substantial.	 He	 looked	 sharply
round.	Was	that	a	mocking	chuckle	he	had	heard	in	the	shadows?	God!	The	very	shadows
were	moving,	creeping	up	behind	him!
He	told	himself	that	he	was	being	foolish,	but	he	would	have	given	worlds	for	a	light,
as	with	faltering	steps	he	went	on	to	the	trap.
He	did	not	turn	his	head	again,	but	forced	himself	to	descend	into	the	thick	darkness,
yet	 the	 last	memory	he	bore	with	him	of	 the	great	hall	of	Kestrel	was	of	a	place	 full	of
mocking	whispers	and	creeping	shadows	that	crowded	after	him.
The	descent	down	 that	 long	spiral	was	an	experience	 that	Hamilton	did	not	care	 to
think	about	afterwards.	More	than	once	he	felt	something	cold	and	damp	brush	across	his
face	—	he	hoped	 it	was	a	cobweb,	but	he	 feared	 it	was	not.	Once	he	despaired	of	ever
reaching	 the	bottom	—	 there	was	 that	 true	nightmare	quality	 about	 it	—	but	 after	what
seemed	an	eternity	he	came	down	into	the	crypt.
It	was	lit,	ever	so	faintly,	with	a	pale	light	which	came	from	somewhere	in	the	midst
of	the	wilderness	of	pillars,	and	he	made	for	the	radiance	like	a	benighted	traveler	lost	in	a
forest.
The	 light	 was	 a	 vapour-lamp	 hissing	 away	 beside	 the	 open	 altar.	 Near	 by	 lay	 the
misshapen	body	of	Simon	Vaughan.	There	was	a	scorched	smell	about	his	clothing,	and
looking	closer	Hamilton	saw	the	burns	upon	his	face.
Wondering	 vaguely	 what	 had	 happened,	 he	 looked	 round,	 and	 his	 eye	 fell	 upon
something	which	drove	all	speculation	upon	the	dead	Satanist	out	of	his	mind:	an	electric
torch	lying	on	the	altar	steps.	He	seized	it	thankfully	and	switched	on	the	powerful	beam.
With	 this	 in	 one	 hand	 and	 his	 gun	 in	 the	 other	 he	 felt	 more	 of	 a	 match	 for	 creeping
shadows!
There	 was	 no	 sign	 of	 Gaunt,	 but	 the	 open	 altar	 told	 its	 own	 story,	 and	 Hamilton
remembered	 Tony’s	 description	 of	 the	 great	 cave	 where	 the	 curse-monstrosity	 dwelt.
Hoping	 he	would	 be	 able	 to	 find	 his	way	 through	 the	 labyrinth,	 he	 scrambled	 over	 the
altar-side	and	went	down	the	steps.
Then	began	a	bitter	struggle,	for	no	sooner	had	he	started	along	the	tunnel	 than	the
same	 feeling	 he	 had	 encountered	 with	 Lorrimer	 in	 the	 crypt	 above	 swept	 over	 him.	 A
crushing	horror	 that	 turned	his	 limbs	to	water	and	his	heart	 to	 ice;	a	great	despair,	as	an
inward	voice	whispered	continually:	“It’s	no	use	going	on.	You	can’t	stop	him	—	nothing
can.	The	game	is	lost.”
And	 out	 of	 the	 darkness	 ahead	 crept	 great	 coils	 of	 thick	 yellow	 vapour,	 seeming
actually	 to	 impede	 Hamilton’s	 progress	 as	 they	 writhed	 serpent-like	 about	 his	 feet	 and
crawled	clammily	over	his	face.
Almost	vomiting	with	disgust	and	terror,	he	beat	frantically	at	them	with	his	arms	and
broke	into	a	shambling	run.	Had	he	not	done	so	he	must	have	either	sunk	down	helpless	or
turned	and	fled.	It	speaks	volumes	for	the	sheer	grit	of	the	man	that	he	ever	reached	the
division	of	the	passage,	but	reach	it	he	did,	and	recalling	Tony’s	description	took	the	left-
hand	tunnel.
From	that	moment	the	attack	lessened,	and	he	went	on	unhindered,	but	with	growing
conviction	in	his	mind	that	he	was	going	to	fail.	He	could	sense	the	frightful	power	which
awaited	him,	and	he	went	to	meet	it	with	no	hope	of	victory	but	simply	because	it	was	the
only	thing	to	do.	He	could	not	have	turned	back	now	and	faced	the	crawling	mist	again,	so
on	he	went,	with	his	pitifully	inadequate	weapons	clutched	tightly	in	his	hands.
At	the	turn	of	the	passage	he	stepped	into	a	blaze	of	greenish	light,	and	there,	facing
him	on	the	narrow	platform	above	the	great	cave,	his	arms	folded,	stood	Nicholas	Gaunt.
Hamilton	stopped.	The	doctor	smiled	sardonically.
“Good	morning,	Mr.	Hamilton,”	he	announced.	“We	meet	again.	I	have	watched	your
progress	with	 interest.	May	I	compliment	you	upon	your	courage?	Few	men	could	have
passed	 my	 sentinels	 and	 kept	 their	 reason.	 Now	 that	 you	 are	 here	 you	 will	 have	 the
opportunity	of	witnessing	a	most	interesting	experiment.	Please	step	forward.”
The	 mocking	 voice	 was	 more	 than	 Hamilton	 could	 endure.	 Blind	 rage	 sweeping
through	him,	he	lifted	his	pistol	and	pressed	the	trigger.
But	the	hammer	never	fell.	Instead,	a	violent	shock	ran	through	Hamilton’s	arm	and
the	weapon	fell	with	a	clatter	to	the	rock.
“You	are	a	very	rash	young	man,”	remarked	Gaunt.	“I	doubt	if	the	bullet	would	have
harmed	me,	but	I	think	it	best	not	to	take	any	risks	just	now.	Come	here,	and	let	us	have	no
more	foolery.”
Like	a	man	in	a	dream	Hamilton	felt	his	legs	move	automatically,	carrying	him	to	the
spot	at	which	the	doctor’s	long	forefinger	was	pointing.	He	struggled	frantically	to	stand
still,	to	disobey,	but	he	was	helpless	in	the	grip	of	that	awful	will.
A	circle	had	been	carefully	drawn	on	the	rocky	platform	with	some	white	substance,
and	 when	 he	 was	 inside	 this	 Hamilton	 came	 to	 a	 standstill.	 The	 doctor	 nodded
approvingly.
“That’s	better,”	he	said.	“You	will	not	move	again.”
Instantly	Hamilton	felt	as	if	he	were	encased	in	iron	bands.	He	could	not	stir	so	much
as	a	finger,	though	the	sweat	broke	out	all	over	him	with	the	effort.	Dumbly	he	watched
the	Satanist	continue	his	interrupted	preparations.
Round	the	edge	of	the	circle	he	was	placing	seven	bronze	lamps.	When	he	had	them
arranged	 to	 his	 satisfaction	 he	 lit	 them	 and	 then	 proceeded	 to	 ignite	 the	 charcoal	 in	 a
brazier	which	 stood	 in	 the	middle.	He	 took	 up	 his	wand	 and	 laid	 it	 across	 the	 glowing
coals.	Finally	he	drew	out	his	watch	and	consulted	it.
“Eleven-fifty-five,”	 he	 said.	 “Time	 to	 being.	 I	 trust	 we	 shall	 have	 no	 more
interruptions.”
II	
The	first	 thing	 that	met	 the	eyes	of	Tony	and	his	 two	companions	as	 they	emerged
cautiously	into	the	crypt	was	the	lifeless	body	of	Simon	Vaughan.	A	quick	glance	around
satisfied	them	that	there	was	no	one	else	about,	and	they	stood	bewildered,	looking	down
at	the	dead	man.
In	spite	of	the	terrible	burns	they	could	see	that	his	features	were	as	calmly	set	as	if
he	were	asleep,	and	on	his	lips	there	was	the	faintest	hint	of	a	smile.
Valerie	caught	her	breath.	She	felt	the	strangest	impulse	to	weep	over	this	man,	who
in	his	life	had	stood	in	her	mind	for	all	the	filthy	wickedness	of	the	world.	Surely	that	pale,
serene	 face,	 purged	 by	 death	 of	 all	 its	 grossness,	 could	 not	 be	 that	 of	 the	 monstrous
Satanist	she	had	known	and	hated.
The	rector	knelt	beside	the	body.	He	too	was	conscious	of	some	great	mystery	here.
“How	did	he	die,	I	wonder,”	he	mused.	“Not	John,	surely.”
“No,”	 said	Tony,	“never.	Look	at	his	clothes,	his	 face	—	all	burnt.	He	 looks	 like	a
poor	wretch	 I	 once	 saw	 struck	 by	 lightning.	And	 there	 is	 but	 one	man	 on	Kestrel	who
could	 command	 the	 lightning.	He	must	 have	 resisted	Gaunt,	 as	 I	 hoped	 and	 prayed	 he
would,	and,	so	doing,	was	destroyed.	Poor	fellow,	he	cannot	have	been	wholly	bad.”
“He	 was	 a	 priest,”	 the	 rector	 reminded	 them,	 “and	 that	 very	 fact	 made	 his	 sins
infinitely	more	grievous,	but	at	the	same	time	it	may	have	made	it	easier	for	him	to	turn
back.	If	he	repented,	even	with	his	last	conscious	thought,	who	knows	but	that	the	Infinite
Mercy	may	not	enfold	him	yet?	We	shall	never	know	the	truth,	but	I	think	we	may,	in	all
charity,	pray	for	his	soul.”
Impelled	by	a	deep	urge,	which	came	he	knew	not	whence,	he	took	the	crucifix	from
his	own	girdle	and	laid	it	upon	the	dead	man’s	breast,	folding	the	stiff,	cold	hands	over	it.
“Into	Thy	Hands,	O	God!”	he	murmured,	and	stood	up.
Tony	 flashed	 the	beam	of	his	 torch	 round	on	 the	 floor	and	noticed,	all	 at	once,	 the
blasting-rod	 lying	where	Gaunt	 had	 dropped	 it.	With	 a	muttered	 exclamation	 he	 started
forward	and	picked	it	up.
“What	is	it,	Tony?”	asked	Valerie	fearfully.
In	a	low	voice	he	told	them.
“So	we	were	right,”	said	 the	rector	when	he	had	finished.	“Vaughan	resisted	Gaunt
and	was	destroyed.	And	then	—	what	did	Gaunt	do?	Where	is	he	now?”
Tony	frowned.
“The	altar	was	open	when	we	came	up,”	he	mused.	“I	wonder	if…?	Yes,	of	course,
he	must	be!	God!	What	a	fool	I	am!	The	great	cave,	the	lair	of	the	curse,	that’s	where	he’ll
be	—	not	here!”
Quickly	they	climbed	back	into	the	altar	and	hurried	down	the	steps.	They	had	hardly
reached	the	bottom	when	the	rock	underfoot	began	to	tremble	and	from	the	darkness	of	the
tunnel	came	a	hollow	rumbling	sound.	The	three	stopped,	clinging	together.
“Too	 late,”	 Tony	whispered	 in	 a	 voice	 heavy	with	 despair	—	 “he	 has	 begun.”	He
looked	at	his	watch.	The	hands	stood	dead	on	twelve.	With	a	half-sob	he	turned	away	and
leaned	against	the	wall.
The	rector	spoke	sharply:
“Tony,	I	absolutely	forbid	you	to	give	in.	Come,	it	may	still	be	possible	to	stop	him.
John	may	be	there.”
“If	he	is	he	can’t	do	anything	—	no	one	can.	We’re	finished,	I	tell	you.”
Valerie	timidly	laid	her	hand	on	his	arm.
“Tony	dear,”	she	whispered,	“for	my	sake,	for	all	our	sakes,	don’t	be	like	this.	Let’s
go	through	with	it	together.”
He	looked	at	her	wonderingly.
“Very	well,	my	darling,	if	you	wish.	But	it’s	not	earthly	use.”
So	they	went	on	together.	There	was	no	opposition	such	as	Hamilton	had	met	with,
only	 the	 steadily	 growing	 oppression	 of	 a	 power	 of	 darkness	 so	 terrific	 that	 their	 very
souls	sickened.	With	each	step	they	took	the	vibration	of	the	rock	grew	more	violent,	until
they	were	hard	put	to	it	to	keep	their	feet.	The	cold	grew	deadly,	until	every	breath	was	an
effort,	cutting	the	lungs	like	a	knife.
As	they	drew	near	the	end	of	the	passage	the	increasing	radiance	from	in	front	made
Tony’s	torch	unnecessary,	and	he	switched	it	off,	thrusting	it	in	his	pocket.	They	turned	the
corner	and	came	to	an	abrupt	halt.
On	the	ledge,	silhouetted	against	 the	ghastly	greenish	glare,	were	two	figures:	John
Hamilton,	erect	and	motionless,	and	Nicholas	Gaunt.
The	 latter,	 a	 bizarre	 picture	 in	 his	 ceremonial	 robes,	 was	 pacing	 slowly	 round	 the
brazier,	whispering	softly.	He	stopped	the	moment	the	three	appeared	in	the	mouth	of	the
tunnel	and	gazed	at	 them	 incredulously,	his	eyes	blazing	with	 fury.	He	 raised	one	hand,
and	Tony,	at	least	expected	to	be	destroyed	instantly,	but	the	doctor	seemed	to	hesitate,	and
finally	beckoned	to	them,	saying:
“Come,	my	friends,	and	join	your	comrade.	You	are	just	in	time	to	see	the	end.”
They	made	no	effort	 to	resist	his	will,	but	walked	quietly	forward	and	stood	beside
Hamilton,	 within	 the	 circle.	 Their	 friend	 looked	 at	 them,	 and	 though	 his	 eyes	 spoke
volumes	his	lips	did	not	move.
“You	must	forgive	your	companion’s	seeming	discourtesy,”	said	Gaunt	suavely,	“but
I	have	had	to	place	him	under	restraint.	He	was	inclined	to	be	violent	when	he	arrived,	and
violence	I	abhor.”
Valerie	gasped.
“You’ve	not	hurt	him,	have	you?”	she	demanded.
Gaunt	shook	his	head.
“No,	 I	 have	 not	 hurt	 him	 —	 yet.	 I	 would	 destroy	 you	 all,	 without	 the	 least
compunction,	but	it	would	entail	an	expenditure	of	power	which	I	can	ill	afford	at	present.
Later	you	will	all	go	together.”
“Dr.	Gaunt,”	said	the	rector	quietly,	“if	you	value	your	soul	you	will	stop	this	infernal
game	of	yours	before	it	is	too	late.”
Gaunt	laughed:	an	ugly	sound.
“It	is	too	late,”	he	said,	“the	wheels	of	destiny	are	turning,	and	nothing	can	stop	them
now.”
At	this	point	Tony,	who	had	been	carrying	the	blasting-rod	ever	since	he	had	found	it
in	the	crypt,	swung	the	heavy	thing	clubwise	over	his	head,	but	the	doctor	was	too	quick
for	him.	One	backward	leap	took	him	out	of	range,	and	like	the	crack	of	a	whip	his	voice
rang	out:
“Stop!	You	cannot	move!”
Paralyzed,	Tony	remained	as	he	was,	one	arm	in	the	air.	Gaunt	quietly	took	the	rod
from	his	helpless	fingers	and	threw	it	out	of	the	circle.
“Now	 be	 still	 and	 silent,	 all	 of	 you.	 I	 cannot	 concentrate	 in	 the	 midst	 of	 such
commotion.”
His	tone	was	quite	commonplace,	but	upon	each	of	his	hearers	descended	the	same
invisible	bonds	of	silence	and	immobility	which	bound	Hamilton.	Rooted	to	the	rock,	they
stood	and	watched.
Going	 to	 the	 extreme	 edge	 of	 the	 circle,	 where	 it	 verged	 upon	 the	 brink	 of	 the
platform,	Gaunt	fixed	his	eyes	on	a	point	in	the	centre	of	the	cavern	floor,	far	below,	and
began	to	move	his	lips	soundlessly.	The	rumbling	sound	which	had	been	going	on	faintly
all	 the	while	like	distant	thunder	now	grew	louder	and	more	near,	and	the	shuddering	of
the	 rock	 became	 a	 steady	 pulse.	 The	 green	 light	 flooding	 the	 place	waxed	 and	waned,
seeming	to	vibrate	in	sympathy.
Suddenly	 a	 great	 circular	 expanse	 of	 rock	 in	 the	middle	 of	 the	 floor	 below	bulged
violently	upwards.	For	 an	 instant	 it	 quivered	 there	 like	 a	gigantic	bubble,	 then	 it	 broke,
and	 in	 the	pit	beneath	writhed	 the	black	slime	of	corruption	which	was	 the	substance	of
the	curse-monstrosity.	The	very	air	seemed	to	darken	as	the	horror	came	into	view,	and	the
essence	 of	 concentrated	 evil	 rose	 from	 it	 in	 waves	 so	 overpowering	 that	 the	 senses	 of
Gaunt’s	helpless	companions	reeled.
The	doctor	smiled	with	quiet	satisfaction	and	turned	towards	them.
“There	 it	 lies,	my	 friends,”	 he	 said	—	“the	 so-called	 curse	 of	 the	Lovells	—	mine
now	to	do	with	as	I	will.	As	I	suppose	you	know,	I	had	 intended	 to	set	 it	 free	and	 let	 it
spread	over	the	whole	world,	but	your	presence	here	has	made	that	undesirable.	Be	not	too
thankful	until	I	have	done!	I	hope	to	do	a	much	greater	thing	than	that.
“Long	 ages	 ago	 the	 greatest	 magician,	 perhaps,	 this	 world	 has	 ever	 known	 dwelt
here,	and	conducted	his	magical	experiments	in	this	very	cavern.	Here,	at	this	same	hour,
he	succeeded	in	doing	a	thing	no	man	had	ever	done	before:	he	made	a	breach	in	the	Veil
which	hangs	between	 this	 creation	and	 the	Outer	Chaos.	For	but	 an	 instant	of	Time	 the
Veil	was	rent,	and	through	the	breach	came	this	monstrosity.	The	Magus	bound	it	to	this
rock	and	went	away	—	none	knows	whither	—	 leaving	his	experiment	half	done.	Ages
after	came	the	monks,	and	by	reason	of	their	exceeding	holiness	dwelt	here	unharmed	by
that	which	lay	dormant	beneath	their	feet.	Then	came	the	first	of	the	Lovells,	committing
sacrilege;	 the	 creature	 woke,	 and	 the	 Abbot’s	 words,	 by	 vague	 intention,	 and	 by	 one
chance	 phrase,	 completed	 a	 phase	 of	 the	 ancient	 ritual;	 and	 it	 fastened	 itself	 upon	 the
house	 of	 Lovell,	 battening	 upon	 their	 very	 life,	 until	 at	 last	 Tony	 Lovell	 cut	 the	 bond
which	bound	it	to	himself	and	gave	the	reins	to	me.
“But	it	grows	weary	of	its	exile	here:	it	longs	for	its	own	kind.	The	hour	is	ripe	for
me	to	do	once	more	the	thing	that	Great	One	did	so	long	ago.	Something	of	his	wisdom
lives	in	me,	and	through	the	strength	and	blind	ferocity	of	that	dark	monster,	yearning	for
its	kind,	I	shall	rend	once	more	the	Veil,	and	open	wide	the	breach	between	this	world	and
Chaos.	But	this	time	it	shall	not	be	shut,	but	shall	stand	open	for	eternity,	letting	the	Outer
Darkness	in	upon	the	world.”
Speechless,	 immobile,	his	hearers	never	doubted	 that	Gaunt	had	 the	power	 to	carry
out	 his	 monstrous	 threat.	 So	 bruised	 were	 their	 minds	 by	 the	 accumulation	 of	 things
seemingly	 impossible	 that	 they	 had	well-nigh	 lost	 the	 power	 of	 reasoned	 thought:	 they
could	only	listen	stupefied	to	his	vaunting	monologue.
“Humanity	has	looked	its	last	upon	the	sun,”	he	went	on	remorselessly,	“for	soon	the
sun	 will	 be	 blotted	 out	 for	 ever:	 sun,	 moon,	 stars;	 the	 green	 earth;	 all	 beauty	 and	 all
loveliness;	for	these	things	have	absolute	existence	only	in	the	mind	of	man,	and	when	the
Veil	 is	 rent	 again,	 and	 this	 earth	 becomes	 a	 playground	 for	 the	 horrors	 of	 the	 Dark,
mankind	will	 be	 plunged	 into	 the	Abyss	 and	 utterly	 destroyed.	 Even	God	Himself	will
cease	to	be.”
So	 dreadful	was	 the	 expression	 of	 hellish	 glee	 upon	 the	 face	 of	 the	 Satanist	 as	 he
uttered	the	last	words	that	the	rector	closed	his	eyes	to	shut	out	the	abominable	sight.
Gaunt’s	lips	curled	as	he	saw	this.
“Pray,	priest,	pray!”	he	sneered.	“You	did	not	think	your	God	could	be	destroyed,	did
you?	Well,	know	now	that	He	can,	at	least,	to	the	knowledge	of	this	creation.	He	will	not
answer	your	prayers:	He	 is	powerless	before	 the	might	of	my	Lord.	O	Satan,	Master!	 I
thank	Thee	for	this	hour!”
“O	God,”	the	rector	prayed	passionately	in	his	heart,	“strike	this	blasphemer	dead!”
But	the	prayer	went	up	unanswered,	and	Gaunt	turned	away	from	them,	and	stood	for
a	while	 contemplating	 the	writhing	 horror	 below.	Under	 his	 steady	 gaze	 its	movements
became	 less	 and	 less	 violent,	 until	 it	 lay	 almost	 quiescent	 save	 for	 a	 slight	 rhythmical
swell	upon	its	surface.	Once	he	moved	his	hands	in	a	peculiar	manner,	and	a	sympathetic
shudder	ran	through	its	slimy	substance.	Satisfied	that	he	had	it	completely	under	control,
he	went	to	the	brazier	and	cast	a	handful	of	powder	into	it.	A	dense	white	smoke	sprang
up,	 and	 hung	 in	 a	 thick	 pall	 overhead.	 Then,	 taking	 up	 his	 glowing	wand,	 he	 began	 to
recite	the	words	and	perform	the	actions	of	a	ritual	which	even	the	highest	of	adepts	have
thought	to	be	lost	in	the	mists	of	antiquity.
Fascinated	 like	 rabbits	before	 a	 snake,	 the	 four	watched	helplessly.	They	heard	 the
rumbling	sound	which	filled	the	cavern	die	away,	until	there	was	silence	save	for	the	low
chanting	of	the	Satanist.	They	felt	the	vibration	of	the	rock	lessen	and	cease.	At	last	even
Time	 itself	 seemed	 to	 stand	 still,	 as	Gaunt	 stretched	 his	 still-glowing	wand	 downwards
towards	the	monstrosity.
Then	 —	 how	 can	 mere	 words	 describe	 what	 followed?	 It	 seemed	 that	 the	 thing
heaved	its	monstrous	bulk	out	of	the	pit	in	the	cavern	floor	and	hurled	itself	at	the	foot	of
the	opposite	wall.	But	was	it	merely	the	opposite	wall?	Did,	then,	the	wall	of	that	cavern,
great	at	it	was,	stretch	out	on	every	side	into	immensity?	Was	it	smooth	as	glass	and	softly
shining?	They	 realized	 that	 this	was	 no	mere	 cavern	wall	 but	 the	 substance	 of	 the	Veil
itself,	 rendered	visible	by	 the	magician	 in	 their	midst.	Past	 terror	now,	almost	 curiously
they	 watched,	 as	 the	 monstrosity,	 obedient	 to	 Gaunt’s	 direction,	 began	 to	 attack	 that
unbelievable	barrier.
The	doctor	stood	rigid,	every	particle	of	his	terrific	will	concentrated	upon	his	task,
the	sweat	pouring	from	his	face.	They	could	feel	 the	dark	power	radiating	from	that	 tall
figure,	and	the	crimson	aura	about	him	was	clearly	visible.	Tension	piled	on	tension	as	the
long	minutes	crept	into	eternity.	The	silence	was	absolute:	a	tangible	thing.
Then,	 with	 a	 sound	 like	 the	 crack	 of	 doom,	 the	 Veil	 was	 rent.	 From	 the	 creature
tearing	at	 its	 foot	 a	 jagged	 rift	 starred	out	 across	 the	wall.	A	 shrill	 cry	of	 triumph	burst
from	Gaunt’s	 lips,	 and	 the	monstrosity	began	 thrusting	 itself	 into	 the	 aperture.	Nor	was
that	all,	for,	as	it	strove	to	widen	the	breach,	it	began	to	utter	a	deep	bellowing	call,	which
was	immediately	answered,	at	first	as	from	a	great	distance	and	then	close	at	hand,	as	the
horrified	 watchers	 beheld	 vague,	 monstrous	 shapes	 of	 Darkness	 crowding	 to	 meet	 it
beyond	the	Veil.
Even	 in	 that	 awful	 moment	 the	 rector	 was	 praying	 continually,	 crying	 out	 in	 the
darkness	of	his	mind	to	the	God	he	knew	to	be	all-powerful.
“O	 God,	 let	 not	 Thy	 people	 perish!	 Let	 them	 not	 be	 destroyed	 utterly!	 From
everlasting	damnation	deliver	us,	O	Lord!”
He	 fixed	 his	 eyes	 upon	 the	 Satanist,	 confidently	 expecting	 the	 fire	 from	 Heaven
which	must	soon	fall	upon	him.	But	that	was	not	God’s	way.
Tony	was	past	framing	a	conscious	prayer,	but	he	let	his	mind	sink	into	the	infinite	in
the	way	he	had	been	taught.	With	no	thought	of	self,	his	soul	reached	out	until	he	knew	he
was	 on	 the	 threshold	 of	 the	 Presence.	 There	 he	 made	 an	 offering	 of	 himself	 for	 all
mankind,	very	humbly.
The	 rift	 in	 the	Veil	was	 now	 of	 an	 appalling	width.	Only	 one	 thing	 prevented	 the
immediate	 entry	 of	 the	 Darkness,	 and	 that	 was	 the	 monstrosity	 itself,	 still	 thrusting
through	 the	 gap	 impelled	 by	Gaunt’s	 command	 and	 its	 own	 furious	 desire	 to	 rejoin	 its
kind.	 In	 another	 moment	 it	 would	 be	 through,	 and	 the	 Darkness	 would	 come	 flooding
irresistibly	in,	blasting	the	world	for	ever.
Then	God	came:	august,	inexorable,	unhurried.	Not	with	the	lightning	and	thunder	of
Sinai;	not	with	 the	flames	of	Pentecost;	but	unseen,	unheralded,	 in	 the	quiet	certainty	of
omnipotence.
Through	Tony	Lovell’s	hands	and	feet	and	side	shot	a	fiery	dart	of	agony;	and	at	the
same	 instant	 the	 invisible	 shackles	which	Gaunt’s	will	 had	 bound	 about	 his	 limbs	were
loosed	and	he	was	free.	Without	the	slightest	hesitation,	though	he	knew	he	was	going	to
almost	certain	death,	he	flung	himself	upon	the	Satanist.	Caught	unawares,	Gaunt	lost	his
balance,	and	for	one	age-long	moment	the	two	tottered	on	the	brink	of	the	ledge,	locked	in
mortal	combat;	then	they	had	fallen	headlong	into	the	gulf.
Still	powerless	to	stir	an	inch,	the	three	who	were	left	saw	with	agonized	eyes	the	two
bodies,	still	clinging	together,	strike	the	cavern	floor,	only	a	few	yards	from	the	pit	whence
the	monstrosity	had	come.	That	both	were	not	killed	instantly	was	in	itself	miraculous,	but
Gaunt,	who	had	fallen	undermost,	was	on	his	feet	almost	as	soon	as	Tony.	He	had	received
injuries	which	must	have	incapacitated	an	ordinary	man,	and	it	was	only	by	the	exercise	of
his	whole	will	that	he	kept	the	life	in	his	broken	body.	What	he	saw	to	terrify	him	in	the
figure	 of	 the	 chalk-faced,	 blood-bespattered	 young	man	who	 staggered	 towards	 him	 no
one	will	ever	know;	but	with	the	cry	of	a	hunted	beast	he	turned	and	fled	round	the	lip	of
the	pit,	with	Tony	after	him.	And	the	monstrosity,	lying	motionless,	half	through	the	Veil,
watched	 him	 come.	 Not	 until	 he	 was	 almost	 upon	 it	 did	 he	 realize	 his	 frightful
predicament:	 then	 it	was	 too	 late.	He	could	 spare	not	 the	 least	 fraction	of	will-power	 to
ward	off	the	horror	as	it	surged	towards	him,	catching	his	feet.	He	uttered	one	scream	of
mortal	 anguish	 and	 fell	 forwards	 into	 the	 bubbling	mass.	 For	 an	 instant	 his	white	 robe
fluttered	against	the	blackness,	 then	he	was	gone,	and	the	whole	bulk	of	the	monstrosity
heaved	itself	out	through	the	gap,	taking	its	erstwhile	master	with	it.
Immediately	 the	 bonds	which	 held	 the	watchers	 on	 the	 ledge	were	 broken.	Valerie
reeled	and	would	have	fallen	had	Hamilton	not	caught	her.	Clinging	together,	they	beheld
the	last	act	in	that	incredible	drama.
When	he	saw	Gaunt’s	dreadful	end	Tony	had	stopped,	one	hand	pressed	against	his
bleeding	side;	but	now,	despite	injuries	which	made	each	step	an	agony,	he	went	resolutely
on	until	he	was	before	the	rift	in	the	Veil.	His	friends	saw	him	pause	for	a	moment	as	if
undecided	what	 to	 do,	 expecting	 each	 second	 the	 dark	 clouds	 of	 chaos	 and	 dissolution
which	 swirled	 beyond	 the	 breach	 to	 pour	 in	 and	 overwhelm	 him.	 Then	 he	 straightened
himself	and	spread	wide	his	arms.	As	the	radiance	about	him	grew	stronger	the	rector	saw
for	 the	 first	 time	 his	 bleeding	 hands,	 and	 his	 dark	 footprints	 on	 the	 rocky	 floor.
Understanding	the	great	glory	which	had	come	upon	Tony	Lovell,	he	made	the	sign	of	the
Cross	and	watched	with	reverent	eyes,	knowing	now	that	there	was	nothing	more	to	fear.
The	slight	figure	with	the	outspread	arms,	which	stood	alone	between	the	world	and
destruction,	uttered	seven	words	in	a	clear,	ringing	voice.	To	his	mortal	hearers	they	meant
nothing	save	music	which	seemed	not	of	 this	earth;	but	 the	Guardians	of	 the	Veil	heard
and	understood.	With	a	mighty	clashing	sound,	like	that	of	iron	gates	swinging	together,
the	breach	was	closed.	Then	 the	vision	of	 the	Veil	 faded,	 leaving	only	 the	 rocky	cavern
wall,	 rough	 but	 unbroken	 as	 before.	 At	 the	 same	 moment	 the	 unearthly	 light	 which
flooded	 the	place	dimmed	and	passed,	 leaving	 them	 in	darkness,	 save	 for	 the	 flickering
lamps	and	the	dimly	glowing	brazier.
Hamilton	sought	and	found	his	torch,	lying	where	he	had	dropped	it	in	the	mouth	of
the	tunnel.	Cautiously	they	descended	to	the	floor	of	 the	cavern,	and,	skirting	the	empty
pit,	came	to	the	place	where	Tony	was.
At	first	they	thought	him	to	be	dead	already,	so	still	he	lay;	but	when	Hamilton	had
pillowed	the	bruised	head	on	his	coat	he	opened	his	eyes	and	smiled	weakly	up	at	them.
“All	clear,	John?”	he	asked.
“All	clear,	Tony,	thanks	to	you.”
“Not	 thanks	 to	 me,	 John.	 Something	 came	 over	 me,	 and	 I	 was	 set	 free	 from	 his
power.	I	had	to	do	it	then.	Perhaps	God	chose	me	as	His	agent	after	all.”
“He	did,	my	son,”	the	rector	whispered.	“Look	at	your	hands.”
Wonderingly,	Tony	lifted	them	and	saw	the	Stigmata.
“Lord,	I	am	not	worthy,”	he	murmured,	but	the	glory	in	his	face	belied	the	words.
For	some	minutes	there	was	silence	save	for	the	quiet	weeping	of	Valerie,	who	knelt
beside	him.	Presently	he	touched	her	dark	curls,	saying:
“Don’t	cry,	my	darling.	 It’s	better	so	—	far	better.	 I’ve	squared	 the	reckoning	now,
and	everything	is	all	right.	You	never	loved	me,	did	you?	Not	as	you	loved	John.	It	was
selfish	of	me	to	ask	you	to.	Please	forgive	me.	Be	good	to	her,	John.”
Hamilton	 caught	 his	 arm	 and	 pressed	 it	 gently,	 unashamed	 of	 the	 tears	 which	 ran
down	his	face.	Tony	spoke	again,	in	a	voice	so	low	that	they	had	to	bend	close	to	hear	the
words:
“Valerie,	won’t	you	smile	for	me?”
She	 lifted	 her	 lovely	 face,	 struggling	 bravely	with	 her	 tears,	 and	 gave	 him	 such	 a
pitiful	little	smile	that	Hamilton	thought	his	heart	would	surely	break.
“That’s	better,	my	darling.	Now	one	kiss.	You	don’t	mind,	John?”
Hamilton	shook	his	head	and	turned	away;	he	could	not	speak.
“Good-bye,	my	sweet,”	Tony	murmured,	as	she	lifted	her	lips	from	his;	then	his	eyes
darkened,	and	his	head	fell	back.	So	passed	the	last	of	the	Lovells.
The	rector	stood	up,	crossing	himself.
“Come,	my	children,”	he	said,	“we	must	get	out	of	here	at	once.	The	material	fabric
of	this	place	has	been	tried	too	far,	and	with	the	monstrosity	withdrawn	I	doubt	if	it	will
stand	much	longer.”
“And	leave	him	here?”	Hamilton	asked.
“Why	not?	His	soul	is	far	away.	Should	not	his	body	lie	in	the	home	of	his	fathers?	It
is	not	an	abode	of	Darkness	any	more.”
Even	as	he	spoke	there	was	a	rending	sound	from	above,	and	a	great	mass	of	rock	fell
from	the	roof,	splintering	not	many	yards	from	where	they	stood.
So	 they	made	 their	 way	 back	 up	 the	 tortuous	 pathway	 to	 the	 ledge	 and	 along	 the
winding	 tunnel	 to	 the	 sea-cave.	 Every	 few	minutes	 a	 hollow,	 echoing	 crash	 resounded
behind	them,	and	when	at	last	they	reached	the	sea	the	air	in	the	tunnel	was	full	of	a	fine
dust	of	pulverized	rock.
They	found	the	boat	moored	where	they	had	left	it,	clambered	in,	and	cast	off	at	once.
The	sea	was	calm,	but	the	fog	had	gone	from	the	face	of	the	waters	and	a	fresh	breeze	was
springing	up.	Hamilton	took	the	wheel	and	steered	for	Pentock,	while	the	rector	sat	in	the
stern	holding	Valerie	in	his	arms.	The	girl	was	utterly	worn	out	by	all	 that	she	had	gone
through	and	lay	quite	still,	her	dark	head	pillowed	on	her	uncle’s	shoulder.
They	had	put	perhaps	half	a	mile	of	blue	water	between	 them	and	 the	 island	when
some	indefinable	impulse	caused	Hamilton	to	stop	the	engine	and	look	back.	Wondering,
his	 companions	 followed	 his	 gaze,	 and	 for	 some	 minutes	 they	 sat	 there	 in	 the	 gently
rocking	boat	looking	at	the	once	familiar	but	now	strangely	different	scene.
All	was	as	it	had	ever	been:	the	dark	mass	of	the	island	crowned	with	the	grey	walls
of	the	Abbey,	merging	imperceptibly	into	steep	cliffs	beneath;	but	there	was	no	menace	in
it	now,	no	veiled	threat	to	mar	its	austere	beauty.	Instead,	a	kind	of	tragic	loveliness,	such
as	must	for	ever	lie	upon	the	hill	of	Calvary,	now	wrung	the	hearts	of	the	three	who	looked
at	it.	In	this	place	also	a	young	man	had	given	himself	for	 the	world,	greatly	loving	and
greatly	loved.	Gone	too	was	that	air	of	immemorial	strength	which	once	had	hung	about
the	battlements;	instead,	a	hint	of	unreality	—	a	touch	of	the	mirage	—	wove	itself	into	the
picture.
Then,	even	as	they	watched,	the	mirage	began	to	fade.	Clear	across	the	water	came	a
curious	grinding	sound,	and	the	massive	right-hand	tower	of	the	Abbey	crumpled	inwards,
vanishing	in	a	spurt	of	flying	rubble;	 the	roar	of	 its	fall	 followed	almost	 instantly.	Quite
slowly	the	second	tower	leaned	across	the	main	body	of	the	building,	disintegrating	as	it
fell,	until	only	the	outer	wall	was	left,	while	a	great	cloud	of	dust,	belching	from	the	ruins
within,	spread	out	across	the	sky.	The	dissolution	of	centuries,	hitherto	held	in	check	by
the	 indwelling	power	 of	 the	 curse-monstrosity,	was	 accomplished	 in	 the	 space	 of	 a	 few
minutes.	Hamilton	made	as	if	to	speak,	but	the	rector	silenced	him	with	a	gesture;	the	end
was	not	yet.
The	dust	darkened	the	sky	and	made	it	difficult	 to	see	clearly	what	was	happening,
but	it	seemed	that	now	the	whole	crest	of	the	island	was	caving	in.	Hamilton	realized	that
the	 roof	 of	 the	 great	 cavern	 within	 must	 have	 given	 way,	 for	 the	 island	 seemed	 to	 be
swallowing	the	ruins	of	the	Abbey	bodily,	until	at	length	the	rock	was	naked	as	when	the
sea	first	thrust	it	up,	only	a	gaping	chasm	remaining	to	tell	the	tale	of	what	had	been.	But
even	now	outraged	Nature	was	not	satisfied,	for	a	long	gash	opened	in	the	face	of	the	cliff
nearest	to	them,	and	a	vast	mass	of	rock	detached	itself	and	slid	into	the	sea	with	a	mighty
splash.	The	whole	island	appeared	to	shudder	and	tilt	slightly,	like	an	iceberg	about	to	turn
turtle,	 and	 then,	with	 a	 gargantuan	 convulsion,	 sank	 into	 the	 depths.	The	waters	 rushed
roaring	together	into	the	gulf	where	it	had	been,	met,	and	spouted	skywards	in	a	column	of
foam	many	hundreds	of	feet	into	the	air.
As	he	 saw	 the	 resultant	wave	 rushing	 towards	 them	Hamilton	hurriedly	 started	 the
engine	and	turned	the	launch	bow-on	to	meet	it.	They	were	tossed	up	like	a	cockle-shell,
and	for	some	minutes	were	fully	occupied	in	clinging	to	their	seats.	When	at	last,	drenched
with	spray,	they	could	lift	their	heads	again,	the	sea	was	empty	to	the	horizon.	It	was	as	if
Kestrel	had	never	been.
finis
DISCUSSING	DARK	SANCTUARY	
(An	Interview	with	H.B.	Gregory)	
JP:	I	and	the	readers	of	Inhuman	are	very	appreciative	of	your	taking	the	time	for	this
interview.	I	know	that	I	was	floored	to	hear	from	your	daughter	some	weeks	ago,	as	all	our
attempts	to	locate	you	or	an	estate	ran	into	a	dead	end.	While	my	surprise	was	extreme,	I
can’t	 imagine	what	 your	 reaction	would	 have	 been	 to	 find	 that	 your	 novel	was	 in	 print
after	 all	 these	 years	 from	 some	 tiny	 company	 in	 the	US.	Could	 you	 tell	 us	 about	 your
reaction	to	the	news?
HBG:	I	was	amazed,	but	extremely	gratified	to	learn	of	the	resurrection	of	Dark
Sanctuary;	but	sad	that	it	came	so	late	in	my	life	when	my	late	wife	(to	whom	it	was
dedicated)	and	most	of	my	old	 friends	were	gone.	As	a	practicing	Anglo-Catholic	I
hope	it	may	strike	a	blow	for	Christianity	in	these	faithless	days.
JP:	Dark	Sanctuary	is	certainly	a	classic	tale	of	the	struggle	of	good	versus	evil,	but
seems	 to	 share	much	 in	 the	way	 of	 atmosphere	with	 the	work	 of	American	writer	H.P.
Lovecraft.	Had	you	read	Lovecraft?
HBG:	 I	 certainly	 had	 read	 Lovecraft	 and	 greatly	 acknowledge	 his	 influence,
particularly	 in	 the	Cthulhu	Mythos,	 but	 I	 always	 found	 his	 failure	 to	 describe	 his
nameless	subterranean	horrors	irritating.	So	I	described	mine	in	full	detail!
JP:	Who	were	some	of	your	favorites	in	the	horror/mystery	genre?
HBG:	Charles	Williams	—	War	 in	Heaven,	 The	Place	 of	 the	 Lion.	Many	C.S.
Lewis	—	That	Hideous	Strength,	Voyage	to	Venus,	etc.	Dennis	Wheatley	—	The	Devil
Ride	Out,	Bram	Stoker’s	Dracula,	 Stephen	King’s	Salem’s	 Lot.	 Peter	 Straub,	Dean
Koontz.
JP:	 Your	 daughter	 mentioned	 to	 me	 that	 your	 writing	 really	 started	 off	 with	 the
composition	of	plays	for	your	Church	theatre?	Was	the	genesis	of	Dark	Sanctuary	a	play?
HBG:	Yes.	The	 idea	of	 the	 family	curse	as	a	monster	 lurking	 in	 the	crypt	was
there,	 but	 in	 the	 play	 this	 turned	 out	 to	 be	 a	 thief	 in	 an	 old	 diving	 suit	 seeking
treasure.	But	the	Abbot’s	Curse	was	there	and	the	Satanist	“Gaunt”,	(I	played	both
parts	myself!)
JP:	Dark	 Sanctuary	 is	 based	 on	 a	 real	 place	 that	 you	 visited	 on	 your	 honeymoon,
could	you	tell	us	a	bit	about	that?
HBG:	The	island	of	“Kestrel”	is	based	on	St.	Michael’s	Mount,	off	the	Cornish
coast	 near	 Penzance.	My	wife	 and	 I	 spent	 our	 honeymoon	 nearby	 and	 visited	 the
castle	there;	then	the	ancestral	home	of	Lord	St.	Leven.	Rider	was	worried	about	this
and	I	had	to	write	to	his	Lordship	and	submit	the	ms.	For	his	approval	before	they
would	 publish.	 Happily,	 his	 Lordship	 approved	 and	 raised	 no	 objection	 to
publication.	He	pointed	out	that	since	the	island	and	abbey	sank	beneath	the	waves
in	my	book,	 it	 could	hardly	be	 identified	with	his	 stately	house,	which	 is	 still	 there
(accessible	by	a	causeway	at	low	tide)	and	a	well-known	tourist	resort.
JP:	Could	you	tell	us	anything	about	the	sale	of	Dark	Sanctuary	 to	Rider?	Had	you
tried	a	number	of	other	houses,	or	did	it	just	seem	that	Rider	was	a	good	fit	for	a	book	of
this	type?
HBG:	I	wrote	the	novel,	 for	entry	 in	a	newspaper	competition	(which	it	didn’t
win)	and	then	sent	the	ms.	to	Hutchinson,	who	passed	it	over	to	Rider	(still	in	their
imprint	 today)	and	Rider	published	 it	 in	1940	with	400	copies	 in	 the	 first	and	only
edition.	 World	 War	 II	 had	 just	 begun	 and	 the	 book	 was	 a	 victim.	 It	 was	 well-
received,	but	failed	to	sell.	I	suppose	that	some	returning	G.I.	must	have	brought	a
copy	 to	 the	US.	Rider	 is	 still	part	of	 the	Hutchinson’s	group	and	I	 tried	 to	 interest
them	in	republishing	Dark	Sanctuary	many	years	ago,	but	they	were	not	interested.
In	1940	 they	mainly	published	 fiction	of	 (they	said)	 the	“quaint,	queer,	 scarce,	and
rare	type.”	That	would	almost	fit	your	lot	today!
JP:	 Interesting	 comparison,	 (and	 a	 flattering	one)!	Your	publisher	 (Rider)	 and	 their
parent	company	(Hutchinson)	published	a	pretty	wide	range	of	books	that	revolved	around
horror	and	metaphysical	 themes,	 such	as	 J.M.	Mills’	 two	novels	The	Lords	of	 the	Earth
and	Tomb	of	the	Dark	Ones;	as	well	as	Bridge	Over	Dark	Gods	by	Furze	Morrish.	Did	you
have	any	correspondence	with	other	authors	working	for	Rider?
HBG:	No.	I	didn’t	know	what	else	Rider	had	published.	I	sent	‘Dark	Sanctuary’
to	Hutchinson,	who	passed	it	on	to	Rider.	They	then	wrote	to	me	and	said	they	would
publish.
JP:	Considering	the	scarcity	of	Dark	Sanctuary	in	first	edition	(I	know	of	three	copies
in	private	hands,	and	one	of	them	is	yours);	it’s	not	likely	most	of	the	readers	of	Inhuman
will	ever	see	a	copy,	let	alone	one	with	the	dustjacket.	Could	you	tell	us	what	the	jacket
was	like?	Are	we	missing	a	great	piece	of	artwork?
HBG:	It	was	similar	to	the	current	dustjacket:	an	impression	of	the	abbey	and	a
horrified	face.	It	wasn’t	very	good,	and	in	retrospect,	the	publishers	thought	it	could
have	been	improved.
JP:	Rider	was	pretty	well-known	for	publishing	a	good	deal	of	theosophist	nonsense
and	 seemingly	 published	 interesting	 fiction	 rather	 by	 accident	 than	 design.	 Were	 you
surprised	 that	 the	 publishers	 of	 such	 silliness	 as	 A	 Message	 from	 the	 Sphinx	 and	 The
Projection	of	the	Astral	Body	were	interested	in	a	novel	written	from	a	strongly	Christian
perspective?
HBG:	I	would	have	been	if	I’d	known.	You	seem	to	be	assuming	that,	 in	those
days,	you	 selected	a	 suitable	publisher.	You	simply	 sent	 it	off	 to	various	publishers
until	one	accepted	it.	Nowadays,	you	have	agents	to	do	that	sort	of	thing.
JP:	 You	mentioned	 your	 fondness	 for	 Lovecraft’s	 work	 previously	 and	 one	 of	 the
most	remarkable	features	of	your	novel	is	the	Lovecraftian	tone.	However,	you	manage	to
work	in	two	unique	twists;	First,	you	show	us	the	horror	in	detail	(which	you	mentioned
was	 intentional).	 Possibly	 an	 even	 more	 important	 divergence	 was	 where	 Lovecraft
postulates	an	atheist’s	cosmology	of	chaos,	where	his	Mythos	deities	are	neither	good	nor
evil,	but	simply	completely	indifferent;	your	book	paints	the	eternal	struggle	in	very	clear
shades	of	black	and	white	and	is	equally	effective.	Was	this	counterpoint	to	Lovecraft	also
intentional?
HBG:	You	are	attributing	a	greater	influence	on	me	from	Lovecraft	than	there
was.	 Lovecraft	 was	 one	 of	 many	 authors	 I	 read,	 such	 as	 M	 R	 James,	 Dennis
Wheatley	and	Charles	Williams.	 I	was	not	particularly	concerned	with	Lovecraft’s
mythology.	I	feel	that	there	may	have	been	less	philosophical	significance	in	both	our
works	 than	 you	 suggest.	 Starting	 from	 a	 Christian	 perspective,	 I	 invented	 a
mythology	 in	 which	 the	 powers	 of	 darkness	 threatened	 the	 omnipotence	 of	 God.
However,	it	was	only	the	means	by	which	God	would	assert	this	omnipotence	which
remained	to	be	revealed	(in	the	book).
JP:	 While	 no	 one	 can	 question	 the	 effectiveness	 of	 showing	 the	 horror	 in	 Dark
Sanctuary,	 do	 you	 feel	 that	 much	 modern	 horror	 has	 become	 too	 descriptive	 and
abandoned	the	writer’s	strongest	tool,	that	of	the	reader’s	imagination?
HBG:	I	suppose	you	might	say	that,	but	I	feel	it	isn’t	what	the	author	wants;	it’s
what	he	thinks	his	public	want.
JP:	Could	you	tell	us	a	little	bit	about	your	foray	into	science	fiction	in	the	1950s?
HBG:	 I	 felt	 that	 I	 had	 exhausted	 my	 capacity	 for	 horror	 by	 writing	 Dark
Sanctuary.	I	wrote	a	short	story	called	“Boy	on	the	Moon”,	which	I	offered	to	Boys
Own	Paper	(a	‘serious’	text-based	magazine	for	boys,	containing	stories	and	articles
about	 science,	 hobbies	 etc.)	 The	 editor,	 concerned	 about	 scientific	 accuracy,
submitted	it	to	Patrick	Moore	(a	famous	British	astronomer),	who	approved	it,	and
they	published.
This	 success	 prompted	me	 to	write	 three	 or	 four	 sequels,	 which	 attracted	 the
attention	of	Frank	Wells	(son	of	H	G);	at	that	time	director	of	the	‘Children’s	Film
Foundation’.	They	produced	a	serial,	based	on	the	stories,	for	showing	in	cinemas	at
children’s	Saturday	matinees.
JP:	 Lastly,	 you’ve	 given	 the	 world	 of	 horror	 fiction	 one	 of	 its	 masterpieces,	 any
chance	we’ll	ever	see	another	H.B.	Gregory	novel?	Perhaps	a	short	story?
HPG:	As	I’m	almost	92	now;	it’s	unlikely.
JP:	On	behalf	of	the	readers	of	Inhuman	I’d	like	to	thank	you	for	taking	the	time	to
for	this	interview	and	sharing	some	of	the	background	concerning	your	remarkable	book!
Thanks	again!
