Forgotten 
or 
Falsified 
Truths
www.avciya.az
www.avciya.az2
George (Gevork) Burnutyan
The Armenian historian, professor of Columbian 
University 
“A number of the Armenian historians 
speaking about the statistics of 1830 are wrong 
in saying that during the Persian rule (that 
is, till the Turkmenchay Treaty) in the eastern 
Armenia 30-50 per cent of the total number 
of population consisted of the Armenians. In 
reality, according to the official statistics after the 
Russian occupation, the Muslim population of 
the Eastern Armenia was over 80 per cent, while 
the number of the Armenian population was 
about 20 per cent there.”
Association for Civil Society Development in Azerbaijan
www.avciya.az 3
The author of the drawing you see here is 
the Russian artist V.I.Moshkov. It is called “The 
migration of 40000 Armenians to the territory of 
the Russian Empire from Turkey and Iran”, and it 
has been painted in 1828.
www.avciya.az4
Alexandre Griboyedov 
(1795-1829)
- The Russian writer and diplomat
- Participant in the signing of Treaty of Turk-
menchay (1928)
Russian Ambassador in Iran
Association for Civil Society Development in Azerbaijan
www.avciya.az 5
“Your majesty, perhaps you gave Armenians 
permission to move to the central lands of Russia. 
They are such a nation that after living a couple 
of years they will proclaim that these lands are 
our ancestors’”.
www.avciya.az6
General G.Maevsky
Russian Consul in Van and Erzurum of Turkey, also 
speaks about it in his memoirs (1831)
“The Armenians have been settled in the 
lands of the Muslim landlords,… They drove 
out the Muslims who protested against it 
conspicuously, and they were right in doing 
it. We thought much to make the Muslims to 
reconcile with the situation, told them that it was 
temporary, the Armenians would not remain in 
their lands forever.” 
Association for Civil Society Development in Azerbaijan
www.avciya.az 7
M.Vardanyan 
Armenian author, Author of the book “The history of 
Dashnaksutyun”
On 1890 in Georgia, Khristofor Mikaelyan, 
Simon Zavareyan and Stefan Zoryan found the 
organisation by name of “Dashnak sutyun” (Armenian 
Revolutionary Union).  
“The most important slogan of Dashnaksutyun is to 
shoot and kill the Turks, irrespective of any circumstance”. 
In their first Congress held in 1892, the Dashnaks 
developed and approved the strategy of 
“organisation and training of military formations of the 
Armenians, institution of revolutionary committees, use 
of terror against the government officials and clerks…” 
“According to the documents kept in the archives of 
Russia, the delegates of the Congress of 1892 adopted the 
principles”.
www.avciya.az8
Svante E. Cornell
- Swedish scholar specializing on politics and 
security issues in Eurasia, 
- Director of the Stockholm-based Institute 
for Security and Development Policy, 
- Research Director of the Central Asia-Cauca-
sus Institute & Silk Road Studies Program, a Joint 
Center affiliated with the ISDP and Johns Hop-
kins University-SAIS.
Association for Civil Society Development in Azerbaijan
www.avciya.az 9
“...From the fourth century b.c. to the eighth 
century a.d., the territory of the current Nagorno-
Karabakh region of Azerbaijan was one of the 
provinces of Caucasian Albania, the most ancient 
state of Northern Azerbaijan. Karabakh has never 
been a part of the Armenian State until the 
Armenians captured it by brute force in 1992.”
www.avciya.az10
Bruce Fein
Adviser of the former USA President Ronald 
Reagan on legal issues
Association for Civil Society Development in Azerbaijan
www.avciya.az 11
“The national minorities lived comfortably, 
enjoyed religions freedom. It is true that in the 
World War I the Armenian terroristic organizations 
together with the French and Russian militaries 
exterminated over two million citizens of the 
Ottoman Empire. The studies prove that the loss 
of the very Armenians in the said period was 500 
000. Besides, the Armenians, particularly those 
who live in the United States, get enormous 
incomes on the account of the lies about the 
genocide”
www.avciya.az12
Association for Civil Society Development in Azerbaijan
“Russian thought” newspaper
 № 342, November 1907
Georges de Maleville. La Tragedie Armeni-
enne de 1915. 1988; E. Feigl. The truth about 
terror. Armenian terrorism – origins and causes. 
2000; edition Historama “ №16, 1985
www.avciya.az 13
“... in the late eighties in the city of Tiflis, a few 
Armenian school teachers formed the group, which started 
publishing the journal “Gnchak”(“Nabat”).... The main 
programme of this party group was to gather under its 
banner all the Armenians in the territory of the three 
powers - Russia, Turkey and Iran, and by gathering to 
create a so-called “Great Armenia”.... ” 
Another point of the program of the 
Armenian terrorist organisation “Gnchak” states: 
“Kill the Turks and the Kurds in all conditions, never spare 
the Armenians who betrayed their purpose, avenge them.”
www.avciya.az14
Association for Civil Society Development in Azerbaijan
A photo taken after bloody Khojaly 
night, 25 – 26 February 1992
www.avciya.az 15
Helen WOMACK 
- Specialist in Russian affairs
- Journalist of The Guardian, The Daily Tele-
graph, The Times, The Observer and The Sunday 
Telegraph
The exact number of victims is still unclear, 
but there can be little doubt that Azeri civilians 
were massacred by Armenian Army in the snowy 
mountains of Nagorno-Karabakh last week. 
Refugees from the enclave town of Khojaly, 
sheltering in the Azeri border town of Agdam, 
give largely consistent accounts of how 
Armenians attacked their homes on the night 
of 25 February, chased those who fled and shot 
them in the surrounding forests.
www.avciya.az16
Anatol Lieven Massacre Uncovered
British author, journalist, and policy analyst
“More than sixty bodies, including those of 
women and children, have been spotted on hill-
sides in Nagorno-Karabakh, confirming claims 
that Armenian troops massacred Azeri refugees. 
Hundreds are missing.
Scattered amid the withered grass and bush-
es along a small valley and across the hillside 
beyond are the bodies of last Wednesday’s mas-
sacre by Armenian forces of Azerbaijani refugees.”
Association for Civil Society Development in Azerbaijan
www.avciya.az 17
The Washington Post 
28 February 1992
“Refugees claim hundreds died in Armenian 
Attack...Of seven bodies seen here today, two 
were children and three were women, one shot 
through the chest at what appeared to be close 
range. Another 120 refugees being treated at Ag-
dam’s hospital include many with multiple stab 
wounds.”
www.avciya.az18
In 1978 Armenians who cheerfully 
celebrated the 150 Years Anniversary 
of Karabakh movements raised a 
monument on this event (pic.1). In 1988 
the Armenians who decided to detach 
Karabakh from Azerbaijan destroyed this 
monument
Association for Civil Society Development in Azerbaijan
www.avciya.az 19
Appendix: 
Resolutions of International Organisa-
tions on Nagorno-Karabakh conflict recog-
nizing the Armenian occupation of the terri-
tory of Azerbaijan 
Security Council of UN
- RESOLUTION 822 (1993)  
- RESOLUTION 853 (1993) 
- RESOLUTION 874 (1993)
- RESOLUTION 884 (1993) 
PACE
- Resolution 1416 (2005)41
General Assembly of UN
- Resolution adopted by the General As-
sembly [without reference to a Main Committee 
(A/62/L.42)]
©Association for Civil Society Development in Azerbaijan
All the statements configured on this document are 
available with their sources on www.avciya.az and on the 
book of “Historical Facts vs. Armenian Myths”.
