1 
 
ORGANIZATION OF LIBERATION OF 
GARABAGH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
"GARABAGH 
YESTERDAY, TODAY AND TOMORROW" 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROCEEDINGS 
OF SCIENTIFIC-PRACTICAL 
CONFERENCE 
 
 
2 
 
Editorial board: Ali Abasov, doctorate in philosophy; Gasym Hajiyev, 
doctorate in historical sciences; Kerim Shukurov, doctorate in historical sciences; 
Firdovsiyye Ahmedova, candidate of historical scineces; Panah Huseyn, Mehman 
Aliyev, Novruz Novruzbeyli, Shamil Mehdi Editorial board: AH Abasov, doctorate 
in philosophy; Gasym Hajiyev, doctorate in historical sciences; Kerim Shukurov, 
doctorate in historical sciences; Firdovsiyye Ahmedova, candidate of historical 
scineces; Panah Huseyn, Mehman Aliyev, Novruz Novruzbeyli, Shamil Mehdi 
 
Translators: Heyran Muradova, Gulnar Mammedli 
 
OLG   (Organization   of   Liberation   of   Garabagh). 
Proceedings of the conferences held under the topic "Garabagh yesterday, today 
and tomorrow". Second volume. Baku, 2009, 240 pages. 
 
The book expounds proceedings of the conferences held in 2005, 2006, 2007 and 
2008 under the topic "Garabagh yesterday, today and tomorrow" and devoted to 
problems of Azerbaijan-Armenia war. 
 
The book is translated and published by financial support of Committee for State 
Support to non-governmental organizations attached to President of Azerbaijan 
Republic. 
 
From Editorial Board:  This book embraces papers presented at the 
conferences held in 2005, 2006, 2007 and 2008 under the topic "Garabagh 
yesterday, today and tomorrow". Presented papers are devoted to various aspects of 
Azerbaijan -Armenia war caused by territorial claims and aggression of Armenia 
against Azerbaijan. These conferences initiated by Organization of Liberation of 
Garabagh are targeting to inform international community about causes, roots and 
perspectives of resolution of Azerbaijan-Armenia war and to derive a common, fair 
position, which corresponds to reality, in this vital problem. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
Adalat Mustafayev 
ARMENIAN SEPARATISM AND ITS SUPPORTERS 
 
Political processes, which took place in western regions of Azerbaijan 
since 80-ies o the XX century were based on events of the XIX century when 
Russian empire invaded South Caucasus and initiated move of Armenians here. 
This problem became even more deeper with conveying of Zangezur to Armenia 
by Soviet empire and creation of autonomy for Armenians on the territory of 
Azerbaijan (DGAR, 1923). 
During the period of Soviet rule Armenians repeatedly expressed 
ridiculous ideas about economic and political "links" of Daglyg Garabagh to 
Armenia and claimed giving Autonomous Republic to Armenia. In 1965 when the 
claim of Armenia for Garabagh was voiced, Khrushov hold a fair position and 
defended rights of Azerbaijan (Boran Aziz. Khodjaly genocide: causes, methods of 
implementation and results. Baku, 2008, p.42). Those who made this demand 
clearly understood that in fact there were no economic or political ties of Daglyg 
Garabagh and Armenia. But Armenians never refused from their groundless claims 
and strengthened anti-Azerbaijan propaganda by all means. They also widely 
applied financial sources both across the former Union and in many foreign 
countries for implementation of their dirty plans against Azerbaijan. In 1989 
Armenian organizations of the USA held a conference on Daglyg Garabagh at the 
Columbia University, which was attended by Tadeush Svyatokhovsky, who 
attempted to say truth and informed participants of the conference that Armenians 
are not the indigenous population. Professor then informed about crude behavior of 
Armenians towards him: "They said to me: "What a scientist you are, how can you 
say that you are an American scientist?" ("Elm" newspaper, July 29, 1989). The 
only thing is in mind of Armenians: whoever you are, you have to say "Amen" to 
lies and falsifications of Armenians. Anti-Azerbaijan propaganda of Armenians is 
confessed even by authoritative representatives of Russia. Ex vice-speaker of 
Russia S.Baburin while his meeting with lecturers and students of Baku State 
University said that "Armenians spend a lot of money for publication of anti-
Azerbaijan propagandistic materials in mass media of Russia" (A.N.Abbasbeyli, 
P.Q.Darabadi, A.G.Ibrahimov. Conflictology. Textbook. Baku, 2006, p.269). 
Unable to objectively evaluate the essence and perspectives of political 
processes in former USSR, dutiful rule of K.Bagirov, A.Vezirov and A.Mutallibov 
seriously complicated situation in the Republic. (Musa I.M. International relations 
and Azerbaijan. Baku, 2005, p.478). When tragic process of withdrawal of over 
200 thousand Azerbaijani from Armenia had started, Armenians of Garabagh were 
afraid of the similar actions against them. Unfortunately, Azerbaijan government 
failed to correctly evaluate situation and did not create conditions favorable for 
location of Azerbaijani refugees in Garabagh. At the same time, Armenians under 
4 
 
the control of USSR were equipped by arms and received required support from 
abroad. Through the period when empire moved towards collapse there emerged 
hurdles for a united strong resistance of our nation to enemy and the gap between 
authorities and people became even deeper. That is why, the enemy by use of all 
possible means succeeded to change the situation for its favor. 
It must be noted, that despite tense political situation through that period, 
Azerbaijan government speeded up construction of some buildings in Daglyg 
Garabagh, while Armenians at the same period were equipped by arms by Armenia 
and powerful supporters. In order to prevent all arguments of Armenians the 
government of Azerbaijan sent supplies to all regions of Autonomous Region and 
undertook any effort to improve social situation in the region. Events were not 
correctly evaluated, Azerbaijan mostly did not held firm position and regarded 
actions of Armenians as desire to impede reforms in the country. Azerbaijan 
authorities evaluated actions of Armenians as "storm of emotions" ("Baku" 
newspaper, July 14, 1989). 
With collapse of  USSR the South Caucasus turned into the arena of 
ethnic conflicts. On the background of fight between forces attempted to preserve 
the Union and their opponents the hostility between nations became even deeper. 
Armenian nationalists played the role of catalyst of national hostility. Instability in 
South Caucasus, various attitudes of great powers to these processes and absence 
of farsighted leader able to preserve the unity in the country led to unwanted results 
for Azerbaijan. M.Gorbachev coming to power in 1985 held pro-Armenian 
position and did not refrain from expressing preconceived opinion about 
Azerbaijan. M.Gorbachev said about Garabagh problem that "Garabagh problem" 
exists and its roots are deep. The problem deepened because at a certain stage the 
attitude of Azerbaijan government to population was ...inhuman" (Armenian 
terrorism and crimes: in Azerbaijan, Turkey and around the world. Baku, 1994, p. 
16). Preconceived opinion of a head of state was the evidence of Russian 
chauvinism. Gorbachev was aware that social-economic situation in Garabagh was 
exceptionally well. He just assisted to activity of Armenian nationalists. 
On January 12 of 1989 due to resolution of Supreme Soviet of USSR 
under leadership of Gorbachev the Special Governing Committee (SGC) was 
created in Daglyg Garabagh Autonomous Republic (DGAR). A.Volski, who 
headed a special committee created for the first time through the history of Union 
under the leadership of Gorbachev, was pro-Armenian chauvinist. He was one of 
those who created condition favorable for blossoming of Armenian nationalism 
and separatism in Garabagh. Major activity of a body created by USSR authorities 
in Garabagh served for strengthening of positions of Armenians. At the same time, 
SGC attempted to create conditions for gradual convey of Garabagh under 
subordination of Russian Federation. They tried first of all to convey control over 
enterprises to Russia or other dependent countries. All these were planned before 
5 
 
creation of SGC and Volski was closely involved in this. Newspaper "Baku" noted 
that "A.Volski as a representative of Central Committee of Soviet CP and Supreme 
Soviet of USSR" took part at the meetings held by authorities of Azerbaijan and 
Armenia in DGAR on October 11, 1988. (Newspaper "Baku", October 12, 1988). 
From the activity of A.Volski it is clear who he is. Armenians were delighted when 
SGC was created in DGAR under supervision of A.Volski and ignoring decisions 
of Azerbaijan government intensified separatism and atrocities. However in the 
press the SGC activity evaluated as "positive". "Special Governing Committee, 
juridical and internal affairs bodies do everything possible in order to prevent 
ethnic clashes and killing of civilians" ("Baku" newspaper, July 12, 1989). It was 
the result of policy implement by this committee that nature of information sent to 
Moscow had changed, creating negative opinion about Azerbaijani, and evaluated 
terrorist groups of Armenians as their attempt for self-determination. Higher 
activity of Armenian lobby was clearly observed. Instead of restoration of order in 
the region the Special Governing Committee made the situation favorable for 
withdrawal of Azerbaijani from here. 
From the start of the conflict various groups and officials successively 
visited Garabagh openly or hidden. To clarify situation in DGAR and regulate 
activity of security forces the group of officials including USSR's Deputy Internal 
Affairs Ministry -S.Lusauskas, Head of Regular troops Colonel-General I.Shatalin 
and other officials visited Khankendi (Stepanakert). But this visit deteriorated 
situation and increased cases of killings and looting of Azerbaijani. 
At first, Azerbaijani believed SGC, which was created in Autonomous 
Region, then they started to understand the essence of activity of this "committee" 
and its being just a deceptive body for easy breakaway of Daglyg Garabagh from 
Azerbaijan. Despite that secret plans for quiet convey of enterprises to Russia or 
other countries were carefully prepared during the period of activity of Special 
Governing Committee the population gradually became informed about the true 
essence of events. One of committee members created in DGAR was Vagif 
Jafarov, the First Secretary of Communist Party Committee of Shusha region. 
When he was asked about cease of subordination of Daglyg Garabagh enterprises 
and organizations to Azerbaijan, his answer was: "...I would like to inform about 
the opinion of Committee: no one, no labor group will be forced to change 
subordination. The issue is different: the issue is about regional economy, 
economic independence, equal partnership and beneficial cooperation, whether it 
will be with Baku, Moscow or other center." ("Communist" newspaper, April 9, 
1989). It can be seen that the center did not allow to inform population about real 
processes in Daglyg Garabagh and unmask true essence of the committee, made 
people believe in possibility of positive resolution, even prevented description of 
some issues in press and correctly inform population. As one of journalists said "In 
order to convince us-journalists they say: It is no need to write about DG, this only 
6 
 
fuels emotions. And we thought, may be indeed there is no need to write." ("Baku", 
newspaper, December 23, 1989). 
During events in Daglyg Garabagh there were issues which rose disputes. 
Sometimes Armenians also resisted Special Governing Committee and demanded 
its liquidation. "One of the former leaders of dismissed Krunk B.Dadmyan, 
director of Automobile Transport Association in Stepanakert said in his televised 
address on May 3 that the aim of strike participants is to liquidate special 
governing  committee   and  restore   activity  of regional  party committee  and  
regional  executive  committee"  ("Communist" newspaper, May 6, 1989). It is 
clear that Armenian lobby was maneuvering and tried to hide major activity of 
SGC. In respect of SGC activity on May 19, 1989 at the meeting devoted to 
activity of International Relations Committee, held in Moscow and chaired by 
N.Ryjkov it was emphasized: "Special Governing Committee at initial stage of its 
existence strengthened rights of Autonomous Republic, assisted to deepening of its 
independence and use of principles of regional economy, and made organizational 
and juridical  decisions  in  order  to  stimulate  DGAR's  Armenian population ties 
with Armenia in spheres of culture and education, while also taking into account 
interests of Azerbaijani population." ("Communist" newspaper, May 20 1989). 
These ideas allow to understand true designation of Special Governing Committee. 
 
Akif Naghi 
FACTOR OF FORCE FOR RESOLUTION OF THE CONFLICTS 
 
The world is forced to exist under conditions of international and internal 
conflicts, as well as racial, ethnic, religious and government - opposition conflicts. 
In some cases there are attempts to resolve and get rid of these conflicts, while in 
other cases reconciling with situation, the existence of the conflict is accepted. 
Actually, being tied of struggle, it agrees to live with keeping status-quo and 
without changing the existed situation. In such case conflict is accepted as a norm. 
The situation of conflict becomes ordinary. However this case takes place when 
one or several parties of the conflict distance themselves from struggle and accept 
their destiny as a must. But this is not frequent. 
In most cases parties attempt to resolve the conflict by seeking various 
ways of regulation. Without taking into account intermediate colors, there are two 
major paths or methods existed for thousands of years, starting from primitive 
society era up to now: 
a) peaceful way of negotiations, gradual, progressive, reconciliation, mediating, 
compromise, mutual concessions, etc. 
b) use of violence and force, military interference, radical, intolerant, 
maximalistic, refusal of compromises and half-steps, irreconcilability, etc. 
Until today both ways have their supporters and followers. There is an 
7 
 
acute discussion and confrontation between them. 
I am the supporter of the second path. I am of opinion that the first path is 
a trick of stronger party, which wishes to keep status-quo and suppresses the will 
of weaker party and forces it to reconcile with its own destiny, or it is the trick of 
party, which wishes to keep the situation unchanged. There is no serious fact 
evidencing regulation of the conflict within any country or international conflicts 
by peaceful means and negotiations. Examples, which are shown in some cases do 
not correctly reflect the reality and mostly have propagandistic nature. The process 
implemented by peaceful means leads toward accepting by one of the conflict 
parties of its own destiny and surrender. This path brings to zero the ability of one 
party to mobilize, bring together its own forces and resist. This path leads to the 
triumph of stronger, winner party. This path means oppression of the rights of the 
weaker, minor and defeated party. In this case, it would be expedient to remind to 
those talking about democracy, that democratic principles are violated. 
One of arguments, which necessitate use of force consists of idea that any 
conflict starts from use of force by one of the parties. Azerbaijan-Armenian 
conflict is related to use of force and invasion of Armenia. All conflicts, including 
English-Ireland, Jewish-Palestinian, Spanish-Basks, newly sprouting Turkmen-
Kurds conflicts have started with use of force by one of the parties. Thus, the 
essence of any conflict is explained by use of force and violence of one of the 
conflict parties. If so, i.e. if confrontation starts from use of force, is it possible to 
solve the problem by other peaceful ways? It is impossible! This does not 
correspond to rules of nature and society. Impact is equal to reverse impact. On the 
contrary, the world would collapsed a long time ago.  The world itself is emerged 
after the first push, i.e. after the first application of force. Any novelty opens way 
for itself by use of force. The world stands over the rule of unity, confrontation and 
struggle of opposites. Struggling and fighting world lives, strengthens and 
develops. That is why, it must be feared not of conflicts in the world, but on the 
contrary, it must be feared of absence of conflicts or their resolution by ways other 
than struggle and fighting. Conflicts proceed from the essence of the world, nature 
and society. Conflicts are indicators of ability of the world to live and strengthen. 
Conflicts show that internal reserves of the world are not exhausted. In fact, people 
have to prolong existence of the world by solving problems in open fields by use of 
force. If you will live until the passive times without conflicts and struggle, be sure 
that this is the end of the world, i.e. as Fukuyama said it is "the end of history". 
Supporters of peaceful path frequently mention movements of M.Gandhi 
in India or Martin Luther King in the USA. I would like to remind in-brief history 
of these movements. Movement of Mahatma Gandhi had started from 1919 and 
gave its results after 30 years. This movement used non-violent methods. Gandhi 
named these methods as "satiyagrakha" - persistence to truth. M.L.King refuses 
from active resistance and calls not to use violence in response of violence and 
8 
 
prefers to use various methods of boycott (for example, to boycott the company, 
which does not allow use of bus by white and black people jointly, etc.). 
a) I would like to draw attention of supporters of this movement to the 
following: India has gained independence after a long period of time and with 
possession of inferiority complex. Even now it has been unable to get rid of 
consequences. For comparison, its neighbors (Pakistan and China) gained 
independence by a rapid leap and violence. Today it is even no sense to compare 
their development level and that of India. 
b) Those involved in Gandhi movement comprehended that it is quite difficult to 
achieve any result by non-violent methods. That is why they characterized their 
movement as "persistency to truth". That is why sometimes they used violence or 
enriched their non-violent methods by elements of violence. It is not accidental, 
that sometimes 25-30 thousand their members were in jail. 
c) It is due to Gandhi movement that India's society did not complete the 
process of self-assertion. Leaders of the country in India, which gives preference to 
non-violent methods, including also M.Gandhi, were removed from the office by 
use of violence, i.e. killing them. Paradox, which shows inferiority complex of the 
society! 
It is the result of  M.L.King movement that black people in the USA still 
in the process of self-assertion, find it difficult to define their position in society 
and feel themselves in role of rabbles of society. Those who have a knowledge of 
American society to any extent know that black people behave badly everywhere, 
demonstratively violate rules and deliberately play role of "bad boy". This proves 
continuation of self-assertion process. Assignment of black people to various 
positions and even high government positions serves to artificially remove that 
imbalance. For comparison, it can be displayed that in South African Republic, 
which chosen path of radical struggle, black people have higher achievements than 
in other places. Here the government of black people, the country of black people 
has more complete and higher form than in the countries where almost all of 
population is black. Another example is Algeria. No one believed that it will 
become an Arab country some time. But Algerian people, who led a struggle by 
violent methods, have gained results in a short period of time. 
Only violence may give positive results in fight against the violence. As, it 
was noted earlier the conflict arises when one of the parties uses force. And the 
party which used force will not refuse from its position by negotiations. If it had 
the intention to refuse it would not use the force. If Palestinians would not use 
violence against violence of Israel, the problem of Palestine would not be actual 
today and most probably, Palestinians were forgotten long time ago. Nobody has 
taken into account Palestinians until Y.Arafat. For a long period of time most of 
the countries did not want to have any deal with Y.Arafat regarding him as a 
terrorist. But later, all countries recognized him and took into account his opinion. 
9 
 
If today the world listens to Palestinians, it is largely due to phenomena of 
Y.Arafat. 
Azerbaijan-Armenian conflict is frozen for a long period of time. 
Negotiations are underway, but there are no visible results. Azerbaijan used the 
force for the first time in 1992-1993. There were immediate results. Four 
resolutions on Garabagh adopted by Security Council of UN and signing by 
Armenian government of document about withdrawal from Kelbadjar in June of 
1993 are the results of use of force by Azerbaijan. In some cases, by use of force it 
is possible to achieve more quick and concrete results. Peaceful means and 
negotiations, used while regulation of any conflict, have frequently lead to 
involvement of a lot of new elements and new shades. This changes the essence of 
the problem, draws away the attention from initial position and causes distortions. 
Time never assists to fair resolution of the conflict. In the course of time the 
stronger party becomes even stronger and attracts allies and interested parties. At 
the same time, in the course of time such categories as social interest, international 
opinion and actuality move to a back plane. 
England immediately reacted to the event with Falkland islands, used force 
and had a result in a very short time. If there was not such rapid reaction, some 
European-American mediator mission similar to the Minsk group of OSCE has been 
making roundtrips between England and Argentina. Some media representatives and 
diplomats in England do not appreciate this action. But, in my point of view those 
members of a country which defended its territory from occupation, are far from 
sincerity. Turkey in a single day mobilized ail its forces against Greece, which 
attempted to occupy Turkey's islands. Croatia has liberated its territories from 
invasion of Serbia in four days period by use of force. No doubt, international 
organizations imposed sanctions on them for this. But they succeeded in more 
important issue. The USA, which tried to change Iraqi regime by negotiations and 
peaceful means for along 30 years could not achieve any results and in the end had 
to use force. 
Famous Chinese military theorists Sun Tszi (VI-V centuries B.C.) wrote 
that the army wins by its stability and the country wins by its integrity. According 
to his opinion, use of force is the most important and basic problem of any country. 
Existence of a country depends on its force and ability to use force. Azerbaijan, 
which territorial integrity has been broken, faces a dilemma: reconcile to reality 
and continue its way to destruction or choose the war for liberation of its 
territories. But according to military theorist K.Klauzevitsin "war is the 
continuation of policy by other means". That is why today in Azerbaijan the policy, 
which leads to war must be implemented. Azerbaijan has everything to fulfill such 
policy and start the war and win. Without consideration of other factors I would 
like to underline financial possibilities. At present, annual state budget of Armenia 
is US $ 800 million. Military budget of this country for the year 2005 is scheduled 
10 
 
as US $ 84 millions. Armenia spends for keeping of military forces in occupied 
territories US $ 12 millions. Of 25 thousand servicemen of armed forces deployed 
in occupied territories of Azerbaijan 3200 servicemen are foreign mercenaries and 
7 thousand are Armenian military servants. According to expert evaluations if war 
starts, one day of military operations will cost to conflict parties US $ 25 millions. 
Here I add also the human factor of both countries. As we can see, war demands 
huge financial expenses and a lot of human reserves. However, everyone 
understands that potential of Azerbaijan and Armenia even can not be compared. 
R.Nibur, F.Shuman, H.Kissinger, E.Karr, KMorgenthau, P.Aron and 
others known as supporters of "theory of force" consider it is important as "force" 
category. According to this theory, international policy is based first of all on the 
force. Consequently, efforts of any country to accumulate the force constitute the 
major factor, which directly impacts international relations development. The 
system of "power balance" between power centers provides stability and devel-
opment of international relations. H.Morgenthau in his book "Political relations of 
nations. Struggle for power" shows that country implements its position in two 
ways: military strategy and diplomacy. And diplomacy gives real results if it is 
based on force. Diplomacy is efficient when it uses available elements of power. In 
international relations the position of any country is defined by criteria of national 
force. National force unites such forces as political, economic, military,     
demographic,     geographic,     scientific-technical,     social-psychological and 
cultural forces. 
Major principles of international law are described in Bylaws of UN, in 
Resolution (1970) of General Assembly of UN, in Final Act (1975) of Helsinki 
Conference and other documents. One of those principles is the principle of not 
applying the force and not to threat by use of force. According to this principle, all 
countries refuse to use force against territorial integrity and political sovereignty of 
other country and refuse to threat to use force. Armenia, which has broken 
territorial integrity of Azerbaijan, has already violated this principle. According to 
international law, if there will be armed attack or invasion into any country, that 
country may use armed force to defend itself and liberate its territories. It can be 
seen that international law envisages use of force in certain cases. 
Thus, in regulation of any type of conflict use of force and violence, 
radical methods must be used as more efficient, rapid and fair way. 
11 
 
Ali Abasov 
STAGES OF DAGLYG GARABAGH CONFLICT: THROUGH 
LOCAL TO INTERNATIONAL LEVELS. IS THE WAY BACK 
POSSIBLE? 
 
For long years of confrontation the following phrase repeatedly emerged 
and then temporarily vanished: "negotiation process over Daglyg Garabagh 
conflict came to deadlock". In other words, hopes and expectations had sporadic 
nature while scepticism in this issue turned into political long-lived issue. May be 
today it is the right time to suppose that this process never went out from deadlock. 
Certainly, there are a number of reasons. Not always everything depends on 
conflict parties, but if one will attempt to understand the logic of position of 
Azerbaijan, then it will be possible to formulate some interesting conclusions. 
First of all, it must be noted that the conflict passed through several stages 
of development and each of them seriously changed its character, and consequently 
the strategy of regulation. In the meantime, no serious researches or special 
technologies based on real process of confrontation were proposed by authorities 
or intellectual circles for conflict resolution. On the contrary, through these long 
years Azerbaijan hold position of waiting "offended" party, which fair demands 
sooner or later will be recognized by international community and centers of 
political influence, which are capable to restore status-quo of Soviet era. Namely 
this dependent position caused such prolonged nature of conflict, when decisions 
are made by too large number of parties, which political interests distinctly 
contradict each other. 
Dynamics of Daglyg Garabagh conflict may be distinctly divided into 
several levels, transitions to which significantly changed character of confrontation 
and paths of conflict regulation. In chronologically intersected succession the 
following stages may be observed. 
At the first, local stage, the conflict had a nature of ethnic confrontation 
between citizens of one state, which was relatively new for Soviet Republics, but 
known as tens or even hundreds of cases around the globe. It is also not the 
exception, when behind separatism it is possible to see annexation interests of third 
parties, which have territories in the region of the conflict. This is similar to our 
case. Major requirement in such case consists in timely prevention of local conflict 
transformation into the regional conflict, accompanied by continuous unmasking of 
annexation policy. Hidden implementation of this policy by any country is 
considered by international law as interference into internal affairs of other states, 
however open implementation is interpreted as violation of peace and 
announcement of war through territorial claims. In this case, it is important to 
timely fix the aggression fact and clearly indicate the party, which violates peace. 
It is usual for us to justify failures of that period by underlining impossibility of 
12 
 
such measures due to centralization of Soviet state, which means that the policy 
was implemented from a single center. Supporters of this position forget that under 
the same circumstances the Parliament of soviet Armenia adopted resolution about 
annexation of DGAR, repeating de-jure (de-facto by their successors) anschluss by 
Germany of part of Czekoslovakia. Allowing the conflict to move to regional level, 
Azerbaijan under these circumstances was unable to strengthen its positions and 
did not undertake measures assisting to creation consolidated platform of Georgia 
and Azerbaijan since they are subject of threats to annex their territories by 
separatism and ethnic cleansing. Attempts to create such platform within the 
framework of the last summit of GUUAM in Kishinev demonstrate comprehension 
of incorrectness of policy implemented earlier, as well as dependant mood, which 
both in Georgia and Azerbaijan brought to transformation of regional conflicts of 
South Caucasus into overe-gional. Thus, despite that Armenia from the very start 
was an active party of the conflict, widening of its authority was due to fault of 
Azerbaijan, which always underlined instigation activity of this country, but did 
not achieve legal evaluation of Armenia's territorial claims. At this stage 
Azerbaijan could not use opportunity of bilateral negotiations with Armenian 
community of Garabagh, which would allow the conflict to stay as local conflict. 
Position of the Center used to focus in its hands tk^ authority to make 
decision, also impeded preserving the conflict at local level. It is commonly known 
how the center used this authority bringing conflicts in the South Caucasus to the 
deadlock. There is no significant distinction between policy implemented by capital 
of totalitarian USSR and the capital of democratic Russia in respect of conflicts in 
South Caucasus. Geopolitical disturbances compressed radius of direct influence of 
this country to limits of "nearby foreign countries" as it called by Moscow. Support 
to interests of Russia here is implemented only due to "frozen" conflicts. Thus, the 
false policy of "dalliance" with Moscow was sentenced for failure from its start. 
Even today the part of political elite continues to state that "keys of the conflict are 
in Moscow". If this statement were true then Moscow would resolve the conflict a 
long time ago avoiding its transfer into international level, which devoid Russia of 
opportunity single-handedly define destiny of South Caucasian nations. 
Conflicts never pass away without leaving any traces in political systems 
of countries involved in military confrontation. On the contrary., they turn into the 
major tool of unavoidable swamping of country into authoritarian regime, which is 
justified by "realities of war-time". No one of South Caucasian countries could 
avoid this bitter experience and post-revolutionary events in Georgia displayed that 
for countries of the region it will be a lrng way to liberation from this hard heritage. 
Obviously, currently the ways o
f
 overcoming the conflicts in South Caucasus will 
be defined by rate cf development of civil societies and institutions, strengthening of 
democracy, creation of independent unions and structures, which implement 
consolidation of democratic processes in these three republics and generation of 
13 
 
new intellectual and political elite of South Caucasus countries. For the time being, 
political instability in Azerbaijan and Armenia, instability, which is caused by 
distinctly displayed necessity to change ruling elites, makes it difficult to 
comprehend that only peaceful negotiations may ultimately bring conflicting 
parties to peace and development of system of mutual protection guarantees, 
stability and cooperation in the region. 
A fragile ceasefire in the region established since May 1994 is frequently 
broken by conflicting parties while deterioration of internal situation, which as a 
rule coincide with periods of parliamentary and presidential elections in Azerbaijan 
and Armenia. These deteriorations are also evidence of use by ruling elites of these 
two countries of methods, which were popular during former USSR era but 
absolutely useless for further strengthening of authoritarian regime. No doubt, if 
the region would be under distinguishing geopolitical conditions and Azerbaijan 
would not posses by strategic oil reserves, the conflict most probably had been re-
solved up to now. The problem is that several large countries and superpower as 
USA have their own "vitally important, strategic" interests, tied in a knot of 
contradictions and not always openly stated. Thus, internationalization of the 
conflict has brought to situation then its resolution involves such countries as USA, 
Russia, leading states of Western Europe (separately and together within the 
structures of EC and EU), Turkey, Iran. Is it possible to reach a resolution at such 
broad range of political interests of these countries?! Russia attempts to gain back 
influence possessed by former USSR in the region. Iran, seriously concerned by 
possible arrival of NATO and USA into the region, opposes these plans by all 
possible means. Western Europe is embarrassed by interpretation of essence of 
"nearby neighboring" policy towards south Caucasus. Turkey, evidently a bit tired 
of unilaterally defending position of Azerbaijan due to conditions stipulated to this 
country for entering into EU. Under these circumstances such cataclysms as dis-
placement of President and shooting in parliament of Armenia must be considered 
from viewpoint of continuous struggle of geopolitical interests, which are far from 
planning of immediate regulation of conflicts in South Caucasus. Interested 
countries prescribe various roles to three Republics of South Caucasus, however, it 
is clear that full-scaled implementation of someone's ambitions is possible only 
under condition of entering of these republics into a single geopolitical domain. 
So, it should be admitted that Gärabagh issue has turned into complex 
knot of diverse problem, which resolution can be hardly reached unilaterally in 
modern world. Attempts of Armenians to convince everyone that the problem is 
resolved by military operations, means in fact that Yerevan appeals to re
c
ult of war, 
but in this case refute the similar right of opposite side. Nobody takes into account 
this aspect, however it must be taken into cor»sid3n.tion. Both sides explain their 
positions in war terms and simultaneously refuse of them. The last resolution of 
Parliamentary Assembly of Council of Europe (PACE) made clear this issue: 
14 
 
"Assembly confirms that separation of the region from the state and its sovereignty 
may be reached as a result of peaceful and legal process, based on democratic 
support of population of the region, but not through armed conflict, which leads to 
ethnic withdrawal and de-facto annexation of this territory by other state. 
Parliamentary Assembly repeats that occupation of foreign territory by a country-
member of CE is the serious violation of obligations of this state as member of 
Council of Europe and confirms the right of people displaced from conflict zone to 
return to their homes". However, international community does not display its 
readiness to satisfy pretensions of Azerbaijan, which until now only indistinctly 
describes peace and situation in the conflict region after reaching an agreement and 
signing of peace treaty. Moreover, Azerbaijan frequently and thoughtlessly applies 
war rhetoric while forgetting a simple truth that a country, which decided to restore 
the justice by war, implements own plans without announcing its aims. 
The interesting issue is discussion on dilemma whether military or 
peaceful way of conflict regulation must be applied. In fact, there is no dilemma at 
all due to obligations undertaken by Azerbaijan before entering into CE 
("Assembly reminds that Armenia and Azerbaijan while entering into Council of 
Europe in January of 2001 undertook to use only peaceful paths for regulation of 
Daglyg Garabagh conflict. Thus, Assembly calls for governments of both countries 
to refrain from use of armed forces against each other, as well as from war 
propaganda"), as well as due to unjustified passive position of Azerbaijan's 
diplomacy, which has lost all its advantages in the course of peace process and 
impossibility to fulfill claims stipulating the signing of peace agreement. The pro-
gram inevitably leading to strengthening of positions of Azerbai jan, support of its 
fair conditions proposed for peace by international community, is related to 
development of legal state, civil society and reinforcement of democracy, which 
are major arguments for emerging of such positions around the globe. 
Only through joint efforts of Azerbaijani society directed to democratic 
resolution of Garabagh issue and adoption of realistic program of joint actions it is 
possible to demand attention of international community and expect changes in 
attitude of leading powers of the world. However, there are some obstacles related 
to positions of ruling authoritarian elites in two countries regarded continuation of 
the conflict as guarantee of stability of their regimes, which must be preserved by 
any means, including even violation of ceasefire regime observed now. Hopes for 
presidential elections in both countries were not justified and in both countries it is 
observed the throw back from democratic achievements, decrease of power 
legitimacy, their low international rating and as a result, weakness of power while 
easily predicted protests of opposition and community. Possible revolutions and 
power changes in Republics may create additional stimulus for negotiation process. 
However, serious politicians should not foster hopes for these hypothetic processes 
and need initiatives, which constitute purposeful policy and do not depend on 
15 
 
political situation in the country. 
Initiative of Azerbaijan has to mean adoption of the concept that 
Armenians of Daglyg Garabagh are citizens of Azerbaijan Republic, temporarily 
gone out of its jurisdiction under the influence of external forces and internal 
separatists. It is obvious, that authorities must strengthen legality and guarantee 
safety of Armenian population of Azerbaijan and work in direction to make them 
citizens of the Republic. Any attempts of external influence and separatist activity 
must be condemned and known to international community. Azerbaijan have to use 
all available resources in order to force aggressive forces of political elite of 
Armenia to sit behind negotiations table and restore state border between two 
countries. At the same time it is necessary to make statement about separating 
negotiation processes with Daglyg Garabagh and Armenia. The former is the 
internal affair of Azerbaijan, which may attract to negotiations any party, except 
for aggressor country. Negotiations with Armenia may be devoted only to relations 
between two states and problems of removing aggression. 
Let us consider rarely discussed fact that at the last (international) level, the 
conflict, transforming into the problem of relations between Azerbaijan and 
Armenia, has gone to the second plane. However, in this second plane the conflict 
continued to play an important role and moreover deteriorated position of 
Azerbaijan in negotiation process. In any case, attempts to solve the conflict by 
increasing a number of involved parties and level of their involvement do not give 
positive results. In this respect, it is required to consider the reverse version of 
decreasing the negotiations process to local, i.e. to initial level. This concept is also 
proposed in the last international document - presentation of Atkinson based on 
which PACE: "appeals to Government of Azerbaijan to establish contacts with 
political representatives of both communities of Daglyg Garabagh in order to work 
out future status of the region". The recommendation also contains mechanism for 
initiation of such negotiation process, in which also elected representatives of both 
communities will take part. Prior to start of this negotiation process Azerbaijan may 
undertake a commitment not to restart armed operations against Armenians of 
Daglyg Garabagh with guarantee of international forces and their observers. Analysis 
of present situation even if Azerbaijan may start the war, it will be war against 
Armenia, which fulfilled aggression and aims to eternalize this. 
Insisting on "direct dialog", co-chairs of Minsk Group and international 
structures and even Armenia hypocritically stating that it "will agree with any 
decision of Armenians of Daglyg Garabagh" assist Azerbaijan to return the conflict 
into the phase of locality and this will cut away most aggressive participants of 
negotiations. The issue is which political forces are able to implement this 
initiative and whether they may turn into such force during parliamentary elections 
in Azerbaijan. 
 
16 
 
ArazAslanly 
OCCUPIED AZERBAIJAN AND  
THE RIGHT FOR NECESSARY DEFENSE 
 
Among juridical documents on use of force the most harsh and serious is 
Bylaws of UN. After World War II in 1945 the goal in adoption of UN Bylaws was 
to provide peace and security for countries and nations. This is because 
approximately during half-century the world evidenced two world wars, which 
negatively influenced almost all countries of the world. Until adoption of UN 
Bylaws the existed international documents could not prevent World W; r 17. That 
is why, it was necessary to adopt juridical documents in order to provide peace and 
security. 
All the- e are also reflected in introduction in Bylaws of UN. In Articles 1 
and 2 the UN goals and principles are reflected, the 3
rd 
clause of the second article 
indicates that all members will resolve international conflicts without damaging 
principles of iviternational peace, security and justice and by use of peaceful means. 
4
th
 clause of the second article devoted to bases of use of force prohibits to all 
members to threaten with use of force and direct use of force against territorial 
integrity and political independence of other countries and in a way incompatible 
with goals of UN. These clauses of UN Bylaws, especially 4*   clause of article 2 
openly prohibits to member countries application of force in international relations. 
But there are various disputes with limits and framework of this prohibition. 
According to some researchers, the main goal of UN consists in "Preserving 
international peace and security and in this aim, prevent dangers for peace, remove 
existed danger, impede actions directed to violation of peace by armed attacks or 
other means; resolve international conflicts which may cause break of peace by 
peaceful methods, according to bases and principles of justice of international law" 
and due to this prohibition of use of force is absolute prohibition and there may be 
no exceptions. 
According to other group of researchers this explanation being within 
limited framework may force countries to tolerate for indefinite time period the 
existed injustice and actions contradicting to law. According to UN Bylaws in 
cases of violation of principles of respect to international law, justice, prohibition 
to change borders by use of force and other principles, await tolerance from 
country, which rights are violated mean questioning existence of these principles 
and ultimately existence of UN Bylaws. 
In UN Agreement the sentences devoted to use of force and necessary 
defense is expounded in Article 51. 
From this Article it can be seen that UN Bylaws prohibits use of force in 
general, however, within the framework of Bylaws there are cases of exception. 
According to UN Agreement there are four exceptions in prohibited use of 
17 
 
force (according to most researchers): 
1. Exceptions made until establishment of Security Council; 
2. Measures, which will be undertaken against countries regarded as enemy in 
World War II; 
3. Necessary defense; 
4. Obligatory measures fulfilled according to resolution of Security Council; 
(some researchers regard these measures not as exceptions, but as a normal right of 
Security Council). 
Of these initial two exceptions were never applied and there is no 
probability that they will be used in the future. Obligatory measures such as 
necessary defense and measures according to resolution of Security Council were 
applied ( even just in few cases) and are exceptions which are in use today. 
The right for necessary defense was the right which never was forbidden 
through the history and this is indicated in UN Agreement. However, legal limits 
and conditions under which this right can be applied were defined. In general, 
conditions of right for necessary defense are the following: 
- to be the subject of armed attack; inform Security Council and after its adoption 
of a certain actions plan to stop use of the right for necessary defense; 
- relativity; 
- time period; 
To be the subject of armed attack: Necessary defense must be 
implemented against the force which undertook attack previously. According to 
Article 51 of UN Bylaws this right can be used if any country is the subject of 
armed attack. However, no provision of UN Bylaws describes what must be 
understood under armed attack. Even in Resolution N3314 dated from December 
14, 1974 on Definition of Essence of Attack there is no clear explanation for this. 
In this resolution there is no definition of direct armed attack, but definition of 
attack in general. At the same time, the implementation of armed attack gives the 
country or countries the right for necessary defense. In this case, the country which 
the first uses force is aggressor and this fact gives the other party the right for 
necessary slefense. In this respect there are also some uncertainties. It is not easy to 
define which party was the first to use force. However, in contradictory cases the 
decisions can be made according to investigations of appropriate international 
organizations. A number of such contradictory cases were researched by 
International Justice Court (IJC). 
Let us consider the use of armed attack and the right for necessary defense 
in case of Azerbaijan-Armenia conflict within the framework of theory and 
practice of international law. 
Despite the fact is reflected in international documents the authorities in 
Armenia in most cases reject this and claim that there is no aggression in the region 
and as if "Armenians of former DGAR struggle for independence". But sometimes 
18 
 
Armenian authorities use phrases evidencing their aggression. For example on 17 
May, 2001 at the meeting of Armenia's parliament Ministry of defense Serj 
Sarkisyan said: "There are territories we have occupied. It is nothing to shame. We 
occupied these areas in order to provide our security. We said this in 1992 and 
earlier, and we say it now. May be I do not speak in a diplomatic way, but this is 
the truth." 
While meeting of Heydar Aliyev, President of Azerbaijan, and Robert 
Kocharyan, the President of Armenia in August of 2002 in Sadarak, the Armenian 
Defense Ministry S.Sarkisyan officially recognized presence of Armenia's soldiers 
on occupied territory and added that it is normal. In the same speech Sarkisyan 
emphasized that they never regard DGAR as Azerbaijani territories. 
Armenia violated 4
th
 clause of Article 2 of UN Bylaws. In resolutions of 
Security Council of UN, Armenia does not openly named as aggressor and the 
reason of this is the vital importance of political opinions of countries- members of 
Council. Let us remind that Armenian Parliament keeps in force resolution adopted 
on December 1, 1989 on annexation to Republic of Armenia of former DGAR, 
which is the territory of Azerbaijan Republic. 
Another fact which may bring the clarity to the subject emerged during 
the presidential elections in Armenia. President of Armenia claimed that 
nomination of R.Kocharyan is not correct from juridical viewpoint. Opponents 
claimed that for nomination Kocharyan must have "become the citizen of Armenia 
of at least ten years ago". In a response, Internal Affairs Ministry of Armenia 
taking as a basis resolution adopted by Armenian Parliament on December 1, 1989 
issued documents regarding citizenship of Kocharyan. Thus, Internal Ministry of 
Armenia outspokenly admitted occupation of Azerbaijan's territories. 
All these facts confirm aggressor activity of Armenia towards Azerbaijan. 
If Armenia admits "we have done this", then it forces Azerbaijan to use its 
right for necessary defense. For example, Armenia repeatedly admitted that it 
behaved according to the 3
r 
Article of resolution number 3314 of Supreme Council 
of UN. Despite that Armenia does not admit that it undertook actions shown in 
clauses a) and b), it always admits actions indicated in clause g). Special 
representative of OSCE chairman, Ancey Kaspshik while his visit to the region 
said: "in occupied territories of Azerbaijan there are armed forces related to 
Armenia's Defense Ministry and this is admitted by S.Sarkisyan, the Armenia's 
Defense Ministry". This action, by Nicaragua resolution of International Crime 
Court dated from 1986 was evaluated as armed attack and gave the other party the 
right for necessary defense. 
Since the aggression is expanded and Azerbaijan solely could not resist 
İıis, Azerbaijan was forced to sign ceasefire (not peace agreement) agreement (in 
this respect there may be various opinions, but we will not consider here details of 
internal political approaches). However, through these years Azerbaijani officials 
19 
 
underlined that they will not leave forever the territories undi;r the occupation of 
Armenia and will use all means, including military operations, for liberation of 
territories. When Armenia started aggression, Azerbaijan was devoid of necessary 
forces to defend the country and due to this, was forced to sign a ceasefire 
agreement. Azerbaijan never agreed with occupation of its territories an always 
made it clear that it will use all means, including use of force, to liberate its 
territories. 
Simultaneously, Armenia's officials at various levels emphasized that they 
will never recognize territorial integrity of Azerbaijan, will never allow annexation 
of occupied territories of Azerbaijan (they mean territory of former DGAR as 
"Daglyg Garabagh") to Azerbaijan. Thus, contemporary world justifies necessary 
defense against attacks on existence and integrity and gives Azerbaijan the right for 
necessary defense. 
It must be noted, that international law allows Azerbaijan to use armed 
forces for liberation of territories occupied by Armenia and in such case to inform 
Security Council of UN. Undoubtedly, we note this not to propagandize war or use 
of armed forces. We are also supporters of peaceful resolution of disputes between 
countries, i.e. without use of force. That is because we know that use of force may 
result in situations dangerous for humanity and culture. However, it must be 
always kept in mind that playing blind to the fact of aggression may be more 
dangerous for international peace and security, and ultimately for humanity and 
culture. 
Taking this into account, territorial integrity of Azerbaijan and normal life 
of all citizens of Azerbaijan, suffered from occupation of Azerbaijan territories by 
Armenia, irrespective of their ethnic origin, must be restored. For this Azerbaijan 
may demand from Armenia to withdraw from occupied territories and stipulate 
time period as six months or a year. In this case, similar to the event of Iraqi 
invasion into Kuwait in 1990-1991 the Security Council of UN may define time 
period and develop appropriate programs. In this case Azerbaijan will have to wait 
for the end of defined period and results of implementation of developed programs. 
However, if such program would not be implemented for six months or one year 
period starting from now, or, if developed program will not gain required result for 
the indicated time period, Azerbaijan have to use its right for necessary defense 
according to the Article 51 of UN Bylaws. This is the obligation of our country not 
only to own nation, but to international law and international community. 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
Arif Yunusov 
STATISTICS OF LOSSES IN ARMENIAN-AZERBAIJAN WAR 
 
1. In Azerbaijan in 1988 before Garabagh conflict 390 thousand 
Armenians lived (approximately 6% of Republic's population). Of these 180 
thousand lived in Baku and 145 thousand lived in Dag-lyg Garabagh Autonomic 
Region (DGAR). According to population census in 1989 in Armenia 85 thousand 
Azerbaijani lived (about 3 % of population). In fact, the figure was higher because 
in January of 1990 in Azerbaijan 208 thousand former Armenian citizens fled to 
Azerbaijan were recorded: 186 thousand of Azerbaijani, 18 thousand of Kurds and 
about 4 thousand Russians. 
2. First refugees in USSR at the end of XX century were Azerbaijani, 
which were forced to flee Armenia in November of 1987. One month prior official 
date of start of Garabagh conflict there were up to 4 thousand Azerbaijani refugees 
from Armenia. 
3. First victims of Garabagh conflict also were Azerbaijani: On February 
22, 1988 near Askeran settlement the dwellers of city Agdam - Ali Hajiyev and 
Bakhtiyar Guliyev were killed. All documentation about this case were later 
transferred to Moscow and investigation stopped. 
4. Losses of both "ides through 1988 to 1994 were: 
During the conflict and battles 11 thousand Azerbaijani died, of these up 
to 2 thousand were women of various age. Most victims were during Armenians 
attack on Khodjaly in 1992 - 613 people. Through this period up to 30 thousand 
people were wounded, of these more than 7 thousand became disabled forever. 
According to official data of Azerbaijan government about 5 thousand people were 
recorded as lost, including 320 women, 71 children and 358 elderly people. Of 
these, location of 783 people in Armenia is known (18 children, 43 women and 56 
elderly). Through the period from 1992 to 2000 about 1086 Azerbaijani were freed 
from Armenian prison, including 67 children, 243 women and 246 el derly. Depth 
of 176 citizens of Azerbaijan in Armenian prisons officially was confirmed by 
International Committee of Red Cross. Through the same period 6 thousand 
Armenians were killed and up to 20 thousand people were wounded. According to 
Armenian sources over 500 Armenians are in prison in Azerbaijan or lost. 
5. Ceasefire is constantly broken from both sides by use of firearms and 
gun-machines. Heavy artillery and artillery with aviation are not used. The exact 
figure of killed after 1994 is unknown. According to unofficial data through that 
period 2500 military Azerbaijani servicemen were killed and 3000 wounded. 
6. according to State Statistics Committee of Azerbaijan by the end of 
20C1 there were registered 219 thousand refugees (from Armenia and Akhiska 
Turks fled in 1989 from Uzbekistan) and 575 thousand internally displaced people 
from Daglyg Garabagh. In total, there were 794 thousand people or anproximatdy 
21 
 
10% of the Republic's population. According to official data of Armenian 
government as a result of conflict 310 thousand refugees and displaced people (8% 
of population) are registered in tne Republic. 
7. Indirect losses of both countries: in comparison to 1989 the childbirth 
sharply decreased and child death increased. In Azerbaijan through 1989-1999 a 
number of orphans increased almost by 3 times and in Armenia by 2 times. In both 
Republics a highest number of orphans are among refugees and IDPs. As a result 
of conflict and followed social-economic crisis through period of 1994-2000 up to 
2.5 millions of Azerbaijani (over 30% of population) and up to 1 million 
Armenians (26% of population) left their countries in aim to find better life. Most 
of them are men between 20-40 years of age. Such flow of masculine population 
negatively influenced demographic structure of population in Azerbaijan and 
Armenia: decreased number of marriages, birth rate decrease, decrease of number 
of family members and all these resulted in decrease of population. 
 
Aydın Aslanov 
TO 200
th
 ANNIVERSARY OF KUREKCHAY 
TREATY ONCE MORE ABOUT GARABAGH MELIKHS 
 
During the period of rule of Sefevids dynasty all territory of Azerbaijan was 
divided into four regions: Shirvan, Garabagh (or Gandja), Chukhursaad (of Irevan), 
Azerbaijanian (or Tebriz). Heads of these regions - beylerbeyliks were governor-
generals assigned by Shakhs and called beylerbeks. 
The first beylerbek of Garabagh was Shakhverdi-sultan from Ziyad-ogly 
clan of Azerbaijani (Kyzylbash) tribe of Kadjar. He was assigned as governor-
general in 40-ies of the XVI century by shakh Takhmasib I. Nobility of this tribe 
possessed by pastures and lands in Garabagh. Descendants of Shakhverdi-sultan 
were beylerbeks of Garabgh until 1736, when Nadir-shakh took away Garabagh 
from Ziyad-ogly, leaving them only Gandja with district, which they possessed 
until 1804. 
After the death of Nadir-shakh, who was killed in 1747, Azerbaijan became 
divided into feudal state units: khanates and sultanates. In area between Kur and 
Araz rivers there was established Garabagh khanate, which was one of the 
strongest in Azerbaijan. The founder of this khanate was Panah Ali-bek Jevanshir 
from Sa-rydjaly clan of Jevanshir tribe, which "stands in a row with most 
important statesmen of Azerbaijan in XVIII century ". In mountain part of 
Garabagh khanate there were small feudal units - meli-kates: Khachen, Varand, 
Gulistan, Dizak and Jeraberd. Since there were five melikates they jointly called 
Khamse. 
From indicated melicates only one - Khachen had its historic roots in land 
of Garabagh. In XIII century Khasan Jalal, the representative of noble clan - 
22 
 
Mikhranids restored power of Artsakh-Khachen principality in part of ancient 
territory of Albania. 
As Armenian historian P.Arutyunyan wrote: "Sovereigns of Khachensk 
district were representatives of large feudal family Khasan-Jalalyan. Building in 
1240 the Gandzasar monastery, they hold in their hands secular and religious 
power over this district, holding both until XIX century ". 
Being direct descendants of Caucasian Albans, the head of Khachen 
principality Khasan Jalal was regarded as "Autocratic knyaz of knyazes, sovereign 
of Khachen ", "knyaz of Khachen and Aran " as well as "great sovereign of 
Albania " and "tsar of Albania". 
Khachen meliks being of Alban roots evidence the fact that there is no 
source about population of Khachen with indications about Armenians. So called 
"Khachen Armenians " in historic documents name themselves as "agvans" (i.e. 
albans). For example, in their letter to Peter I in 1722 they named themselves as 
"agvans", which is a synonym of the word "Alban", This is r.lso evidenced in the 
book titled "Brief history ofAgvan country" authored by Katalikos of Gandzasar 
monastery - Esai Khasan-Jalalyan, which called territory where his ancestors lived 
as "Agvan ". 
Of four indicated earlier melikates three (Varand, Gulistan and Jeraberd) 
emerged on the territory of Garabagh during various periods of XVII century and 
Dizak even at the beginning of XVQI century. 
Referring to historic sources P.Arutyunyan noted: "meliks of Varand 
districs were from clan of Melik-Shakhnazaryan". One of Melik-Shakhanazarov 
brothers - Mirza-bey in 1603 moved from Ge-garkuni to Garabagh, where he put 
the ground of Varand melikate. 
In this respect Azerbaijani historian of XIX century Mirza Adi-gezel-bey 
wrote that sovereign of Varand were "Melik-Shakhnazarly - noble clan of Gekdja 
(Gokchi) area, from there they flee and upon arriving to Garabagh, they became 
dizzy by power in Varand area". To mid of XVIII century the power in Varand was 
captured by melik Shahnazar, who killed his brother. 
In the same book of Armenian historian it is said about Gulistan, melikate: 
"According to legends, the ancestor of Gulistan melikate - Melik Beglyaryanov- 
was "Karayuzbashi" Abov, who at the start of XVII century together with 
subordinate people migrated from Udinian village Nij to village Talysh". In one of 
the documents of Yerevan Matenadaran it is said about Gulistan melikate that 
founders of this melikate moved into Gar bagh from Shirvan. 
Mirza Adigezel bey wrote about this melikate: "Its melik was Melik-
Usub. Ancestors of this melik were from Shirvan. For some period of time they 
lived in village Talysh. Many members of this clan were meliks. Later Melik-Usub 
captured Gulistan fortress and settled there". That is why in historic sources 
Gulistan melikate frequently named as Talysh. 
23 
 
P.Arutyunan in his work notes about Jeraberd melik: "ancestor of 
sovereign of Charaberd melikate was son of melik-Israel the melik-Esai, which 
killed su-ni khan and moved with his subordinates in 1687. After the death of Esai 
the melikate were ruled by melik-AllakuliSultan and his brother." 
In this respect Mirza Adigezel-bey wrote: "Melik-Allah-Kuli was the 
melik of this area. His clan came herefrom Magaviz (Ma-gavuz) and became 
meliks here and settled on banks of river Ter-ter in area with a rough terrain named 
as Jermykh. Chosen Jer' mykh as a shelter, they became the independent 
sovereigns of area Chilabyurd) Jeraberd, and became known in that area ". 
At the start of XVIII in Garabagh another melikate is emerged -Dizak. 
P.Arutyunan wrote about this melikate that its founder: "was melik-Egan, son of 
Gukas (Movses)-varda-peta. In some sources it is indicated that family of melik-
Egan moved to Garabagh in the beginning of XVIII: according to some sources it 
is moved to Dizak from Persia, according to others - from Lori (Georgia).". More 
confident notes about Dizak area are seen in work of Mirza Adigezel-bey: "Meliks 
of this area were named Melik-Egan. They are refugees from Lori. The title of 
melik they received during the rule ofNadir-shakh and according to his order they 
became meliks." It must be also noted Dizak meliks had a large influence while 
rule of Nadir-skah, which assigned melik Egan as a head of other meliks of 
Garabagh and sometimes gave him power to rule in Khamsa. In his turn, melik of 
Dizak provided Iranian troops by arms and supplies during their punitive marches 
into north Azerbaijan territories and Dagestan. 
Meliks of Garabagh participated in war with Ottoman empire on the side 
of Nadir-shah. They provided shah troops by supplies and forage. When the war 
between Ottoman empire and Iran had started, meiik Allah-Kuli, the ruler of 
Jeraberd, which "was the first who rushed with several horsemen from Chelyaburd 
onto artillery and for this he was raised to a rank of sultan ". Almost the same we 
may read in book of Mirza Adigez 1-bey: "Melik-Allah-Kuli showed example of 
unparalleled courage and prowess. Nadir-shakh considered that title of melik is 
insufficient for him and ordered that from this time on the simple people and 
nobility called him as sultan, not melik". 
In order to weaken the influence of Ugurlu-khan II Gadjar, the Garabagh 
beylerbey, Nadir-shakh gave regions of Borchaly, Gazakh, Shamshadil to the rule of 
Georgian tsar. Part of Garabagh population was moved to Khorasan according to 
order of Iranian shah. In addition Nadir-shakh issued a decree for meliks of Garabagh 
"to throw away from neck of noble and simple people the chair- of obedience to 
Gandja khans and consider themselves free from them and all their requests and 
demands sent directly to sovereign ". 
To the mid XVIII century Garabagh meliks had all rights of feudal rulers - 
had juridical and administrative power. Within their properties, meliks possessed 
by feudal immunity. They had their armed units. But the power of Garabagh 
24 
 
meliks did not spread beyond borders of their fortresses and neighbor villages. 
They all were vassals of Garabagh khan. 
It must be noted, that the title "melik" was characteristic not only for Alban 
feudal of Daglyg Garabagh. The title "melik" as mentioned Azerbaijani historians 
belonged also to some Azerbaijani feudal of Garabagh and Shirvan. Large feudal of 
Gabala and Sheki also were meliks. Meliks are known in the history of Aze -baijan 
since Xn-XIV centuries - i.e. long time before emerging of Sefevids stpte. 
Establishment of independent Garabagh khanüte on the huge territory of 
former Garabagh belerbeylik and enforcement of Bayat fort by Panah Ali-khan 
caused a serious concern of meliks, which did not want to lose their power and 
privileges gave them by Iranian rulers. The fierce struggle started between 
Garabagh khan - Panah Alik - han and meliks. 
This struggle was only of political nature. This struggle was in fact 
intestine struggle within ruling class of feudal, characteristic for feudalism. The 
proof for this is appeal of Garabagh meliks to some Azerbaijani khans about joint 
fight against Panah Ali-khan. At first, Garabagh meliks appealed to ruler of Sheki 
khanate Hadji Chelebi-khan as one of the strongest rulers in Azerbaijan. In their 
letter to Shekhi khan they wrote: "Panah-khan came to the throne, builds a fort and 
reinforcements and if his idea will not be timely liquidated, later it will be 
impossible to resist him ". 
Gadji Chelebi -khan, who did not desired strengthening of power of 
Garabagh khan, together with his ally khan of Shamakhy, besieged a fort Bayat - the 
residence of Panah Ali-khan. For a month they unsuccessfully attempted to capture 
the center of Garabagh khanate. In the end they failed and having large human losses 
Sheki and Shirvan khans retreated. Gadji Chelebi-khan was forced to accept: "Up to 
now Panah-khan was like the silver without engraving. We came and engraved this 
(silver) and went back." 
After this event the power of Panah Ali-khan even strengthened. 
Garabagh khan decided to bend all meliks to his power. 
The first who recognized the power of Garabagh khan was melik Shahnazar 
of Varand, which daughter married to son and successor of Ibrahim Khalil-aga, khan 
of Garabagh. Melik Shahnazar by all means "underlined his devotion and love to 
khan; the latter regarded obedience of such huge personality and respectable man 
as a pride of his rule and regarded him with a deep respect and honor." 
Then it was a turn of melik Khachen. Local population at first fiercely 
resisted Panah Ali-khan and forced him to retreat. However, Garabagh khan used a 
trick and forced Khachen melik to leave their reinforcements in mountains and 
went out with his armed forces to plain area. In plain area cavalry of Panah Ali-
khan defeated the enemy. As a result, Khachen melik and its supporters of about 
two thousand people, were forced to retreat and hide in mountains of Garabagh 
with rough terrain. Troops of Panah Ali-khan attacked them. "For three days the 
25 
 
fire of battle was burned. On the third day Panah khan captured their 
reinforcements". To tally defeated and having up to 300 people killed, Khachen 
melik gave up. To remember this Panah Ali-khan built the monument in the battle 
field on the coast of Khachen river. 
Thus, this was the second melik in Garabagh which recognized his 
dependence on Panah Ali-khan. "He obeyed -wrote Mirza-Jamal- and was assigned 
by Panah khan the melik of separate inherited property, which exists up to now. 
Population of Khachin [dislayed] obedience and conscientiously fulfilled their 
obligations". Panah Ali-khan, forcing Khachen melik to obey him, allowed him to 
mint Khan coin - panabad. Mirza Adigezul-bey also wrote: "Melik Mirza-khan for 
his loyalty and favor ... started to mint a coin pure as silver, ofmelikate on behalf of 
Panah-khan ". 
Soon after, Allah Kuli Sultan, melik of Jeraberd, who understood 
usefulness of fight against Garabagh khan attempted to conclude peaceful 
agreement. Accompanied by noble people of his melikate he went to meet 
Garabagh khan to conclude the peace. "Panah-khan met them with respect and let 
them go, previously giving presents to him and his companions". However, 
peaceful relations between Garabagh khan and melik of Jeraberd did not last for a 
long time. Shahnazar, melik of Varand, "having hostility to Allah-Kuli-Sultan", 
pushed Panah-khan to break relations with Jeraberd melik. 
Then melik Allah-Kuli-Sultan accompanied by a large suite visited the 
Garabagh khan for the second time, Shahnazar, melik of varand, said to Panah Ali-
khan: "// is hard to believe that a person who surrounds himself by such splendor 
will always depend on you end be faithful to you. At the first opportunity he will 
become your enemy and that is why to free a bag and scorn the opportunity are not 
the rules of great people, like you". 
At the same period the ruler of Nakhchivan - Heydar Kuli-khan was a 
guest of Garabagh khan. Nakhchivan kHan, "noting splendor and wealth, which 
surrounded Allah-Kuli-Sultan, started to tell to Panah-khan that this Sultan will not 
obey him anc! two oovereigns with equal opportunities, wealth and luxury can not 
exist in one town (in one state)". 
As a result of these intrigues, Allah-Kuli-Sultan was captured by the order 
of Garabagh khan and executed the same night. Panah Ali-khan assigned his brother-
melik Khatam as melik of Jeraberd area. 
Despite that melik Khatam was assigned by khan, in a short time melik 
Khatam joined melik of Gulistan against Panah Ali-khan. These meliks fiercely 
resisted and for several years refused to recognize power of Panah Ali-khan. 
Historian Mirza Adigezel-bey described the struggle of Panah Ali-khan 
with other inobedient meliks of Garabagh: "Melik-Usub of Talysh with support of 
this melik (melik Khatam Jeraberd -A.A.) killed his uncle and came to throne. Both 
these meliks, concluded an agreement between them rose the flag of hostility and 
26 
 
discord. They both locked in Jermykh fortress and for a long time they made sallies 
from there ". 
Panah Ali-khan fulfilled several attacks against inobedient meliks. 
However, due to inaccessibility of Jeraberd fortress rebellious meliks succeeded to 
beat off attacks of Garabagh khan. For four years Jeraberd fortress fiercely resisted. 
Rebellious meliks personally headed and commanded armed units and "did not 
take a single step back in the struggle with him (Panah Ali-khan) ". 
Only after Panah Ali-khan destroyed all areas under the crops and 
surrounded fortress, those within the fort were in hard situation. Azerbaijani 
historian wrote: "Then they (meliks - A.A.) saw that their crop lands, gardens and 
cattle are exterminated by peoples and troops of Panakh khan, [such] life became a 
burden to them. Without any way out, they left their homeland, crops and gardens 
and flee to Gandja. During seven years they lived in Gandja province and 
[Shamkur] district"". 
Struggle of Garabagh khan with his rebellious vassal - melik Dizak was 
also fierce. Melik Isai dislocated the large portion of population of Dizak to 
reinforced village Tuk. There were armed units of Dizak of up to three thousand 
people. Several days Tuk village was under siege of khan's troops. There were 
bloodsheds with large human losses. Panah Ali-khän wounded in one of clashes 
was forced to move back. The next attempt to capture Dizak, undertaken a year 
later was also unsuccessful. According to Mirza Jamal: "he (Panah Ali-khan) was 
smashed and Melik-Isai-bey pursued him, destructing everything on his way". 
Only new attack of reinforcements of melik Isai, undertaken by a Garabagh khan 
after a short period of time brought a success to Panah Ali-khan. Defeated Dizak 
melik, who "saw critical circumstances, especially food shortage and lost any hope 
to achieve any support, decided to ask for peace" 
Upon order of Panah Ali-khan, melik Isai was deprived of all his property 
and sent with his family to fort Shusha. There also were other safety measurements. In 
particular, all dwellers of Tuk village were dislocated by Garabagh khan to other areas 
of khanate. 
After a short period, in 1759 the Garabagh khanate was attacked by Fatali 
khan Afshar, ruler of Urmiya, which attempted to establish his power in 
Azerbaijan. Once troops of enemy entered the Garabagh, some meliks took part of 
Fatali-khan Afshar. In this respect, Mirza Jamal wrote: "Meliks of Chilyaburd 
(Jeraberd) and Talysh, which fostered a hidden hostility to Panah khan, joined to 
Fatali khan. Six months they located nearby to fortress...". 
In decisive battle meliks of Varand and Khachen supported Panah Ali-
khan of Garabagh. Troops of Fatali-khan were defeated. 
Thus, in 50-ies of XVIII century the Garabagh ruler Panah Ali-khan in 
severe intestine struggle with local feudal - meliks of Khamse, succeeded to smash 
their resistance and subject them. Neither support of Sheki and Shirvan khans from 
27 
 
north of Azerbaijan to Garabagh meliks, nor invasion of Mohammed Hasan-khan 
Gadjar and Fatali-khan Afshar from south of Azerbaijan, were not able to stop the 
process of establishment of strong khan power in Garabagh and subordinate of 
small feudal rulers to sovereign of this Azerbaijani territory. 
Conclusions: 1) To mid of XVIII century on the territory of Garabagh a 
powerful Azerbaijani Garabagh khanate emerged with supremacy of Azerbaijani; 
2)"Armenian" meliks of Garabagh are in fact previous Al bans. That is why, no 
one of families of Garabagh meliks ascended to noble, nakharar Armenian clans. 
These were İocal feudal, which were not Armenian by their origin. 
3. Struggle of Panah Aki-khan against Garabagh meliks was feudal intestine fight 
for power. More stronger ruler forced other smaller rulers, which had land 
properties in Garabagh, to recognize his power
1
 Garabagh khan used various 
means in this struggle -from marital diplomacy to armed rule. 
Why Armenian historians are so insistent in attempt to display melikate of 
Garabagh as Armenian feudal principalities? 
The box opens very easily! As wrote Armenian authors themselves, 
nowhere in any Armenian region by XVIII century there are traces of Armenian 
statehood. Only in Garabagh there were "only remnants of Armenian statehood", 
which is said to be in Caucasus. 
Armenian authors use Garabagh meliks because feudal of Garabagh are 
their only chance to confirm mythic idea about existence of Armenian statehood on 
the territory of Caucasus. Those historians do not want to see obvious things: at the 
ancient times Garabagh was ethnically and politically the part of Alban state; in I-
IV centuries Garabagh area was subject of Alban Arshakids, in VII-VIII centuries 
it subjected to great knyaz Mihranids; in XII-XIII centuries in Garabagh there was 
Khachen principality, which according to academician I.A.Orbeli "was part of 
ancient Albania", in XVI-XVIII zone of Garabagh was within Garabagh 
beylerbeylik of Sefevids state and then state of Nadir-shakh. From mid XVIII 
century to 1822 this territory was within Azerbaijani Garabagh khanate, which at 
the beginning of XIX century belonged to Russia. Tsar Russia recognized only one 
of khans of Garabagh - Ibragim khalil khan as an authoritative ruler of Garabagh 
region and hold negotiations only with him. On May 14 of 1805 between 
representatives of Russian command in Caucasus and Ibrahim Khalil khan of 
Garabagh the Kurekchay treaty was signed, which was an official document for 
conveying Garabagh territory under the rule of Russia. 
  
28 
 
Elchin Ahmedov 
HISTORIC, POLITICAL  
AND MILITARY STRATEGIC VALUE OF SHUSHA 
 
At the beginning of XVIII century Azerbaijan consisted of four 
beylerbeylik: Tabriz, Shirvan, Chukhursad and Garabagh. Garabagh beylerbeylik 
with its center in Ganja city covered vast territory between Araz and Kur rivers. 
In XVIII century complicated historic events happened in Garabagh. 
Being one of administrative units of Sefevi state the beylerbeylik of Garabagh was 
occupied by Ottoman Turkey in 1724. Ganja city, the center of beylerbeylik was 
invaded by Turkish troops. 
In 30-ies of XVIII century armed attacks of Nadir shah Afshari 
temporarily changed situation in Iran and Garabagh. Iran revived under the rule of 
Nadir shah succeeded in regaining of Azerbaijan territories, including Ganja, from 
Ottoman empire (1735). Nadir shah was also harsh to population of Garabagh 
beylerbeylik existed by that time for over two centuries. This was caused by 
objection expressed by Garabagh beylerbeylik while inauguration held in 1736 in 
Mugan when Nadir shah was announced as the ruler. 
In 1747 after the death of Nadir shah his state collapsed. In mid-XVIII 
century after the liquidation of a long lasted ruling of Iran on the territory of 
Azerbaijan the independent and semi-independent feudal states - khanates were 
created. 
Garabagh khanate was one of eighteen khanates established in Azerbaijan 
in the middle of XVIII century. Founder of Garabagh khanate Panah Ali khan was 
from Javanshir kin. Panah Ali khan was the head of Otuzikiler tribe and emir of 20 
thousand yards of Jevanshir and Gazakh. He announced himself a khan and 
ordered to build Bayat fort in Kebirli district in 1748 in order to defend Garabagh 
khanate from attacks of enemies. 
During the rule of Panah Ali khan the first war took place at the end of 
1748 in Bayat fort. This was due to attack of Haji Chelebi, the khan from Sheki. 
Panah Ali khan victory over Sheki and Shirvan khanates had brought him a fame. 
Taking into account weak strategic position of Bayat fort and difficulty to hold 
their troops he decided to build a new defense fort and started construction of a 
Ternekut fort nearby to Agdam and famous as Shahbulag. 
During that period the fame of Panah Ali khan increased every day. He 
extended his influence over Ganja, Irevan and Nakhchyvan khanates by force and 
marriage diplomacy. In 50-ies of XVIII century meliks of Khamse became the 
subjects of Garabagh .khanate. L iter Panah Ali khan transferred the center of 
khanate to unreachable area and built a fort there. It was the fort of Shusha. 
Building of Shusha fort started in 1750-1751. According to Garabagh 
historians at a some distance from Shusakend, in 1750 on a high steep mountain 
29 
 
the building of the fort had been started and completed in 1756-1757. Panah Ali 
khan made Shusha the capital, reinforced it and turned it into Fort-city. For a some 
period of time to a honor of Panah Ali khan it had been named as "Panahabad", 
later as "Shusha fort" and "Shusha". 
Enemies of Panah Ali khan were concerned by construction of unmatched 
Shusha fort. In political events which took place after the year 1751 the name of 
Shusha was always mentioned. Shusha fort resisted a large number of attacks and 
evidenced bloody battles. 
In 50-ies of XVIII century while Panah Ali khan was involved with 
reinforcement of Shusha fort the troops of Mohammed Hasan Gadjar, shah of Iran, 
attacked Garabagh in 1751. Gadjar troops made a camp in vicinity of Shusha, 
where they stayed for about a month. But strong fortifications of the city had 
forced troops of Iran shah to go back. Several years later - in 1758 Fatali khan 
Afshar, the ruier of Urmiya attacked Garabagh khanate with a large army. Fatali 
khan held Shusha under the siege for 6 months and he failed to capfi re the city.  
After the death of Panah Ali khan, during the rule of mrahimkhalil khan 
(1763-1806) the Garabagh khanate became even stronger. On the territory of 
khanate strategically important forts have been built, such as Askeran, Agoglan 
and other forts and walls of Shusha fort. 
In mid-80-ies of the XVIII century the founder of Gadjar dynasty Aga 
Mohammed khan came to power in Iran. In order to restore former strength of 
Sefevi state he strived for occupation of new territories. In 1791 as a result of 
struggle lasted for over ten years, Aga Mohammed Gadjar made all provinces of 
Iran and Azerbaijan obedient to his power and prepared to invade the northern 
portion of Azerbaijan. 
In 1794 Aga Mohammed khan Gadjar demanded from Ibrahimkhalil khan 
to obey him and sent his son as a hostage. Ibrahimkhalil khan turned down his 
demand. Aga Mohammed khan had sent 8 thousand troops to Garabagh. But troops 
of Aga Mohammed khan were defeated at Askeran fort. The same year Aga 
Mohammed khan was forced to increase quantity of arms and troops by ten times. 
In summer of 1795 a number of Iranian troops, which crossed Araz river 
and moved to Garabagh exceeded 85 thousand. Gadjar aimed to totally subordinate 
Azerbaijan and Georgia. True aim of summer attacks in 1795 consisted in 
occupation of new territories and filling state coffers by looting. The major 
obstacle, which impeded reaching this aim by Aga Mohammed khan was the fort 
Shusha. 
To reach Shusha the troops of enemy had to cross Araz. Clearly 
understanding this, Ibrahimkhalil khan ordered to destroy Khudaferin bridge built 
long time ago. Undertaking serious efforts to defend Shusha fort, Ibrahimkhalil 
khan ordered to make ready cannons and deployed troops in Garabagh mountains 
and Shusha. 
30 
 
All population of khanate prepared to fight against enemies attacked 
Garabagh. Troops of 15 thousand people were gathered in Shusha. Along with 
men, women are also participated in defense. To capture Shusha the Iranian forces 
also used foreign forces and strongest weapons of that period. Enemy cannons 
under commanding of French officers three days fired Shusha. But they failed to 
destruct fortifications of the city. 
Since the siege of Shusha was unsuccessful, Aga Mohammed khan burned 
surrounding villages, took away the cattle and captured a lot of people. Despite 
several attacks to Shusha the attacking troops had huge human losses and were 
repulsed. While repulsing attacks the population from the city walls thrown out fire 
and stones over soldiers of enemy. Garabagh historians after detailed description of 
Shusha fort by Iranian forces explained reasons of defeat of Aga Mohammed khan. 
One of the reasons of Garabagh forces over Iranian troops was guerilla war of 
people of Garabagh. Along the roads from forests on the shores of Araz river to 
Shusha fort the people fought against invaders and captured food supplied to Iran 
army. Thus, leaving the enemy without provisions they seriously hit army. 
Siege of Shusha continued 33 days. Through this period the army of Aga 
Mohammed khan significantly decreased. Almost all cannonr went put of order. 
Thus, Aga Mohammed khan was forced to cea^e the siege of Shusha and move 
towards Georgia. 
In September of 1795 troops of Aga Mohammed khan after fierce battles 
entered Tiflis. Gadjar put Tiflis on fire and went back to Mugan in the fall of 1795. 
He intended to spend the winter here and start a new attack to Shusha in the spring. 
But events, which took place in the spring of 1796 in Iran changed plans of Aga 
Mohammed khan. 
In April of 1796 the local rulers appealed to Russian officials and as a 
result Russian forces under the commander General V.Zubov moved towards 
Azerbaijan. But this time, Russia was unable to strengthen its positions in 
Azerbaijan. After the death of Yekaterina II in 1796 the Russian forces were called 
back by Pavel I, who came to throne in spring of 1797. 
When in fall of 1796 Russian forces went out of Azerbaijan Aga 
Mohammed shah Gadjar announced himself a shah and prepared a plan of attack to 
Garabagh and its invincible capital Shusha. In the spring of 1797 Aga Mohammed 
shah crossing Araz river led his strengthened army towards Shusha fort. 
Aga Mohammed khan was concerned by his failure to capture Garabagh, 
including Shusha in 1794-1795. Despite that resistance to Aga Mohammed khan 
increased patriotism and will for fight among population, in Garabagh khanate they 
felt that there is a need for stronger allies in a fight with Iranian occupation. 
Population of Shusha yet suffered of looting and plunders of 1795. At the same 
time, drought in Garabagh resulted in starvation. 
In this situation it was impossible to defend Shusha similar to that of 
31 
 
1795. Despite this, Ibrahim khan took a decision to resist the enemy. According to 
French historian Jan Khurenn, Ibrahim khan in 1795 again destroyed Khudaferin 
bridges and thus provided defense of Shusha fort. Aga Mohammed khan 
approaching the fort understood that it would not be easy to capture Shusha and 
ordered his soldiers to fire from all cannons to the same part of the city wall. In his 
turn Ibrahimkhalil khan decided to destroy cannons of Iranian forces and attacked 
them with 200 soldiers. He had succeeded in this, but on his return found that gates 
of the fort are closed. In this situation Ibrahim khan was forced to move to Car-
Balaken. 
Aga Mohammed khan sent a letter to people of Shusha and offered to 
obey him. Shah noted that citizens had to collect 500000 ashrafi as indemnity. 
Thus, Aga Mohammed khan entered Shusha easily and without a fight. 
After Aga Mohammed khan entered the city there were looting by Iranian 
army. Hundreds of people were thrown into the prison. But soon after, on July 4 of 
1797 Aga Mohammed khan was killed by those close to him. After the death of 
shah, forces of Iran disorderly left Shusha and Garabagh. 
In the II half of XVIII century under conditions of complicated internal 
and international situation Garabagh khanate was the feudal state of Azerbaijan 
which succeeded to preserve its sovereignty. Its capital Shusha was the major 
stronghold of Azerbaijan in fight against occupants. Courageous defense of 
Shusha, counter-attacks of its citizens evidence that successor of Panah Ali khan - 
Ibrahimkhalil khan was successful commander as well as skilful state person. 
According to the Kurekchay agreement ("Promised commitment") signed 
between Russia and Iran on May 14 of 1805 the Russian troops were deployed in 
Shusha. Based on Turkmenchay agreement signed on February 10 of 1828 
Azerbaijan was divided into two parts. The northern Azerbaijan was invaded by 
Russian troops. Until the law adopted on April 10 (1840) the territory of former 
Garabagh was called as "Garabagh province". By reforms of 1840 "Shusha 
district" was created instead of "Garabagh province" and it was given to 
Yelizavetpol (Gandja) province in 1868. This was in force until Soviet rule coming 
to power in Azerbaijan in 1920. In 1917 Shusha district during Temporary 
government was the administrative unit of Yelizavetpol province subjected 
Caucasian Committee. Through 1918-1920 during the period of Azerbaijan 
Democratic Republic it entered Gandja province. 
Then Soviet rule came to power in Azerbaijan the issue of borders 
between Azerbaijan and Armenia was in responsibility of Moscow. Armenians 
living in mountain portion of Garabagh received a status of autonomous region on 
June 7, 1923 an! this was due to patronizing of Soviet Russia only. Establishment 
of Daglyg Garabagh Autonomous Region (DGAR) no doubt was the result of 
farsighted and purposeful policy of Soviet Russia which used territorial claims and 
hostility of Armenia towards Azerbaijan. Thus the basis was put for future 
32 
 
territorial claims of Armenia. 
Administrative territorial division of Azerbaijan was seriously violated 
while establishment of DGAR. This was because until establishment of DGAR in 
Azerbaijan there were no cities or regions named Stepanakert, Martuni, Mardakert 
or Hadrut. By the order of 1923 territories of Shusha, Jevanshir and Gubadly 
districts were divided for favor of DGAR, and Khankendi and Askeran regions 
were wholly taken away from Shusha district. In 1923 tens of villages of Shusha 
district such as Khankendi, 'Khodjaly, Kerkidjahan, Ulubab, Pirdjamal, Jamylly, 
Aranzemi, Ballidja, Demirchiler, Syghnaq, Garabulag, Mukhtarkend, Dagdaghan, 
Shusakend and Dashbashy were given to Khankendi and later on those areas the 
Askeran region was created. 
From the day of establishment of DGAR the economic potential of 
Azerbaijan was directed for development of Khankendi. Consisted of 10-15 houses 
the Khankendi village transformed into the center of economically strong region 
under the name "Stepanakert". Shusha which administratively belonged to this 
region was put in position of dependant on Khankendi: phone lines connected 
Shusha to other regions of the Republic were managed from Khankendi; gas 
pipeline Yevlakh-Lachin was through this region; Agdam-Shusha highway was 
surrounded by Armenian settlements of Askeran and Khankendi. All this was done 
according to a certain plan and this became clear only after 1988. 
It can be seen that tens years earlier there was preparation for the events of 
February of 1988 and basis of separatist movement was created. At the end of 1987 
political and ideological activity of Garabagh Armenians increased. In November 
of the same year A.Aganbekyan in his speech in Paris underlined his confidence 
that Garabagh will soon be given to Armenia. This speech played a role of signal 
for start of marches in Khankendi in the beginning of 1988. 
In February of 1988 in Khankendi the meetings and strikes started at 
which Armenians demanded annexation of DGAR to Armenia. In Yerevan also 
meetings were held with the same demands. The same year on September 18 
Armenians by use of violence have withdrawn 15 thousand Azerbaijani from 
Khankendi and forced them to settle in Shusha and surrounding regions. 
On January 1989 the government of former USSR in order to stabilize the 
situation a special governing committee was created in DGAR under the 
supervision of A.Volski. Despite that this committee was created in order to 
prevent deterioration of ethnic relations and stabilization of situation, the situation 
in DGAR became worse during the period of rule of the special governing 
committee. A.Volski, committee chairman, instead of stabilization of situation 
inflated the tension. As a result of his active "efforts" through a short period of 
time almost all enterprises and organizations were conveyed from subordination of 
Azerbaijan to that of the center. In all documentation DGAR was erased from 
composition of Azerbaijan. 
33 
 
Through the period of its activity the special governing committee failed 
to provide return of Azerbaijani fled from Khankendi to their homes. On the 
contrary, several other Azerbaijani villages were emptied by "assistance" of the 
committee. A part of withdrawn Azerbaijani population came to Shusha. In 
general, due to "serious care" of A.Volski the province went out of control of 
Azerbaijan government. 
Starting from 1991 the tension in mountain portion of Garabagh was 
gradually increasing. Social and political situation evidenced incoming of large 
tragedy. At the end of October of 1991 and during November the villages in 
mountain portion of Garabagh, including Tug, Khodjavend, Garadagly, Imaret-
Gervend and other strategically important villages were put on fire, destroyed and 
looted by Armenians. 
Telephone communication lines of Shusha passed from Khankendi were 
cut on November 24 and population of Shusha and surrounding villages were 
absolutely isolated. As a result Khodjaly and Shusha turned out to be under the 
siege. On December 2, Armenian army, equipped by Russian armaments and 
armored machines driven mostly by Russian servicemen attacked from Khankendi 
the Kerkidjahan settlement. It was impossible to send army units from Shusha for 
support, because Russian forces closed the road from Shusha to Kerkidjahan. At 
the same time, Shusha itself was the target of everyday intensive shelling. 
Starting from 1992 Armenian army occupied other remained Azerbaijani 
villages in mountains of Garabagh. Thus, on February 12 Malybeyli and 
Gushchular villages of Shusha were occupied by Armenian armed forces. 
On February 25 at night Armenian forces by support of 366 regiment of 
Russian army deployed in Khankendi attacked Khodjaly and killed about thousand 
civilians. 
After occupation of Khodjaly by united forces of Armenian and Russian 
armies it became clear that the next target will be Shusha. Armenians did not hide 
this and openly prepared to capture the city and Lachyn in order to make a 
corridor. Strategic position of Shusha almost zeroed probability of its easy capture. 
But in aim to reach Shusha, Armenians occupied our territories with unbelievable 
atrocity and step-by-step moved towards Shusha. What was the loss of Shusha for 
Azerbaijan? If one will look through the history, the political and strategic 
importance of Shusha will become clear. 
In March there were heavy battles in surroundings of Shusha. Starting 
frcm mid of April a large number of armored machines and troops of Armenians 
accumulated in vicinity of Shusha. On April 29 Armenians undertook an intensive 
attack over Haji talasy and Dashashyran areas in surroundings of Shusha. All these 
attacks displayed Armenians move towards, Shusha, which was under the 
blockade. At night on May 7 Shusha was under fierce missile attacks by missiles of 
"Grad" and "Krystal" type, cannons, tanks and machine guns. Shelling continued 
34 
 
until the morning. From the early morning Armenians forces started to move 
towards Shusha from directions of Khankendi, Shushikend and Kerkidjahan. 
Despite that the city was defended until the evening of May 8, Armenians occupied 
Shusha and then villages of Kosalar and Shyrlan. 
Thus, Armenian armed units deployed in mountain portion of Garabagh 
together with other Armenian terrorist groups fulfilled another crime on the 
territory of Azerbaijan Republic and captured the last remained settlement of 
Azerbaijani, in mountains of Garabagh - Shusha. Fall of Shusha, which once was 
under the siege for 33 days and was not captured, for such short time was caused 
by very weak defense system within the city. Our armed forces deployed in Shusha 
and their military training was weak in comparison to that of Armenians. It is true 
that there were a certain number of military equipment and troops within Shusha. 
Prior to the attack there were 2 tanks, 7 armored machines, 1 "Grad" missile unit, 
700 soldiers, however of these 400 were dismissed for leave. According to data of 
Armenians they had 100 armored machines and tanks and 11 thousand soldiers. 
On May 8 of 1992 by the initiative of Iran the meeting between officials 
of Azerbaijan and Armenia was held in Tehran. Later it became evident, that 
ceasefire along Azerbaijan-Armenian border and mountain area of Garabagh 
served for special interests of Armenia. This meeting was necessary for Armenia in 
order to hide from international community their true intentions. Undoubtedly, 
Armenian authorities were aware of preparation of attack. Because invasion into 
Shusha coincides with the period when Armenian authorities held negotiations in 
Tehran and demanded ceasefire and that is why, signed peace agreement was in 
force just until the ink dried. At the same time, Armenians, as always, prior to their 
attack spread false information about fierce attacks undertaken from Shusha over 
Khankendi. 
This event once more proved aggressive intentions of Armenia which did 
not suite to any international law norms and its intention to annex Daglyg 
Garabagh to Armenia by use of force, violating Bylaws of UN and principles of 
OSCE. By capturing Shusha Armenia resolved this problem only from positions of 
military tactics. Political resolution of problem deepening further, was driven into 
the complicated course. 
After the invasion into Shusha, which is the ancient musical and cultural 
center of Azerbaijan, Armenian forces closed the road from Shusha to Lachin and 
started bomb shelling of Lachin from territory of Armenian Republic. The goal of 
Armenian forces consisted in strengthening their positions on Azerbaijan territories 
and make corridor in order to connect Daglyg Garabagh to Armenian Republic. 
Lachin was the major obstacle to fulfill this. Soon after occupation of Shusha in a 
short time on May 18 Lachin was   captured  by   army  of Armenia.   Occupation   
of Lachin displayed that the war extended beyond the borders of autonomous 
region and showed huge aggressor intentions of Armenia. 
35 
 
Azerbaijan Republic after occupation of its territories used efforts of all 
mediator missions and showed its intention to resolve the problem according to 
principles of UN and OSCE. In May of 1992 the first stage of negotiations within 
the framework of Minsk group of OSCE started in Rome. The meeting in Rome 
constituted preparation for Minsk Conference on Daglyg Garabagh and was 
attended by eleven countries - the USA, Turkey, Russia, France, Italy, Sweden, 
Czech, Slovak, Byelorussia, Azerbaijan and Armenia. But occupation of Shusha 
and Lachin by Armenia turned into the hurdle for Minsk conference. 
It is already quite a long period of time when troubled spirits of Panah Ali 
khan, Ibrahimkhalil khan, Molla Panab Vagif, Nadjaf bey Vezirov, Abdulrahim 
bey Hagverdiyev. Khan gyzy Khurshudbanu Natavan, Uzeyir bey Hajibeyli, 
Ahmed bey Agayev, Yusif Vezir Cheminzeminli, Khan Shushinsky, Bulbul, 
Rashid Beybutov and tens of other outstanding personalities calls for help. Now 
everyone understands the truth: "Garabagh belongs to those who possess Shusha". 
Namely loss of Shusha later played significant role in loss of other territories of 
Azerbaijan ... 
Garabagh history, which is inseparable of Iran history or in other words, 
Garabagh history, which is very similar to history of Iran, reflects many tragic 
days. During the era of Afsharies in Iran, Garabagh was the subject of several 
attacks and a large number of people were killed due to attacks of Nadir Shah. 
Garabagh, which had a small period of calmness, faced serious tragedy. The 
founder of Gadjar dynasty aga Mohammed khan came to throne in Iran, fulfilled 
massacre in most cities of Iran (khaca shah) attacked Azerbaijan and finally reached 
fort Shusha. Mohammed aga personally headed the troops. His arrival to Shusha 
started the major stage of Iranian-Russian war. A large number of human losses were 
in Garabagh. Due to order of Mohammed khan famous poet Molla Panah Vagif, the 
vizier of Garabagh, was arrested in Shusha and on the next day Mohammed khan 
ordered to kill Vagif. But Gajar shah was killed by his own relatives and the poet was 
set free. 
As we already said during the rule of Gajar dynasty Garabagh went 
through hard times. Population of Garabagh, which lived during the relatively calm 
period of Nasreddin Shah rule, evidenced the tragedy during governing of Fatali 
Shah. At that period a new stage of Iranian-Russian war started. A lot of people were 
killed in Garabagh. The territory of Garabagh trampled for 10 years under feet of 
England, France and Russia has been lost because of indecency of Fatali shall. Only 
famous politician and far-sighted statesman Abbas Mirza liberated Garabagh from 
Russian troops. According to Gulustan and Turkmenchay agreements most cities, 
Garabagh region in particular, were given to Russia. After Garabagh fell under the 
control of Russians, Russians started to implement their policy in Garabagh. Moslem 
population of Garabagh was forced to live together with Christian Armenians, which 
was not easy and both parties clashed in a number of conflicts and had losses. 
36 
 
At the start of XIX century by Christian chronology, bases of Russian 
empire became unsteady. And immediately prior the Bolshevik movement 
notorious Armenian-Moslem or Azeri-Armenian conflicts took place. Armenian-
Moslem war started in 1905 by Christian chronology or in 1323 by Hijra led to 
settlement of Armenians in Garabagh, however Moslems were forced to flee their 
houses for Armenians. Intentions of Russians were not limited by Garabagh only. 
They wanted to locate on the territory of present Azerbaijan Republic the Christian 
Armenians, who are extremists in a true sense of this word. 
Armenians by support of Russians appropriated most portion of territory 
of present Azerbaijan Republic. 
Due to signed Gulustan and Turkmenchay agreements Iranian government 
could not stop this process. In the end, Anver Pasha headed Ottoman troops freed 
territory of Azerbaijan Democratic Republic, including Ganja and Baku, from this 
evil. 
Famous writer Mohammed Ordubadi in his precious book (Bloody years) 
wrote about atrocities, which took place in Garabagh: 
"May 24, 1905 ... Armenians shooting was not halted by the government 
and no measures were undertaken to suppress unrest. At 12 o'clock firing was 
started by Armenians once again, thorough fear covered the area and killings of 
people, which did not see the war was very close". 
From beginning of the XIX century to 1918 severe clashes took place 
between parties. Movement of workers generated in Russia gained victory in 1917 
by Christian chronology. Despite of this, Armenian -Azeri war in Garabagh did not 
stop and became even deeper. 
1918 was the year of Musavat revolution in Azerbaijan, which took 
control over Baku and surrounding towns and regions. Musa-vatists had to fight 
with Bolsheviks and at the same time they had to fight with Armenians in 
Garabagh. Finally, after two years, the governing of Musavat party was ended and 
in 1920 Bolsheviks returned to Azerbaijan Soviet Republic. Armenians taking 
advantage of this crisis, started to reinforce their positions in Garabagh and 
withdrawn Azerbaijani from Garabagh by use of money and force, and located 
Armenian families there. 
During the period of establishment of Soviet rule the endless conflicts 
took place in the region, especially in Middle Asia and Caucasus. After Stalin 
became the ruler, he suppressed burning ethnic conflicts by his strong will. Despite 
the end of conflicts in Russia, Georgia and other places, settlement of Armenians 
in Garabagh continued during period of Stalin rule. 
Brejnev became the head of Soviet Union after Stalin. His rule distinguished 
from that cf Stalin and there was some mildness in policy of Union. But this mildness 
was not for the favor of Azerbaijan nation, on the contrary, may be namely this 
mildness gave a push to strengthening of Armenians position in Garabagh. Several 
37 
 
short-lived Soviet rulers at the end of XX century were succeeded by Mikhail 
Gorbachev with his policy of "perestroika". Gorbachev, who attempted to reinforce 
bases of Soviet Union, in fact initiated its collapse starting from 1989. Across the 
former Soviet Union the war for power has started. Instead of strengthening of 
weakened positions in Garabagh the new government was established in Baku. 
Armenians taking advantage from crisis in the Soviet Union undertook 
serious measures to annex Garabagh to Armenia. First of all, Armenians withdraw 
those who were of Azerbaijani origin from the Republic and then initiated the process 
of annexation of Garabagh to Armenia. This resulted in bloodshed and Azerbaijan 
territories fell under the control of Armenians by support of Russian troops and 
Russian military equipment. Azerbaijan nation, which severely suffered from war 
and evidenced day-by-day flee of Azerbaijani from their homes, voted for 
nationalists. Ebulfez Elchibey won at the presidential elections by 90% of votes. But 
his government also was unable to withdraw Armenians from territory of Azerbaijan. 
One year later Azerbaijan nation tiring of hard economic situation and 
tiagic days of Garabagh war resulted in weakened fighting ability of soldier? and 
the nation made plans to liberate territories not b) use of armed forces, but through 
diplomatic paths. Finally, Elchibey distanced from the power and people voted for 
Heydar Aliyev. Policy implemented by Heydar Aliyev resulted in ceasefire. It has 
been indicated earlier that this situation continues for over 10 years. 
Up to now international organizations were unable to fulfill required 
measures, but we believe that justice will win some day... 
 
Faig Ismayılov 
ARMENIAN VANDALISM  
AGAINST MONUMENTS OF AZERBAIJAN 
 
Occupation of territories of Azerbaijan by Armenians is a long-term 
process implemented through hundreds of years. 
Armenians, which always lived with desire to create their own large and 
powerful state, passed through territories of India, Syria, Iran, France, Greece, 
Russia and Turkey and finally came to Azerbaijani territories. It can be said that 
before their arrival to Azerbaijan, they have already walked around the globe. 
Armenians intending to take advantage from confrontation between 
Russia-Turkey and Russia-Iran at the end of XVIII and start of XIX centuries 
appealed for support of Russians and undertook to assist them to cause unrest 
within the countries of their residence. Armenians won the sympathy of Russians 
by creating diversions with large number of human losses on territory of Iran and 
especially in Turkey. In February of 1828 after signing of Turkmenchay agreement 
between Russia and Iran, by instigation of Russians, Armenians migrated from 
territories of Iran, Turkey and Russia into Irevan and Garabagh khanates. Densely 
38 
 
populated in those areas, they have created their own religion and later, their own 
state by support of Russia and other countries. 
This policy of displacement, implemented by Russia for along 178 years 
has brought a tragedy to every Azerbaijani family. Millions of people turned into 
prisoners of this policy, hundreds of thousands of innocent people became victims 
of terror and separatism, which did not receive juridical evaluation even today. 
Armenians, taking advantage from naive nature of Azerbaijani, were 
changing names of places of their dense population and building temples and 
churches in classic style for their religious ceremonies. 
With increased number of Armenians in areas of their location and in 
workplaces they gradually withdraw representatives of other ethnicities. Since the 
policy of ethnic cleansing of Armenians is based on a long-term concept, at first 
they implemented this policy very slowly and carefully. 
Their major intentions included wide allocation on those territories, mix 
with large nations, spread their influence in areas of residence, give their young 
girls as present to local influential people and implement their plans by killings if 
necessary. 
Music: Armenians newly settled on territory of Azerbaijan, soon after 
mixed with local population. They took part at wedding ceremonies and holidays 
of Azerbaijani. Since Indian, Arabic and French music they brought here was not 
useful, they in a very short time learned Azerbaijan national music and language. 
They had not their own national music and culture because their lifestyle was that 
of nomads. Poetry and arts of Armenians started with Sayat-Nova, reflect history 
of recent times. Even Sayat-Nova, who is regarded as .Armenian classic, confessed 
that he used many peculiarities of Turkish culture. 
At their wedding ceremonies and other events they used only Azerbaijani 
music. At the same time, they started to learn singing in Azerbaijani. They have 
learned to play on such instruments as tar, kamancha, drums such as def and 
nagara, percussion instrument and started even to teach playing on them to 
Azerbaijani children. In XVIII-XIX centuries in most renown Mugham trios of 
Azerbaijan the players of kamancha were Armenians. Armenians were involved in 
many musician groups and developed their s. kills as singers. 
Starting from the early XX century they openly introduced Azerbaijani 
folk music and songs by composers as Armenian music. Armenians, living today 
with Azerbaijani -music and announcing themselves as ancient and eternal enemy 
of ^urkic nations, will understand once that their behavior contradicts to 
international convention and law and will be grateful to Azerbaijan nation for 
pleasure they enjoyed from Azerbaijani music.  
Sculptures made of stone: In the beginning of  XX century after creation 
of Armenian state by Russians on the territory of Azerbaijan the ethnic cleansing 
plans of Armenians became even intensive. Only through the period of Soviet rule 
39 
 
they deported over 500 thousand Azerbaijani from Western Azerbaijan. Then they 
started to liquidate their sacred places and cemeteries. In most cases they removed 
tombstones, hewed them and repeatedly used. However, figures of horses and rams 
-totems left in cemeteries had a special value. By such vandal actions, Armenians 
intended to erase a large portion of history of Azerbaijan. Despite that they 
attempted to remove any traces of Azerbaijani, in most archives around the globe 
there are information about these territories. 
It is noteworthy that figures of horses and rams, inscribed stories and 
ornamental carvings are characteristic for regions of Irevan, Dereleyaz, Zangezur, 
Nakhchivan and Garabagh. Large number of these figures and variety of their style 
give detailed information about art of sculptures made of stone in our country. 
Stony figures of ram in those territories are various by their extensions. 
The length of largest of them is 150 cm, its height 110 cm and the length and 
height of smallest one are 45 cm and 30 cm respectively, 
Figure of ram dated back to 1577 in cemetery of Urud village in region 
Sisyan and carvings in form of stories attributed to XVI century were rare samples 
of craft of carving over the stone. 
In 1834 French traveler Lubua-de Monpere noted that he had seen across 
Garabagh a lot of figures of animals made of stone and evidenced a deep respect of 
local population to those figures. These notes are not about Armenians. These 
figures are the only monuments, which Armenians failed to appropriate. Travelers 
arrived at Azerbaijan through that period did not indicate settlement of a large 
number of Armenians in Garabagh, as Armenians claim now. 
By cutting these figures into pieces, Armenians transfer them to other 
regions and use them for other purposes. They destroyed with unbelievable cruelty 
about 100 thousands samples of art and tombs in Western Azerbaijan and other 
occupied territories. Now there is not a single intact cemetery on territories under 
occupation. 
Architectural monuments: Ethnic cleansing policy of Armenians also 
touched our historic and architectural monuments on occupied territories. In 
Garabagh and surrounding regions only over thousand historic, architectural and 
cultural monuments existed and most portion of them were totally or partially 
destroyed by Armenians. Today in Western Azerbaijan there is not a single historic 
and cultural monument or tombstone belonged to Azerbaijani. 
Armenians implement policy of vandalism in a planned manner 
in Garabagh or any other region of Azerbaijan. They think that bydestroying 
historic monuments it is possible to prove that Azerbaijani did not live on these 
territories. However, they are mistaken, and it is not easy to erase Azeri Turks from 
historic sources. 
 Most ancient samples of images made over the stone by carving and 
scratching techniques and made by people in our territories from Neolite age to the 
40 
 
XX century are found in Kelbadjar and Lachin. Ornaments over the stone are 
consist of floristic and geometric images and images of birds and animals. 
Starting from XIII century among decorations of architectural monuments 
it is possible to see images of birds, animals and humans. However, they were not 
gibbous, they were mostly plain and made as inscriptions. To these monuments 
primarily belong images inscribed over tombs of Melik Ajdar nearby to Jijimly 
village of Lachin region and Khachin Turbetli village of Agdam region. 
Unfortunately, these monuments left on occupied territories, have turned 
into targets of Armenian vandalism. Armenians totally destroyed such monuments 
as Kerbelayi Behbudaly spring in Lachin region, Hamza Soltan palace, Damirovlu 
sacred place, Soltanbaba, Sheikhahmed Melikajdar, Khalife, Khanoglu, Panah 
khan tomb and two tombs in gipsy cemetery, 12 bridges, 126 cemeteries, hundreds 
of tombstones, historical architectural reserves in Shusha, including Haji Abbas, 
Haji Yusifli, Yol-gala, Khodja Merdjanly, Kocharli, Seyidli, Mamay, Govharaga, 
Ashagy Govharaga, mosques of Malibeyli village, dwellings, which were historic 
monuments, caravan-saray in Shahbulag village and many other similar 
monuments . 
In general, during the last conflict 1200 historic monuments were totally 
or partially destroyed, a Gallery and 27 museums were looted, over 100 thousand 
exhibits were transferred to Armenia from the territory of Daglyg Garabagh and 
occupied territories. This is the reality of Armenian vandalism on territory of 
Azerbaijan in XXI century. There is no nation around the world, which music, 
history, cuisine, culture and arts are so deeply suffered from aggression. 
 
Fazil Gazanfarogly 
DAGLYG GARABAGH: LOST FUTURE 
 
Existence of program for resolution of Garabagh problem of Azerbaijan 
authorities or in brains or coffers of opposition, which may replace authorities in 
the future, fairly causes suspicion of any Azerbaijani. However, from viewpoint of 
interests of Azerbaijan the problem has two ways of resolution: accept occupation 
of territories and conclude peace agreement or mobilize army and withdraw enemy 
from occupied territories and in this case to face most powerful countries, which 
support Armenians. Both these ways do not seem real. That is why, everyone 
awaits what will be dictated to us by international will. And it seems that 
international will has no intention to refuse to support Armenia. As in former 
cases, Azerbaijan's ability to hold intensive consultations with Turkey is seriously 
limited. Especially, the fact that Turkey is not included into co-chairs of Minsk 
group and incompletion of resolution of North Cyprus problem forced both 
representatives of ''one ration, two countries" to reconcile with reality. However, it 
must be kept in mind that Garabagh problem is more complicated than problem of 
41 
 
Cyprus and, if in the latter case all significant cards were in hands of Turkey, in the 
former case Azerbaijan has no any mean for influence. It is already over 15 years 
that Azerbaijan does not take part in political, economic, cultural and social 
institutions. Despite that ceasefire is in force for quite a long period of time, parties 
did not sign any document, which may make closer the resolution of the conflict 
and number of those killed is constantly increasing. Irrespective of what is 
happening in negotiations held by international mediators, the revival of war is 
regarded as a real danger. And despite authorities of Azerbaijan frequently 
emphasize that "if peace negotiations will not be successful, we will liberate our 
territories by war", we have to keep in mind that Daglyg Garabagh, now populated 
by Armenians only, has turned into most militarized zone around the globe. On the 
other hand, the USA, Russia and Iran holding conflicting positions, at the same 
time support Armenia and this evidences that if war starts Azerbaijan will not fight 
against Daglyg Garabag or Armenia only. 
The situation is complicated by the fact that authorities of Azerbaijan 
through that period totally removed public organizations from resolution of this 
problem and the issue was given to power of several officials and kept it 
confidential as state secret. The most regretful thing is that despite repeated 
initiatives in Milli Majlis (Parliament) of Azerbaijan Republic, the governing 
majority refused to discuss the issue in any form. 
Thus, it can be inferred that any discussions held at various levels of 
society due to Garabagh problem and which might influence decisions will not be 
allowed in the future also. That is why, the Azerbaijani government, which clearly 
understands the situation and uninformed society of Azerbaijan wait for a miracle 
in one of the proposals made at highest levels by the USA, Russia or OCSE. But 
there will be no miracle. Because the leading countries of the West, OCSE, 
European Union, International Crisis Group, Minsk group have come to common 
conclusion: resolve Daglyg Garabagh problem without use of force and without 
emphasizing territorial irtegrity of Azerbaijan. Even the subject of liberation of 
regions surrounding Daglyg Garabagh is not deliberately excluded from 
negotiations and they do not interested in underlining this fact as aggression by 
Armenia. Up to now, i.e. after ceasefire was established it is possible to observe the 
folloy ing: keeping Daglyg Garabagh within Azerbaijan and giving it the highest 
autonomy and postpone the issue of status; consider Daglyg Garabagh and 
Azerbaijan as part of a "common country"; governing of Daglyg Garabagh by both 
countries under the protectorate of Azerbaijan and Armenia; changes in Daglyg 
Garbagh and Armenia in form of territorial exchange of Mehri corridor; granting 
transition sovereignty to Daglyg Garabagh for 25 or 50 years with further recog-
nition of its independence. 
Various versions of status were proposed during various periods. I would 
like to remind one of these, which was proposed by Minsk group of OCSE in 1997. 
42 
 
According to this proposal, Daglyg Garabagh may be the state and territorial unit 
within Azerbaijan, providing it will be given a wide range of rights and guarantees. 
Despite that Daglyg Garabagh turned down this proposal, Armenia displayed 
intention to discuss agreement related to giving formal autonomy to Daglyg 
Garabagh within limits of Azerbaijan. However, Armenia's thesis that "there must 
be no vertical relations between Azerbaijan and Daglyg Garabagh" was fairly 
rejected by Azerbaijan. On the other hand, Azerbaijan, confidently refusing to 
discuss the version of Azerbaijan confederation, considers that it is possible to 
keep status-quo by keeping Daglyg Garabagh de-jure within Azerbaijan and de-
facto as independent structure. This is) the most disadvantageous of all versions 
and is similar to continuation of aggression. However, this may be considered as a 
part of! strategy for gaining time. Unless the issue of status is resolved Azerbaijan 
holds its right to use force for restoration of its territorial integrity. According to 
International Crisis Group keeping status-quo corresponds to strategy of winning 
time both for Armenia and Daglyg Garabagh. 
International organizations clearly understand that without liberation of 7 
occupied regions it is impossible to define status of Daglyg Garabagh. After start 
of Prague process the issues, which considered as promising became more abstract 
with unfinished negotiations in Rambouillet. No doubt, mediators from time to 
time smooth extreme positions, keeping Kelbadjar and Lachin on background and 
express possibility to discuss withdrawal of armed forces of Daglyg Garabagh and 
Armenia from 5 occupied regions in surroundings of Daglyg Garabagh. 
Negotiations held for the last years do not consider the package resolution of 
problem of status. 
Armenians themselves attempting to keep the status issue outside present 
negotiations, try to create firm basis for gaining more stable position. Their official 
position, according to foreign ministry of Armenia consists in basic principle of 
"confirmation of right for self-determination of Daglyg Garabagh population and 
recognition of this right at international level. Acknowledgement of this fact and its 
reflection in agreement by Azerbaijan will make it possible to start resolution of 
the problem". Namely this step will make it possible to define the status in the 
future according to plan of Armenians and this maneuver is considered as a major 
compromise, which can be made by Armenians. Sometimes Armenian officials 
bring to the agenda such amorphous term as "temporal mutual activity regime" 
during which it is envisaged to withdraw troops from occupied territories. 
According to this proposal, along with keeping the status issue as unresolved, 
everything indicates the intention to hold referendum in Daglyg Garabagh in 10, 15 
or 20 years period. We have to be more interested than Armenians in saving Gara-
bagh from insolvency. That is because the prolongation of this problem leads to day-by-
day increase of Armenians statehood resources in the region. Irrespective of our false 
self-prizing on "Azerbaijan model of economic development" relying on oil incomes 
43 
 
and fairy-tails about Armenians fleeing from those territories, we hardly believe in 
realization of these predictions since all previous predictions failed. Real situation is 
that we lost Daglyg Garabagh and significant part of adjacent territories. Today our 
agenda must consist of gaining a share in Garabagh and gaining back by Azerbaijan of 
the regions surrounding Garabagh without any loss. It seems, that very real plan, 
similar to Annan plan proposed to Turkey in respect of Northern Cyprus, may be 
proposed in respect of Garabagh. In fact, proposals made by M'nsk group of OCSE 
and other international organization may become quite real one day. For instance, 
according to plan proposed by International Crisis Group "withdrawal of Daglyg 
Garabagh armed forces backed by Armenia may start soon from regions 
surrounded the entity, instead of this Armenia may request from Azerbaijan to 
guarantee not to use force and guarantee from international organizations for 
Population of Daglyg Garabagh. The final status of  Daglyg Garabagh may be 
defined in the future through implementation of mechanism, indicated for example 
in peace agreement. In this case, Daglyg Garabagh may provide itself by interim 
status recognized at international level, continue activity and keep most of the 
institutions, because it will not be regarded as "illegal" since it will not violate 
sovereignty of Azerbaijan. Elections supervised by international organizations may 
be held for population. Defense army may turn into National Guard. Trading may 
lead to collection of custom duties. Donors may implement various programs and 
may issue travel programs recognized at international level". Certainly, all this is 
not discussed due to unconformity of this to official position of Azerbaijan, but this 
can be demanded from us in the near future. Position of Azerbaijan up now 
consists in the following: first of all, further occupation must be stopped, armed 
forces had to be withdrawn and IDPs have to return to their homelands. At the same 
time, despite that it is not possible to give Daglyg Garabagh any status, which violates 
territorial integrity of Azerbaijan, it is not the exception that Azerbaijan will make 
compromises in versions which will create de facto independence of Daglyg Garabagh. 
Azerbaijan government and community being unprepared for preventive measures had 
to use at least harmless actions in version of displacement and try to limit activity of 
Armenians in international arena. Resolution adopted by European Parliament about 
destruction of Armenian tombs in Nakhchivan is the clear example of our slug-
gishness. That is why implementation of the following measures may create conditions 
favorable for any progress in the future: 
1. First of all, urgent measures must be undertaken to restore status of 
refugees of Azerbaijani withdrawn from territory of Armenian SSR by support of 
Soviet Army, their former identification cards must be recognized as juridical 
documents. Autonomous Republic of Azerbaijani in Armenia must be established 
with its Parliament, head of state elected by parliament and the government in exile 
has to be formed. For activity of official institutions of this country the 
headquarters has to be formed in one of large cities of Azerbaijan and diplomatic 
44 
 
efforts must be directed for its trans-formation into subject of international law. 
Representatives of Azerbaijani in Armenia have to require from the USA to show 
its sincerity as an ally and register them similar to registering of Daglyg Garabagh 
Republic as a non-governmental organization at Ministry of Justice of the USA. 
Refusal of the USA to do this will display its intercession or in worse case, the USA 
will be forced to refuse from registering of Daglyg Garabagh representation as a 
non-governmental organization. 
2. In the Parliament a special group has to be formed from MPs elected 
from occupied territories. Participation of legitimate representatives of whole 
occupied territories of Garabagh instead of those of Daglyg Garabagh, which status 
was liquidated, may also remove the fact of Azerbaijan's Parliament being outside 
the negotiation process. Since Daglyg Garabagh problem is not discussed in Milli 
Majlis for a long period of time this allowed bureaucratic minds to lead the 
situation and limited discussion of new proposals. 
3. If it will be impossible to stay neutral if there will be the USA-Iran 
conflict in any form, Azerbaijan similar to Armenia, has to attempt to become an 
ally of the USA. This is because to take hostile position towards neighbor countries 
as Russia and Iran in favor of the USA may create good opportunities for Armenia 
in Daglyg Garabagh dispute. 
4. In the near future Azerbaijan has to require withdrawal of France 
from co-chairing in Minsk group of OSCE and replace it by Turkey. 
5. Serious changes in army have to be undertaken in Azerbaijan in order 
to struggle with cases of corruption. It would be naive to think that higher army 
budget will make the army stronger, since now army is the structure where 
corruption is widely spread. Increasing political seismicity of South Caucasus 
region show that the losses will be minimal in a country, which is more prepared to 
the earthquake. Daglyg Garabagh game: Neither white figures nor bracks start. It is 
not known who plays this game. Everyone knows one thing: Azerbaijan society 
indifferently walks around the chessboard. The 
lo
ser will be known soon. 
 
Feliks Tsertsvadze 
PROBLEM OF "GENOCIDE OF  
ARMENIANS": HISTORY AND FALSIFICATIONS 
 
For the past period the international community is feverishly imposed by a 
hastily fabricated new version of "genocide of Armenians" of 1915. First of all, 
time interval of this tragedy is sharply extended - from one to 45 years. Secondly, 
they decided (repeatedly!) to increase number of those killed and indicated it as 2 
millions. To make their arguments more weighty they decided to quote 
such/'authoritative person" as Adolf Hitler. 
And nobody is concerned that Armenians put forth another fabrication. 
45 
 
On April 22, 2005 Yuriy Tsaturyan in his paper "It must not be forget!" ("New 
Russian word" - NRW) states: "...in 1915 in Ottoman Turkey over 1.5 million of 
Armenians were killed...". He confirmed his own pretentions by a statement of 
Hitler made before his invasion into Poland. After 4 days while broadcasting of 
"Ricochet" program of Russian radio in New-York the quote of Hitler was 
mentioned by other person, which was introduced to listeners as Armenia's 
Ambassador in UN Martirosyan. He explained that "genocide of Armenians" took 
place from 1896 to 1915 and 1.5 million of Armenians were killed through that 
period. Both Tsaturyan and Martirosyan are remorseless cheaters. So called quote 
of Hitler "...anyway who does remember today about extermination of 
Armenians?..." - is a deliberate lie. This lie was unmasked many years ago at the 
faculty of political sciences in Ankara, as well as by works of American historians, 
in particular Khif Leuri in book "Congress of the USA and Adolf Hitler about 
Armenians". Hitler never told anything like that. Newspaper "Armenian reporter" 
was forced to admit this on August 2 of 1984. 
Mister Pariants in newspaper "In a new light" (INL) with reference to Kris 
Zakyan, the head of department for relations with press of Eastern-American 
eparchy of Armenian Church, in his paper "90 years of mourning" published April 
22-28, 2005 emphasized that 1.5 millions of Armenians became "...victims of 
tragedy from 1915 to 1923". Penitential advertisements placed in various papers 
and invited to the meeting on April 24 of 2005 in Times Square in New York 
stated also that "...from 1915 to 1923 there were killed 1500000 Armenians...". 
Such hubbubs of lobby confirm the fact that insistent statements of 
deceptiv: Armenian propaganda about death of 1.5 mln. Armenians in 1915 is not 
the other thing than bluff. Motivation of Armenian propagandists and lobbyist is 
clear to any sensitive person, especially to analysts: they intend to make as events of 
equal value of 1915 and Holocaust of Jews and then claim reparations in billions 
from Turkey. It is no doubts how these milliards of dollars or Euros will be spent-it 
will be distributed among "themselves". 
A worldwide speculation is prepared and the memory of innocent victims 
of Moslem and Christian population of Turkey in 1915 is just the token money in 
hands of these dealers of politics and finances. And they even do not hide this. For 
example, mentioned Armenian lobbyist Pariyants, earlier worked in pro-Armenian 
newspaper INL, approximately a year ago from pages of this newspaper offered a 
bribe to authorities of the United States. He wrote: "...over a million of American 
Armenians - quite a powerful lobby. New Republic (i.e. Republic of Armenia - 
note of the author), created on remnants of Soviet Union, for the last years has 
received from the USA the significant aid - approximately 42 dollars per capita, 
US $ 126 millions per year - note of author)... Armenians would gladly change 
these dollars for official acknowledgement of genocide...". I wonder whether in 
White House and Capitol Hill they know about this impudent offer? Do President 
46 
 
G.Bush, senators, congressmen know that Armenian lobby outsj okenly discuss 
possibility of their bribery by money of American taxpayers. I think that they have 
to know. In this respect, I already wrote a letter to our President G.Bush in May of 
last year, but unfortunately did not receive an answer. Somc members of Senate 
and House of Representatives have also been informed. But regrettably, they 
played deaf to this.  
While detailed consideration of tragic events of 1915 it became obvious 
that in mass killings of civil citizens of Turkey irrespective to their ethnicity the 
blame is firstly with Russia, secondly with England and Turkish authorities held 
only the third position. Russia was first to deport civil Moslem population on 
territory of Turkey across the front line. It also assisted to intensive activity of 
many Armenian armed forces on both sides of front line. As a result of fighting of 
many Armenian armed forces - of 2295705 people of civil Moslem population in 
eastern Anatolian provinces as Trabson, Erzindjan, Erzerum, Van, Bitlis and others 
the human losses constituted 1600000 people. In other words 1 million 600 
thousand Moslems were killed or lost. And blame for this rests with Russians and 
Armenians. The England actively armed and instigated Armenians to revolt against 
Turkish authorities, but in most heavy and tragic moments for Armenians it is just 
betrayed them and left them to the mercy of fate hiding behind the phrasing of 
type: Britain has no constant friends, it has constant interests. 
Turks struggled as they could and just copied actions of members of 
Entente. Proceeding from military viewpoints the Turkish authorities deported 
from battlefields the civil Armenian population. 700000 Armenians were deported, 
300000 of these died. Turkish authorities are responsible for their death because 
they had to provide necessary safety measures, feeding and medical aid. Figure, 
which reflects a number of victims of civil Armenian population during 
deportation is based on many independent researches, including that of Americans, 
and includes a number of lost, i.e. those who flee, crossed Russian border and 
settled in Armenian SSR. The figure of 300 thousand coincides with data indicated 
by Armenian delegation on December 11 of 1918 in letter to Foreign Ministry of 
France, compiled exceptionally by data of Armenian sources. Consequently, it must 
be considered as exact. It is clear now why repeated initiatives of Turkey to create 
commission for so-called problem of genocide of 1915 and an nounce the truth are 
blocked by Armenians and its European allies - France and others: they know 
sensational data that losses of Turkish are much higher than that of Armenians and 
that tragedy of 1915 could not be classified as genocide of Armenians since Tur-
kish authorities had no intentions to exterminate civil Armenian population. On the 
contrary, they held investigation of tragic deaths of Armenian population, found 
those guilty and prosecuted about two thousand officials for crimes against civil 
Armenian population. Is it possible to talk about genocide in this case? Compare 
this to genocide implemented by Germans against Jews. Can anyone imagine at 
47 
 
least a single fact of investigation initiated by Hitler in respect of killing of a Jew, 
prosecuting them by SS and execution? May be, Gorbachev - the Nobel Prize 
Laureate investigated genocide in Baku? Or the first Russian President Yeltsin with 
his Armenian partner Kocharyan did investigation of genocide in Khodjaly? 
Besides, neither Armenians nor other nation has any juridical, legal and 
other bases for making any claims to Turkey for events of 1915 and eventsfrom 
1915 to 1921. All mutual pretensions were once and forever resolved by 
agreements of 1921, which was signed by Armenians also. The international 
community is unaware of all this. Turkey keeps silence, because scrupulously keeps 
clauses of agreement of 1921, which are in force today. 
Screechy and insistent propaganda of Armenians backed by powerful 
Armenian lobby with total absence of resistance from someone, has increased 
figures of their human losses in 1915 from 300 thousand to 2 millions and intend to 
increase it further. It is time to stop them, gentlemen. From time to time opponents 
blame me for repeating Turkish or Azerbaijani propaganda. First of all, I do not 
consider the phrase "Turkish propaganda" as something indecent. Especially on the 
background of Armenian propaganda, which by its organization and skills lefts far 
behind both Turks and Azeri. Thus, in April of 1999 Armenian propaganda (ArP) 
through the INL announced to the world that genocide of 1915 claimed lives of 1.8 
mln. Armenians. In April of 2005 ArP through the same INL decreased this figure 
to 1.5 mln./i.e. 300 thousand Armenians were revived by version of ArP. However, 
after several days almost revived 300 thousand Armenians died again. In addition, 
they took with themselves additional 200 thousand compatriots (the author has all 
original issues of indicated newspapers and may display it to anyone). 
It is no doubt that we deal with another exaggeration, another fabrication 
of Armenians based on blasphemous jugglery by hundreds of thousands of 
innocent spirits of Armenians. Now, wet us calmly and without emotions make it 
clear what did happen in Turkey in 1915? Version of ArP is known. As if a number 
of victims of civil population by data of various Armenian sources vary within the 
ranges from 800 thousand to 2 millions. Due to this it is demanded from Turkey to 
acknowledge the genocide of Armenians and even made it as condition of its 
entering into European Union. France and Russia have already recognized 
genocide of Armenians in Turkey. At present there is an intensive pressure of 
lobby to Congress and Government of the USA. 
However, real events of 1915 totally refute version of Armenians. It is 
clearly not true since it contains the long suite of falsifications and manipulations. 
Judge by yourselves: On November 1, 1914 Turkey entered into the war, in 
December its troops on the Eastern front started attack towards Kars. However, 
near Sarykamysh Turks defeated, the front stabilized a little further to the east from 
Erzerum. In January of 1915 Russian forces attacked in South front, from Persian 
border and round to Ararat. Once it became known, Armenian so-called civil 
48 
 
population held a rebdlionlin Turkish province of Van. By February of 1915 
Armenian population of a whole Eastern Anatolia joined to rebellion. Turkish 
governor fled from Van and independent Armenian state was announced there. 
Beatings and withdrawal of Moslem population from Eastern Anatolia were very 
extensive.    
Armenians from all Turkey were called together to Vaa and other 
settlements. Until the rebellion, Armenian population in Van constituted 33.8 
thousand people or 42 % of a total number, by start of March there were 300 
thousand Armenians. Situation deteriorated because a large number of Armenian 
servicemen deserted from Turkish army with their weapons and joined to rebels 
and units of Russian army. Their number constantly increased and reached 
approximated 15 thousand. 
All these actions of Armenian population can be regarded only as 
unfaithful and treacherous. All irrefutable facts and documents evidence that in 
August of 1914 prior to Turkey's involvement with war there was a congress of 
"Dashnaktsutun" party in Erzerum. At the congress it was announced that: "party 
desire that Turkey would stay neutral and party is ready to cooperate with Gov-
ernment in order to avoid war. However, if war starts, then members of 
"Dashnaktsutun" party similar to other Armenians, will implement their duty as 
citizens...". It is impossible to refute this fact. Armenians vowed for fidelity to 
Turkey, which citizens they were. But when the war started, Armenians supported 
enemies of Turkey - Russia, England and others. The leaders of Armenian section 
in Turkey, members of dashnaks party, which did not keep their pledge to be loyal 
to Turkey, set an example to ordinary members of Armenian community. This is 
acknowledged by Armenian historian Papazyan, who wrote in particular: "they 
(Armenians) were not aware of danger... Any caution was thrown away...there was 
a call for Armenian volunteers to fight against Turks on Caucasus front...". 
Historian Rafael de Nogales underlined that example of treachery came 
from rulers of community. He wrote: "When military operations started, deputy 
Pasdermadjyan from Erzerum in Ottoman Assembly took a side of enemy together 
with all his Armenian soldiers and officers of the 3
rd
 Turkish Army... They put on 
fire villages and mercilessly killed all civil Moslems...". 
Lord Bris, who later became one of the most active accusers of Turks 
during the campaign about "genocide", jointly with "Friends of Armenia" collected 
money in London and armed Armenian volunteers, which took part in bloodshed in 
Van. After extermination of Turkish population, they gave Russians everything rest 
to Russian forces...” 
Except for eastern Anatolia the Armenian population of Zeytun region in 
Kilikia also revolted. In February of 1915 the Ambassador of Russia in London 
proposed Englishmen to send arms to about 2 thousand rebels. And this is in the 
back front of Turkish army, which held defense in Western front in Daradell 
49 
 
region. In this situation when revolt in Eastern Anatolia started to spread over 
central province \ it would be absurd to blame Turkish authorities for taidng 
measures for safety of its army and loyal civil population. 
Activists from ArP clearly understand this. That is why, talking about 
various facts, they carefully silence Armenian re'/pits.Vhese events preceded 
counter- measures of Turkish authorities, which later with activity of ArP named as 
genocide, although Turkey through 1908-1915, in my opinion, was more 
democratic state than modem Israel. 
Israel up to now can not make a decision to give Arabs the rights equal 
with Jews. Arabs are not allowed into the army of Israel. However, lurks regarded 
Armenians as citizens with equal rights. They served in the army. They were 
trusted and given arms. This, once again refutes statement of ArP about mythic 
plan on extermination of Armenians. There was no such plan. No one will give 
arms to the nation, which one intends to exterminate. Armenian officers served at 
all levels of Turkish army. Armenians dominated in the spheres of finances and 
trade. Armenian population had their own advocates, physicians, lawyer, scientists 
and bishops. Thousands of Armenian churches, schools, libraries, newspapers, 
publishing houses were functioning in Turkey and books were published in 
Armenian. By March of 1915 Turkish authorities had serious bases not to trust to 
Armenians and in Armenian community a plot w? * planned against Turkey. 
According to circular note of General Headquarters (GH) N 8682, 
Armenian servicemen were disarmed, but in regular army they were left in 
quartermaster and_engineering troops. This measure is evaluated by ArP as a first 
step to genocide. They say that Armenians were disarmed in order to kill them 
easily. This is a very naive argument, that at level of kindergarten. If Armenians at 
first were armed, and were disarmed only 4 months after the start of war, 
consequently, there were serious events, which convinced GH of Turkish army in 
treachery of Armenian servicemen, their violation of oath, mass desertion with 
arms, ammunition and military supplies. 
It must be noted that circular note of GH stated, in particular: 
"Everywhere, where there is no aggression acts, it is necessary to control situation 
and refrain from any actions, which may depress Armenian population... and not to 
drive them to despair...". This and other similar documents adopted by authorities 
of Turkey in February-March of 1915, could not characterize its actions as 
preparation to extermination. 
But ArP with insistency, which has to be applied for better things, 
continues to convince international community that there was some secret plan of 
extermination of Armenians. Their aims have been explained at the beginning of 
the paper. 
 
 
50 
 
Firdovsiyya Ahmedova 
THE PROBLEM OF STATUS OF DAGLYG 
GARABAGH: HISTORY AND MODERNITY 
 
Creation of Armenian state in Caucasus became a problem displayed in 
the plain of international confrontation. From viewpoint of Azerbaijan's statehood, 
integrity of its territory the ultimately dangerous compromise was giving to 
Armenians of Yerevan as a political center for establishment of Armenian 
federation. However, Armenians did not satisfied by gaining a state in historic re-
gions of Azerbaijan and initiated bloody conflicts by making new claims. 
Armenians lived in mountain portion of Garabagh attempted to announce 
"independence" on July 22 of 1918. On July 31 the head of Azerbaijan government 
Fatali khan Khoyski wrote to Mahammad Amin Rasulzadeh, the chairman of 
Azerbaijan delegation in Istanbul, that if Armenians will claim Garabagh, then he 
had to refuse to giv Irevan and part of Gazakh district. Despite that according to 
agreement with Armenians, Irevan was officially given to Armenia providing that 
they will not claim other territories of Azerbaijan, they appropriated Zangezur and 
other territories of Azerbaijan, continuously expressed claims for Garabagh and 
continued armed aggression. 
According to map given by Armenians to Enver Pasha their claims 
covered Surmeli, Nakhchyvan, Ahalkalak, Echmiadzin, Irevan, Borchaly, Gazakh, 
Garabagh, Zangezur and Ordubad regions. 
At the stages when foreign military forces had also a political power in 
Azerbaijan, Armenians expressed their claims for Garabagh. By support of 
Ottoman military forces, Baku fall under the rule of Democratic Republic, armed 
Armenians in Garabagh prayed for mercy from representatives of Turkish 
authorities and surrendered. Greeting Azerbaijani troops with bread-and-salt, Ar-
menian population in towns and villages of Garabagh, adopted subjection to 
Azerbaijan, voluntarily returned arms and expressed readiness to obey to all orders 
of Azerbaijan government. After the defeat of Turkey in World War II, its troops 
were forced to leave the region and English military units were deployed in South 
Caucasus under the commanding of V.Tomson, English general-governance was 
established in Baku and this revived Christian solidarity, which immediately was 
shown in position of Armenians. In December of 1918 Andronik started to spread 
rumors that "Garabagh is given to his power by Englishmen". On December 22, the 
General Thomson refuted this speculation. Starting from fall of 1918 the factor of 
foreign forces is shown in political plain. Armenian separatists, understanding that 
political and diplomatic activity will not give required results, continued ethnic 
cleansing policy against Azerbaijani. In order to prevent mass extermination of its 
population Internal Ministry of Azerbaijan Democratic Republic in January of 
1919 proposed to establish temporal general-governance covering Shusha, 
51 
 
Jevanshir, Jebrail and Zangezur districts. On January 15 of 1919 Azerbaijani 
government issued an order to establish temporal general-governance. Khosrov bey 
Sul-tanov on January 29 was assigned as General-Governor. In this situation 
Armenian government outspokenly claimed mountain portion of Garabagh. 
Despite that this was unexpected for Azerbaijan government, it considered this 
absolutely baseless and in a response note had stated that Garabagh is historically 
the inseparable part of Azerbaijan. Armenia's protest against establishment of 
general-governance in Garabagh was evaluated as an attempt to break sovereignty 
of Azerbaijan. From beginning of 1919 between two states, Azerbaijan and 
Armenia, official correspondence took place in respect of mountain areas of 
Garabagh. 
Armenian government in the beginning of 1919 considers it useful to 
apply principle of "historic right" and started to use government forces and various 
armed units for bloody clashes. In official note of Azerbaijan government it was 
stated that Armenian government claims for Garabagh is baseless from historic, 
economic and ethnographic viewpoint. Despite that Armenian government 
attempted to influence Azerbaijan by appealing to officials of Great Britain army 
units in Caucasus (Uoker, Thomson and others), their attempts gave no results. 
Colonel Shatelwort went to Shusha and demanded from Armenians to obey 
Azerbaijan Democratic Republic. Nevertheless, Armenians continued their 
separatist activity. In the end of April of 1919 at their congress they refused to 
recognize general-governance in Garabagh. Adoption of such resolutions was 
mostly influenced by destructive activity of Armenia's government and its 
representatives in Daglyg Garabagh. Foreign mediators for the first time gained 
experience in settlement of territorial disputes emerged between republics in 
Caucasus. Mainly the Great Britain and the USA were actively involved and 
proposed various projects. General Thomson on May 5 of 1919 announced that he 
had signed an order to send to exile those who involved with separatist activity. On 
June 5 reactionary Armenians accompanied by representatives of English 
commander were exile'i from Shusha to Tiflis. At the meeting held on June 6 in 
Armenians populated district of Shusha Armenians declared that they recognize the 
government of Azerbaijan. Armenians accepting principles of general-governance 
started to hold 'liscusrions. By signing agreement with Azerbaijan's government on 
August 15 of 1919 Armenians recognized areas of their location as territories of 
Azerbaijan. It was envisaged to give Armenians of Garabagh the "cultural 
autonomy". It must be noted that through that period the foreigners in capacity of 
representatives of organizations might travel to Shusha without acknowledging 
Azerbaijani government and without presenting any mandate to local officials. 
After recognition of Azerbaijan government by Armenians of Daglyg Garabagh, 
Azerbaijan Foreign Ministry expressed its objection to arrival of Americans to 
Garabagh without relative letter. 
52 
 
In spring of 1919 Armenians again attempted to make an agreement based 
on principle of territory exchange. Despite that in spring of 1918 Armenians agreed 
not to claim Garabagh providing that they will own Irevan, one year later they 
prepared bases for claiming for Sherur-Nakhchyvan area in exchange for 
considering Garabagh as territory of Azerbaijan. To fulfill their claim for 
Azerbaijan territories, the Armenian government speri finances along with military 
intervention. At the enu of .1919 Armenian government rendered 19 million 
manats for "liberation" of Daglyg Garabagh. 
In,order to distract attention of international community from opinion 
about forced annexation, Armenians (at official and non-official level) pretended 
that the "conflict" is caused by desire of Armenians living in Azerbaijan for self-
determination. The similar claim was expressed by Armenians living in Georgia. 
Republic of Armenia speculating on issue of national self-determination (official 
support, but in fact, it is known from historic and modern experience as instigation) 
of Armenians densely populated territories of neighbor countries (irrespective of 
how this was developed historically) in fact intends to create independent or half-
independent Armenian states as a stripe embracing it, in order to make easy their 
later occupation. 
Conflict emerged within the borders of Daglyg Garabagh and claims 
aimed at a same target are also traditional tactic moves of Armenians. Resolution 
of "Daglyg Garabagh conflict" apart from history of Armenia's invasions into 
Azerbaijan could not be objective. Foreign Affairs Minister of Azerbaijan 
F.Khoyski considered as incorrect the analysis of events in Garabagh without 
studies of processes in South Caucasus, and predicted that if appropriate measures 
would not be taken the bloodshed may repeat.,, 
The fact of violent withdrawal of all Azeroaijani from their ancient lands in 
Armenia as a result of bloody events due to claiming of Daglyg Garabagh at the 
end of  XX century is out of sigiit of international community. The issue of 
moving back of Azerbaijani, who densely populated a vast area in Armenia (on 
ancient lands of Azerbaijani), and the issue of giving them autonomy is not the 
subject of negotiations at all. Since the last stage of Armenian-Azerbaijan conflict 
is the part of process, this issue "does not draw attention" of international 
mediators. Presentation of Azerbaijan territories occupied by Armenians around of 
Daglyg Garabagh (which also provide joining of Daglyg Garabagh to Armenian 
Republic) as a safety stripe is the confession of Armenian as aggressor country. It 
is advantageous for Armenians, which occupied Azerbaijan's territories by mass 
killings and violence, to discuss the conflict at international arena: in aim to gain 
better results than regarding it as internal affair of Azerbaijan and at this stage re-
53 
 
solve the problem according to international standards, i.e. in civilized manner, 
without allowing Azerbaijan to use force and create reliable image of international 
law after their bloody and merciless behavior. 
At present due to various versions of peaceful resolution of "Daglyg Garabagh 
conflict" the contradiction of territorial integrity and self-determination principles is 
included into discussions.  
As Minsk group of OCSE announced Azerbaijan's agreement on holding a 
referendum on status of Daglyg Garabagh will be a real compensation to Armenia 
for liberation of occupied territories of Azerbaijan. Resolution of the conflict, more 
precisely proposal to held referendum on issue of status of Daglyg Garabagh 
caused ambiguous attitude in Azerbaijan. Opposite positions of official and 
unofficial institutions and individuals once more proves the existence of potential 
power, which may influence resolution of the problem. 
Irrespective of autonomous status form of Daglyg Garabagh within 
Azerbaijan, the considerion as the only way for definition of its status the 
referendum held on territory of whole Azerbaijan, and consider as unacceptable the 
establishment of autonomy at Presidential or government structures level 
contradict to historic documents related to initial autonomy status. In 1921-23 
resolutions adopted while discussions related to Armenian population of Daglyg 
Garabagh were implemented by government structures or institutions of party. On 
July 7 of 1923 by Azerbaijan Central Executive Committee's decree Daglyg 
Garabagh Autonomous Republic was established. Is it possible to discuss the form 
and essence of autonomy, which was not established by the referendum. It would 
not be correct to oppose the mechanism of referendum. Established by resolution of 
government structure and later liquidated by government structure also, the 
autonomous region-may be governed only by supreme government structures. 
Taking into account principles of democratic rule and taking as a basis the present 
Constitution, expression of opinion by every citizen of Azerbaijan in respect of 
destiny of the region, which is the portion of their own country, is quite normal. 
But forms of referendum make the process as useless. Prior to analyzing of present 
versions let us consider the history related namely to this subject. It is possible to 
make conclusions according to historic experience through the period of Soviet 
rule, starting from discussions held between two Caucasian countries to official 
discussions related to definition of the region status. After Soviet Russia invasion 
into Azerbaijan, the Bolsheviks thought it as important to stop the "game of inde-
pendent republics". "Elasticity" of principle of Soviet autonomy created possibility 
for development of national statehood. One of the forms of "elastic autonomy" was 
establishment of DGAR. This territory was preserved for Azerbaijan in all versions 
54 
 
during discussions held by Bolshevik authorities of Russia in 1920. Discussion of 
Garabagh problem at the highest official level resulted in giving of autonomy to 
upper part of Garabagh with administrative center of the region in town Shusha. 
Modern Armenian politicians considered as the only "juridical basis" the rtsolution 
of Caucasus Bureau of RK(b)P Central Committee dated from July 5 of 1921 on 
"Inclusion of Daglyg Garabagh into Azerbaijan", could be advised
4
 to remember at 
least Kurekchay agreement of 1805, even without studying many thousand years of 
Azerbaijan history and culture. On July 4 of 1921 the forms of plebiscite for status 
of Garabagh were also discussed. Armenians and their supporters insisted that 
plebiscite must be held only among Armenians without participation of Garabagh 
Azerbaijani. This opinion was due to a small number of Armenians in Garabagh. 
However, Azerbaijan in 1921 proposed to held polls with participation of all 
Azerbaijani and Armenian population of Garabagh and refused to hold opinion poll 
among Armenians only. Another round of separatism is intensified in the region 
where number and influence of Armenian population is increased, policy of "ethnic 
cleansing" implemented against Azerbaijani and occupation of 7 regions of 
Azerbaijan named as "safety stripe", and Khodjaly tragedy, all this makes it 
possible to derive results of referendum by 100% certainty. In 1989 in 
contradiction to Constitution of USSR and international law the DGAR was 
withdrawn from subordination of Azerbaijan and given to subordination of Special 
Governing Committee (SGC), which subordinated directly to Federation Center. 
Another stage is annexation of DGAR to Armenia and liquidation of SGC. The 
initial version of this scenario was proposed in 1920: join to "Russia through 
Baku". After withdrawal from subordination of Azerbaijan it would be easy to give 
the region to Armenia. Principle of self-determination does not mean provision of 
territorial adjoining to "protector" country. Positions of parties in respect of 
principles proposed for resolution of Daglyg Garabagh problem will depend on 
their interests. Disarmament in the region, referendum, temporary status of Daglyg 
Garabagh, deployment of peacekeeping forces, creation of a joint commission, 
refuse from use of force and threats, etc. are principles which discussed in relation 
with Garabagh dispute through 1918-1923. These principles proposed for the last 
90 years reveal the rich classification which is distinguishing and repeated at 
various stages. Historic cases of application of these principles for similar 
situations and motives will be very useful from point of view of prediction of 
further events and results. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
55 
 
Gasym Hajiyev 
MATERIAL CULTURE OF GARABAGH IS INSEPARABLE 
PART OF MATERIAL AND SPIRITUAL CULTURE OF AZERBAIJAN 
 
It is about two hundred years since Armenians have turned Garabagh into 
the arena of tragic events, falsifying our history from time to time, fabricate their 
own history and force Azerbaijani to flee their homelands. Armenian "historians", 
which turned into a tool in the hands of policy-makers, collect "facts proving" 
belonging of Garabagh to Armenians, prepare "juridical documents" and try to 
legally substantiate occupation of territories by Armenians. 
Armenian ideologists and "archaeologists" display Alban Christian 
monuments in Garabagh as "Armenian monuments" and even attempt to prove the 
whole area between rivers Kur and Araz as "ancient Armenian territories". In fact, 
then even were no dense population of Armenians in Garabagh and across the 
whole Caucasus until the XIX century and that is why tfco&e monuments could not 
belong to them. 
Examples of material culture and numismatic samples found during 
archaeological researches in Daglyg Garabagh, namely in Khankendi, Aghdere, 
Khojavend, Shusha, and in lowlands of Garabagh, such as Barda, Terter, Aghdam, 
Aghjabedi, Fizuli, Beylagan, as well as in Lachin and Kelbajar reflect ancient 
material culture of Garabagh, its ethnic composition and culture, social-economic 
development and lifestyle. 
In the beginning of the V century in Albania the Alban alphabet had been 
developed in a new form and it is considered that the alphabet was applied in 
official documents. Due to this, education centers were created and one of the 
major centers was Barda -the ancient town of Garabagh. 
After advance of Christianity to Albania in the early Middle Ages (IV 
century) in Garabagh, which is the ancient territory of Azerbaijan, Albanian 
Christian monuments were built, similar to those characterizing Christian 
architecture of the IV-VII century. Amaras in Aghdere (in ancient Turkish this 
word means "white hun"), Govurgala in Aghdam (non-Moslem fort - fort belonged 
to Alban Christianity - G.H), Alban Christian temples in Gebele (Beyuk Amidli 
village), in Lachin (Agoglan), in Kelbajar (Hashavend (Khotavend), Chahartag), in 
Zagatala (Kilsedag, Mamrukh) and in Gakh (Lekit), as well as Alban Church in 
Khojavend (Sos village), a building with basilica in Tezekend settlement of 
Aghjabedi, a temple with three half-circled apsidal in Barda are characteristic 
monuments of architecture, history and culture of Garabagh region of Azerbaijan. 
In medieval sources there are notes which reflect existence and 
preservation of Alban Christian temples even after the Islam had been spread 
across Azerbaijan. 
In spite that through various periods the religions dominated on the 
56 
 
territory of Garabagh had changed, population preserved specifics of traditions and 
national character. However, this was not the same everywhere. 
Existence of various religions in Garabagh seriously influenced the social 
life. This played a certain role in lifestyle, spiritual life, as well as in town-building 
- construction of social and religious buildings, architectural styles, structure and 
planning of towns. The large part of population in the region in distinction to 
Armenians migrated here, according to their origin, language and culture consisted 
of ethnic groups of Turkic origin which for thousands of years lived in areas 
between Great Caucasus and Araz river and belonged to Caucasian group of 
languages. Depending on historic time interval there were various lifestyles, 
religious ideology and due to this, distinctive features of spiritual culture emerged. 
In distinction to other regions of Azerbaijan, existence of various religions in 
Garabagh led to serious changes occurred long after. When Alban Christianity was 
replaced by Islam, the fact of presence of autochthon Alban Christians in mountain 
areas of Garabagh was used for move of a large number of Armenian families to 
the region in the XIX century. They turned the local Christian Albans to Grigorian 
confession, assimilated, named themselves as hayks and described the area as a 
"part of country of hayks". Once taking a refuge in Azerbaijan, Armenians for the 
last period named Azerbaijan's territories as "Eastern Armenia", show these as part 
of "Great Armenia", regard this region as their ancient Motherland and fabricated 
false history of "Armenian cultural settlements". Researches show that material and 
spiritual culture of Upper (Daglyg) Garabagh is part of Azerbaijan culture and 
contradictious viewpoints are groundless. 
 
Gorkhmaz Mustafayev 
ADMINISTRATIVE UNITS AND POPULATION OF GARABAGH 
AND GANDJA KHANATES AT THE BEGINNING OF XIX CENTURY 
 
Among khanates emerged on the territory of North Azerbaijan the 
khanates of Garbagh and Gandja had a special place. These khanates were created 
on the territory of Garabagh (Gandja) bey-lerbeylik, which was one of the 
significant administrative-territorial units of Sefevi empire. 
Period of khanates is one of the most interesting and important stages in 
history of Azerbaijan. Despite that various aspects of history of Azerbaijan 
khanates have been studied by scientists, researches on demographic processes in 
khanates constitute the new trend in historic studies fulfilled in Azerbaijan. 
Demography of population embraces diverse, wide spectra of problems - dynamics 
of population number, ethnic and religious composition, allocation, migration, 
immigration, etc. Thorough studies of these problems in Garabagh and Gandja 
khanates have a crucial value from viewpoint of enlightening of many dark points 
in history of khanates in Azerbaijan. 
57 
 
At the start of XIX century after Aleksander I came to power in Russia the 
policy towards South Caucasus seriously changed. Russian empire started the 
policy of open aggression of Azerbaijan khanates. Assignment of P.Sisyanov as a 
General Commander of Caucasus in 1803 initiated the most rude military policy 
against nations in Caucasus. All battles of the I Russian-Iran war took place on the 
territory of Azerbaijan and this left deep trace in dynamics of population number 
and demographic processes. Soon after the start of war Russia increased the 
pressure over Azerbaijan, including Garabagh khanates. Under these circumstances 
as the only way out Ibra-himkhalil khan signed Kurekchay agreement on May 14 
of 1805 and thus was forced to accept protection of Russia. By signing this 
agreement the integrity of Garbagh khanate was guaranteed by emperor. Thus, 
Garabagh khanate lost its independence and Russian forces were deployed in 
Shusha. Russian troops, which came to "protect" population of Garabagh, under 
the supervision of Major Lisanevich in 1806 killed Ibrahimkhalil khan together 
with other people close to him (17 people). September 13 of 1806 decree of 
Aleksander I assigned Mehdigulu aga as a khan of Garabagh. After the occupation 
of Azerbaijan's northern khanates a new governing body "Rule in Moslem 
provinces" has been established in 1813 for governing in Moslem provinces with 
its headquarter in Garabagh. Establishment of this body is considered as a 
significant measure undertaken for liquidation of Azerbaijan khanates and 
especially of Garabagh khanate. It is the interesting fact that for position of 
"Moslem provinces ruler" the Christian fanatic knyaz Madatov was assigned. 
Madatov, being the "right hand" of Yermolov, turned into the "leading landowner" 
in Garabagh. It is known that Azerbaijan khanates were divided administratively 
into mahals, mahals into the towns and villages. One year after the liquidation of 
Garabagh khanate in 1823, officials of Russian empire Mogilevsky and Yermolov 
in there reports described Garabagh khanate as consisted of 21 mahals - Sisyan, 
Demirchi-hasanly, Kupara, Bergushad, Vahabyurd, Kebirli, Tativ, Jevanshir, 
Talysh, Khachin, Kolany, Chelabyurd, Khirdapara, Dizakh, Pu-syan, Dizag 
Jevanshiri, Otuziki, Iyirmidord, Garachorly, Varanda, Dizakh and Adjanan-rurk. 
Documents of 1727 and 1823 show that administrative units of Garabagh 
undergone some changes in the course of time. According to description of 1823 
only Shusha town was shown on the territory of Garabagh. Evidently, town of 
Barda shown in documents of 1727 later had lost its value. However, while 
analyzing cameral descriptions of 1823 some mistakes done by Russian officials 
were identified. For example, final table displays that 18563 families Were 
registered in Garabagh. If 139 families from Jebrail registered later will be added 
to that figure it will reach 18702 families. Analyzing data of cameral accounting 
from year 1823 it cm be inferred that in fact 18769 families lived. 
However even most correct accounting and cameral descriptions do not 
allow precisely define population number in Garabagh khanate. This was also 
58 
 
confirmed by empire's officials. Mogi-levsky and Yermolov in their report N22 
sent on May 2, 1823 indicated: "Despite our efforts we are unable to precisely 
evaluate population number of Garabagh... Population from one mahal is allocated 
across the other mahals". It can be seen that real number of population in Garabagh 
was higher than that indicated earlier. 
According to "Notebook thoroughly describing Gandja-Garabagh 
province" there were of 12 mahals in 1727 within Gandja khanate. These are 
Gandjabasar, Sungurabad, Beyuk Kurekbasan, Kichik Kurekbasan, Dangy, 
Garagaya, Turkanlar, Yukhary Zeyem, Ashaghy Zeyem, Shemkurbasan and 
Khylkhyna. From indicated mahals Gandjabasan. Sungurabad, Beyuk Kurekbasan, 
Kichik Kurekbasan, Kurekbasan and Dangy mahals wholly were within Gandja 
khanate while Garagaya, Turkanlar, Yukhary Zeyem, Ashaghy Zejyem, 
Shemkurbasan and Khylkhyna mahals partially were belonged to Gandja. 
Documents reflecting accounting after occupation of Gandja khanate by 
Russia give more accurate data about administrative division of khanate at the start 
of XX century. Cameral description held in Yelizavetpol in February of 1807 by 
officials of empire indicates mahals of Gandja, Kurekbasan, Shamkhor, Samukh 
and Ayrym. Documents reflecting cameral accounting in Yelizavetpol district in 
1817 show 5 mahals here: Gandja, Kurekbasan, Shamkhor, Samukh and Ayrym. 
Cameral accounting of 1831 indicate 6 mahals presence in Yelizavetpol: 
1) Daglyg mahal - in south-west of the district, in Gandja mountains; 2)Shamkhor 
mahal located on both banks of Shamkhor riVei bordering with Shamshadil; 3) 
Kurekbasan mahal bordering with Garabagh province and covered mainly left bank 
of Kurekchay and partially right bank; 4) Gandjabasar mahal situated between 
Shamkhor and Kurekbasan; 5) Samukh mahal embraced mountain belt of Samukh 
along the right bank of Kur river; 6) Ayrym mahal, which population being 
nomads allocated across the whole district. It is evident that after liquidation of 
Gandja khanate, most probably, empire's officials in the second half of 20-ies of 
XIX century made changes in administrative structure of Yelizavetpol district and 
as a result the new - Daglyg mahal was created. 
It has been shown above that whole territories of Gandjabasar, 
Sungurabad, Beyuk Kurekbasan, Kichik Kurekbasan, Kurekbasan and Dangy 
mahals and parts of Shemkurbasan, Ashagy Zeyem, Yukhary Zeyem, Turkanlar, 
Garagaya and Khylkhina mahals belonged to Gandja khanate. Because it was 
impossible to define which toponymic units in districts of Shemkurbasan, Ashagy 
and Yukhary Zeyem, Turkanlar, Garagaya and Khylkhyna belonged to Gandja 
khanate and which were beyond the border of khanate, we wholly conditionally 
attribute them to Gandja khanate. According to evaluations in 1727 in the same 
district 7450 were registered as tax-payers. If to take into account only districts 
which wholly belong to Gandja khanate, then according to statistic data from 
"Notebook of thorough description" 4285 families lived in 1727 in Gandjabasar, 
59 
 
Sungurabad, Kichik Kurekbasan, Beyuk Kurekbasan and Dangy districts. Political 
disputes, armed attacks and conflicts through 30-80-ies of the XVIII lead to large 
human losses in Gandja khanate. Attacks of Nadir shah in 1734-1735, looting of 
Gandja by armed forces of Panahali khan through 1750-1751, occupation of 
Gandja by Ibrajimkhalil khan and troops of Irakly II in 1780, the second invasion 
into Gandja by armed forces of Ibra-himkhalil khan in 1795 led to sharp decrease 
of population of Gandja khanate. 
Our studies display that empire's officials made mistakes while these 
evaluations also. Thus, accounting of March 2, 1804 shows 7303 people in 
Yelizavetpol and move of 2033 people from Gandja to Shamshadil. Adding to this 
figure 1119 people moved from Shusha to Yelizavetpol the figure will reach 
10455. There are valuable data reflecting dynamics of population of Gandja 
khanate and Yelizavetpol district in Central Historic Archives of Azerbaijan 
Republic. According to archive documents 2517 families were registered in Gandja 
khanate by accounting on March 2, 1804. Data of February of 1807 shows 2025 
families in Yelizavetpol district, while data of December of 1808 recorded 8913 
people. Detailed accounting of 1817 in Yelizavetpol showed 17901 people. 
Sharp decrease of population in Yelizavetpol in 1807 and 1808 in 
comparison to 1804 was due to the first Russia-Iran war. After returning back of 
population due to signing of Gulistan peace agreement population of Yelizavetpol 
district increased by two times in 1817. Cameral description held in 1833 in 
Yelizavetpol recorded 5424 families (12149 m.g.). This increase happened in 
comparison to 1817 was possible only due to migration of Armenians to Yeliza-
vetpol. 
 
Guldane Najafli 
FACTORS WHICH TRIGGERED  
ATTEMPTS OF ARMENIANS TO ESTABLISH  
STATE IN GARABAGH IN THE I HALF OF XVIII CENTURY 
 
Territory of our independent and democratic Republic for many years is 
under occupation of Armenian aggressors and thousands of people were displaced 
from their historic lands. Roots of this evil policy, which was prepared for several 
centuries and implemented according to a certain plan, go back to ancient times. It 
is crucially important today to unmask diligence of Armenians, who once have not 
even an inch of area in South Caucasus, to create their own state for expense of 
Azerbaijan's territories and displayed in various documents and exaggerated false 
facts. Through the history the territories which were the subject of serious 
falsifications and appropriation by Armenians by use of fabricated facts is the 
territory of Garabagh. As we know, during the rule of Sefevis the country was 
administratively divided into bey-lerbeyliks (provinces). One of these was 
60 
 
Garabagh beylerbeylik with a center in Ganja city. Beylerbeys were assigned from 
kyzyl-bashs and they ruled those provinces by inheritance. The first bey-lerbey 
(ruler) of Garabagh was Shahverdi Soltan Ziyadoglu of Gadjar clan. 
Garabagh province by its territory was one of the largest of state of Sefevis. 
Even being occupied by Ottomans in the I quarter of the XVIII century the territory 
of this provinces stayed unchanged. Researcher H.Mamedov wrote: "Either in the 
end of XVI century and start of XVIII century the territory of Ganja-Garabagh 
province in general was unchanged. Borders of province in the north pass along the 
Kur river, from the area of junction of Kur and Araz rivers border directs to the west 
along the Araz, Bergushad liva (province) and from here towards the north, passes 
the east portion of Goyce lake and further to north enters Tiflis province and 
elongated till Lori district, which bordered south portion of Borchaly and Tashir area". 
During Sefevis era the Christian melikate as a new administrative unit was created 
within Garabagh beylerbeylik. Armenian authors and their supporters try to 
exaggerate the role of five Christian melikates on territory of Garabagh and 
describe each melikate almost as example of "Armenian statehood", as the 
structure which "preserved traditions of Armenian statehood through the centuries" 
and simultaneously attempt to prove that Armenians were indigenous population of 
Garabagh. For example: Armenian historian A.Ioanissypn along with describing 
territories of Garabagh and Irevan as "historic territory of Armenia" where the 
major portion of Armenian population is gathered, showed Christian meliks on 
territory of Garabagh ruled during the era of Nadir shah as "practically independent 
rulers, holders of total power and possessors of their own armed forces". 
First of all about meliks themselves: let us consider information written 
by XIX century annalists of Garabagh. According to Mirza Adygozel bey there were 
separate names for each of five regions known together as Khamsa. Name Khamsa 
was given due to number of regions, i.e. five. Melik Yegan of Dizak came from Lori, 
melik Shahnazar of Varand came from Goyce, melik Allahgulu of Chile-bord was 
from Maghaviz, melik Usub of Guustan (Talysh) was from Shirvan. Rulers of only 
one melikate - meliks of Khachin were children of Hasan Jalalyan. Other authors of 
"Garabagname" also confirm this fact. Even Mirza Yusif Garabagi, who was South 
Azerbaijan Armenian, notes in his work that meliks came to Garabagh from other 
areas. Other source of that period - "Tezkiret-el-mulk" does not mention. . .names of 
Garabagh meliks at all. This can be explained by the fact... that these melikates were 
smaller feudal properties in comparison to "country", secondly melikates were 
formed during XVII-XVIII centuries and at the start of XVIII century their status as 
inherited properties was not recognized". 
About population of Christian melikates of Garabagh: Armenian 
historians and tneir supporters try to convince community of the following: 
population of Garabagh melikates consisted of Armenians. From the letter of four 
meliks - Isay, Shirvan, Sergey and Iosif, written to Russian tsar Peter I in 1723 it is 
61 
 
clear that Christians which lived on territory of Azerbaijan during that period 
named themselves Alban (avqan). 
Major factor which pushed forward the idea to create independent state of 
Armenians, which were scattered across the territory of present Armenia and 
adjacent areas, was long lasted wars between Sefevis and Ottoman Turkey. 
Armenians, which took advantage of any opportunity during these wars purchased 
Azerbaijani territories from Ottomans. H.Mamedov citing the work "Gen-cineyi-
fethi-Ganja" by the author Ibrahim Rahimizadeh shows that in 1588 the beylerbey 
of Ganja-Garabagh before approaching of Mohammed khan Osmanly troops to 
Ganja withdrawn 50 thousand people, including his own family from the town. 
Despite that these people crossed Araz river and settled in Garabagh, the ottoman 
troops came here and massacred them. However, non-Moslem meliks of Ganja-
Garabagh province came to show their obedience to Ottomans and along with 
keeping their positions they received new territories. 
Policy of Armenians, which through the history always desired to grasp 
territories of others and fostered an idea of "Great Armenia", suited the interests of 
Russia and its policy implemeted under the cover of "protection of Christians". 
Russian empire, aiming to occupy India and the Middle East, needed to create 
reliable buffer zone in conjugation area of borders of Turkey, Iran and Azerbaijan 
in order to be able to use this zone as military base. 
Armenians tried to use their close ties with Russian authorities to favor of 
their national interests. That is why, in historic sources and letters along with 
information about South Caucasus, ethnicities located here, economy, roads, 
harvests, they wrote false data about number of Armenians populated various 
regions and their being tormented by Moslems. 
Israil Ori, shown as "outstanding figure of national independence movement 
of Armenians", who in fact fostered insidiousness towards Azerbaijani in the I quarter 
of XVIII century while his meetings with representatives of authority of Russia and 
Western European coun tries described Armenians as "oppressed" nation, with 
"tragic destiny" and "being under the tyranny of giaour". Casting aspersions on 
Moslems he tried to justify instigation policy of Armenians. Armenian historians of 
XIX century, as well as modern Armenian historians inilate value of letters with 
indication that Armenians on territory of Garabagh live "under oppression of giaour, 
under conditions of starvation and destitu ion" and justify invasion of Russian forces 
to South Caucasus, including Azerbaijan, displaying them as a force which 
"liberated them from tyranny of giaour". 
But they play blind when it comes to other letters, which did not reflect 
that social-economic situation was hard. Let as consider facts: the letter written by 
meliks on April 9, 1799 to knyaz Platin says: "We have everything - money, 
property, people capable to hold arms. But we have no one to rule our country. We 
pray for God to make this true. We are ready to serve you by everything we have". 
62 
 
In other letter, Armenians promise to give 60 thousand pood of flour and 10 
thousand bulls to Russian forces in case if they will be deployed in Garabagh. 
With weakening of Sefevis state at the start of XVIII century, 
strengthening of Russia and inclusion of South Caucasus into the sphere of 
interests of Russia, the Alban Katalikos and meliks changed their political 
orientation and played the "card of Christianity" and requested the help of their 
"Christian brothers". 
Appeals of Christian meliks of Garabagh such as "we Christians, day-by-
day we lose our Christianity under the oppression of giaour" made during that 
period were not the other thing that excuses to mask strategic plans of Russia for 
South Caucasus. Name!}, these excuses created the ground for "special care" 
shown by Peter 1 marches to regions of Azerbaijan on the Caspian sea shore. Thus, 
Peter I >igned a decree related to Armenians on November 10 of 1724. That decree 
stated: "the area must be chosen for settlement of migrated Armenians in occupied 
territories of Azerbaijan and General Matyushkin have to be commissioned ... to 
regard Armenians kindly, provide their safety ana give them emptied houses and 
fertile areas. Suspicious Moslems must be immediately withdrawn and Christians 
have to be located in their areas. ... Try by any means to invite Armenians to these 
areas and decrease a number of Moslems. However, do this in such a way, that 
they would not understand this." 
This decree of Peter makes it clear that he paid attention and suppc rted 
Armenians only due to interests of Russia. His approval to locate Armenians in 
provinces on Caspian sea shore, especially in regions with Moslem population was 
the part of his Eastern policy intended to be implemented in future. 
Armenians being aware about marches of *eter I into provinces nearby to 
Caspian sea shore intensified their activity for mobilization. The bishop of Low 
Khachin monastery vardapet Miiias also participated in those marches. According 
to the plan of Peter I, after capture of Derbend he had to go to Shamakhy to join to 
armed units of Armenians and Georgians. In this respect Katalikos of Gandzasar 
monastery -Yesai wrote to Peter I: "... armed forces of about 12 thousand (?) 
people headed by Armenian meliks... nearby to Ganja together with Georgian 
forces are waiting for Russian tsar arrival to Shamakhy". 
Armenian authors broadly apply this false figure, indicated in letter 
written prior to arrival of Peter I, in order to fabricate number of Armenians lived 
in Garabagh. However, the first reliable statistic information about population of 
Garabagh melikates was given in account held in 1823 due to abolishment of 
Garabagh khanate. According to that data in the whole Garabagh there were 18 
thousand 563 families and of these only 1 thousand 559 families or 8.4 % were 
lived in Christian melikates. 
Thus, Armenians in order to fulfill their evil policies rely on support of 
foreign countries, first of all, Russia. Their attempts to appropriate our territories 
63 
 
are clearly shown in their letters sent to those countries. However, since this evil 
policy had no historic roots, Armenian fancy about creation a state on Azerbaijani 
territories, especially in Garabagh in the I half o XVIII century, had failed. 
 
Guntekin Najafli 
INTENTIONS OF RUSSIA TO CREATE ARMENIAN 
STATE ON THE TERRITORY OF GARABAGH KHANATE 
 
One of the most powerful khanates in Azerbaijan in the second half of the 
XVIII century was Garabagh khanate. Through the indicated period Garabagh 
khanate distinguished from other khanates by presence of Christian melikates. 
Some of these Christian melikates being under protection of Russia, even from the 
period of rule of Panah Ali khan impeded centralization of power within khanate, 
on the one hand assisted to external forces to attack Garabagh in order to break its 
independence. (Garabaghname, I vol., Baku, 1989, p.36-37). 
In 80-ies of the XVIII century while implementation of aggressor policy 
towards South Caucasus by the government of Yekaterina II the use of "Armenian 
card" was one of priorities. Russian military A.Suvorov, G.Poyomkin and 
P.Potyomkin played an active role in attempts to create Armenian state on territory 
of Azerbaijan, implementation of dirty plans of Armenians and establishment of 
close ties with Armenian wealthy people and bishops. Russian government 
assigned G.Potyomkin as senior commander for Caucasus and his close relative 
P.Potyomkin as head of defense line in Caucasus. According to order of 
G.Potyomkin on September 6, 1782 "...Ibrahim khan from Shusha had to be 
overthrown and independent Armenian province under protection of Russia had to 
be created in Garabagh". (O.Markova, Russia, Transcaucasus and international 
relations in the XVIII century, M.196l\ p. 160). 
From "written inquiry of 13 articles" sent on December 21, 1782 by 
P.Potyomkin to Armenian archbishop I.Argutinsky it becomes evident that the 
General was preparing to attack Garabagh. In 10
th
 article of his inquiry he wrote: 
"Please inform me where is the fort in which Shusha's khan did settle, its 
surroundings, how is possible to approach to this fort and by which routes it is 
possible to reach this famous and regarded as impregnable fort" (A.Ioannisyan. 
Russia and Armenian liberation movement in 80-ies of XVIII century. Yerevan, 
1947, lecture 3, p.206). In order to implement this plan on April 6, 1783 
G.Potyomkin in private order to commander in Caucasus wrote: "Ibrahim khan 
from Shusha must be overthrown, because starting from this moment Garabagh 
will be Armenian province depending only on Russia. Apply any measures in order 
to create this province. Thus, Armenians from other regions will anve here." 
(A.Ioannisyan. Russia and Armenian liberation movemen: in 80-ies of XVIII 
century. Yerevan, 1947, lecture 3, p.68). It is evident that Russian authorities by 
64 
 
creating all favorable conditions for "Armenian province of Garabagh" tried to 
provide a move of a large number of Armenians to Garabagh in order to use them 
for their own interests in the future. 
Taking into account that through indicated period the international 
situation was not favorable for Ibrahimkhalil khan (Ottoman empire defeated in 
war with Russia was unable to defend khanates of Azerbaijan), the khan, who 
understood danger to Garabagh khanate, had no other way out than to make 
political maneuver. On April 6 the same year P.Potyomkin received a letter from 
Ibrahimkhalil khan with assurances that "for a long period of time I wish to be a 
subject of Russian throne and unlimitedly generous empress" (A.Ioanissyan. 
Russia and Armenian liberation movement in 80-ies of XVIII century. Yerevan, 
1947, lecture 3, p.71-72). Upon familiarizing with appeal of khan of Garabagh 
Yekaterina II agreed that if there are no any difficulties or doubts for taking of 
Ibrahimkhalil khan under protection of Russia, when it is possible to sign an 
agreement similar to agreement with Irakli II (Collection of Russian historic 
society. Vol XXVII, p.756). 
Further processes showed that this farsighted and diplomatic step of 
Ibrahimkhalil khan postponed for some period th 3 intention of G.Potyomkin to 
overthrown him. On May 19, 1783 knyaz in his secret order wrote: "obedience of 
Ibrahim khan from Shusha and his request to be regarded as Russian subject 
cancelled liquidation of khanate" (T.Butkov. Materials for new history of Caucasus 
through 1722-1803. SPb, 1896, vol.111, p. 170). 
But, despite G.Potyomkin had changed his order dated from April 6 to 
overthrown Ibrahimkhalil khan, he did not give a clear answer to khan's request in 
order not to miss a chance to use khan of Garabagh against of Guba khan and 
secretly continue policy of "fondling" Armenians. On May 19 G.Potyomkin wrote 
to Yekaterina II: "When the situation will be favorable it is necessary to make 
Ibrahim khan obey and give his province under the rule of national authority (it 
means Christian melikates - G.N.). Thus the Christian state for Armenians will be 
created in Asia according to your promise and by my efforts" (A.Ioanissyan. 
Russia and Armenian liberation movement in 80-ies of XVIII century. Yerevan, 
1947, lecture 3, p.74; G.Butkov. Materials for new history of Caucasus through 
1722-1803. SPb, 1896, vol.11, p. 142). In May of 1783 knyaz A.Potyomkn gave an 
order to General P.Potyomkin: "It is necessary to support Armenians in order to 
create strong Christian state on territory of Garabagh ...under the supreme 
protection of Russia" (G.Butkov, Indicated source, vol.III,p.l70). 
Letter of Russian spy Reynegs "informing about depriving Ibrahim khan 
of the power as a result of attack of Russian forces and "restoration of Armenian 
kingdom" and sent to melik Abov, was captured by khan of Garabagh". (G. Yezov. 
Relations of Peter Great with Armenian nation, SPb, 1898, p.??????/). Khan of 
Garabagh by use of diplomatic skills proved treacherous position of meliks and 
65 
 
succeeded to break their resistance. Ibrahimkhalil khan understood that Russia did 
not refrained from idea of influence over Garabagh and Russia just wanted to win 
some time. That is why he gathered about a thousand of his supporters and went to 
reinforce fort Shusha. (A.Ioanisyan, Indicated source, p.79). 
P.Potyomkin induced Irakli II to advise Ibrahimkhalil khan to send his 
courtiers to the General. Obviously, Russian commanders desired to influence the 
khan of Garabagh through Irakli II in order to make khan to refuse from 
reinforcement of his positions. Finally, Mirza Vali, the envoy of Ibrahim khan 
arrived at Tiflis on February 6, 1784 and brought the appeal of the khan to 
Yekaterina II. In that appeal, Ibrahim khan along with his request to become the 
subject of Russia, also asked "if khan will accept to be Russian subject, whether it 
will be provider that no one will interfere his internal affairs and support him in 
fight against enemy?" (A.Ioanissyan. Indicated source. p:08). From this question it 
becomes evident that khan was aware of Salib attack prepared against him and 
tried to prevent that attack. Soon after Ibrahimkhlil khan undertook more 
courageous measure. In May of 1784 Haji Ismail, one of reliable friends of Ibrahim 
khan, went to Tiflis and on behalf of khan asked Irakli II: "If khan will agree to be 
the subject of Russia, will you (Irakli II -G.N.) guarantee that no portion of his 
properties will be given to someone other?" (A. Ioanissyan. Indicated source, p. 
101). In order to prevent insidious intentions of some Christian meliks, 
Ibrahimkhalil khan used his diplomatic skills and tried to keep bilateral relations 
with Russia. In July of 1784 vizier of the khan Musa Sultan meet G.Potyomkin and 
then went to Petersburg, where he was regarded with a respect similar to that of 
ambassador of a large country (O.Markova. Indicated source, p. 184). Evidently, 
Russia taking into account authc ity of Ibrahimkhalil khan and power of khanate, 
and intending 'to attract Azerbaijan khanates one-by-one carefully behaved while 
then diplomatic relations with Ibrahimkhalil khan. Through that period due to 
diplomatic efforts of Ibrahimkhalil khan it was impossible to create Armenian state 
on the territory of Garabagh khanate. 
 
Gyulzade Akhundova 
CRAFTS IN GARABAGH 
 
The important role while studying the history and culture of any nation 
belongs to researches on its farming and manufacture. Manufacturing is most fully 
reflected in crafts existed through that period. 
Azerbaijani nation through its long history accumulated a huge handicraft 
heritage, which honed at the expense of empirical knowledge and skills. Most of 
them were preserved up to now, being conveyed from generation to generation. 
These crafts are also widely distributed within historic-ethnographic zone of 
Garabagh, which is inseparable part of Azerbaijan. They are famous by their 
66 
 
workpieces, skillful masters and their successors. 
Carpet weaving holds the leading position among widely spread crafts in 
Garabagh. Abundance of raw material boosted development of this craft. It must be 
noted, that population is historically bound to carpet weaving and gained high 
professional level in this. The important value for studies of weaving in Garabagh 
belongs to bone needle found during archaeological researches in Uzerliktepe in 
vicinity of Agdam, which was the first town-type settlement in Caucasus. No 
doubt, the needle was intended for weaving. S.Semyonov involved with studies of 
ancient tools also confirms that this is a weaving tool. 
According to opinion of experts, carpet weaving historically started in 
ancient Egypt (N.Sholpo. Textile-weaving industry in ancient Egypt. Archives of 
Institute of history of science and techniques, vol.V, M., 1936, p. 126-127). 
Development of carpet weaving in Garabagh underwent simultaneously with that 
in Iran. There is also other opinion, for example Ropres notes: "It is most probable 
that Caucasian carpets were weaved from times earlier than that in Middle Asia, 
and it is not the exception that Caucasus is the homeland of weaving of easterr. 
carpets, because woven fabrics, namely kilims, weaved long before all knotted 
(piled) car pets were better and more perfect and currently are w
r
eaved mainly in 
Caucasus" (H. Ropers. Mordenlandische Teppic'i. Berlin, 1922). 
Garabagh carpets were always preferred among CVa~asian carpets. By 
the quantity and quality of weaved carpets and pa.as Shu-sha holds the first 
position in the whole Caucasus (E.Zedgenidze, S.Zakharbekov, A.Ter-Egizarov. 
Elizavetpol province, Shusha. SMOMPK, issue XI, Tiflis, 1891, p.l 1-301). 
E.Zedgenidze indicates that carpets of Shusha ".,. lose to Persian and especially to 
tekin carpets. This is caused... by lower quality of wool here in comparison to that 
of Tekin and Persian" (p.34). This is also confirmed by A.Piralov (Short 
description of crafts ,in Caucasus. Tiflis, 1900), K.Khatisov (Crafts in Caucasus in 
bock "Reports and researches on crafts in Russia", vol.II, 1894) and other authors. 
In data attributed to the end of XIX century there is also indication on 
preferable position of Garabagh carpets on the territory of then Eizavetpol 
province. "Carpet weaving is widely developed in town Shusha and Shusha 
region". (F.Brok-gauz, I.Efron. Encylo-pedic dictionary, vol. XI, SPb, 1894, 
p.620). In the 40
th
 volume of the same edition, published in 1904 it is written: 
"Shusha is the largest center of carpet weaving in Caucasus, and carpets manufac-
tured here -:re sold far away from this region and reach Moscow and Petersburg". 
All these notes make it possible to state that the art of carpet weaving existed in 
Garabagh from ancient times and reached high level of development. 
Carpets were weaved by many ii. Garabagh. Thus, E.Zedgenidze wrote: 
"It is hard to define a number of craftsmen, it is not known even to local 
authorities. However, it can be t,aid that all tatars are involved with weaving" (p.2). 
Further the author explaining reasons of inability of carpet weaving by Armenians, 
67 
 
moved to Garabagh during various periods, notes: "Only few Armenians are 
involved with carpet weaving. Armenians themselves explain this by a danger they 
undergo when go out to locations of nomad tatars during sheep clip for wool, while 
buying wool in shops is too expensive. Besides, historical and life conditions 
impeded development of this craft: carpet weaving is brought here by tatars from 
Asia; thus Armenians had to learn this from tatars, but this was impossible due to 
national and religious hostility between these two nations". In addition, Armenians 
regarded to carpet weaving as "existence on expense of women". Thus, Armenians 
with such attitude to carpet weaving at the end of XIX century, at the end of XX 
century were not ashamed to show masterpieces of neighbor nation as "Armenian 
carpets". Let us remind, that Armenian aggression touched not only Garabagh 
carpets, but also carpets of other regions of Azerbaijan. Thus, the carpet of 
"Achma-Yumma" type (Shusha. XIX century) belonged to Garabagh group is 
named by Armenians as "Karvn". "Mugan" as "Guchark", "Chelebi"-
"Vishapagorg" or "Svunik". "Malvbevli" - "Vishapa-torg" or "Artsakh". "Talvsh" - 
"Artsakh". 
Another craft - pottering in Garabagh is related to ancient times - Neolite 
era. During Eneolite period pottering had a nature of domestic craft and starting 
from Bronze age it turned into one of leading branches of manufacture. High level 
of pottering in Garabagh is also confirmed by a large amount of pottery found 
while archaeological researches in Khodjaly. Even during Eneolite to meet 
requirements of population in pottery their assortment was widened and potter 
stoves were used. Garabagh potters used potter wheels, which were one of 
technical innovations during the history of mankind. Pottery made in Garabagh 
during Bronze period was black and engraved by various geometric and plant 
decorations. Distinguishing feature consists in filling of lines on the surface of 
pottery by white matter. Samples of pottery named as "ceramics with white 
incrustation" are found in monuments of Shusha, Khodjaly and Gulyatag. Found in 
Userliktepe wooden tool, ceramic skimmer used for fusion of metal and the figure 
of a woman made of clay (K.Kushnareva. Settlement of Bronze Age on the hill 
Uzerliktepe nearby to Agdam, p.418), show that ceramics also was used for 
various purposes. During the later periods also Garabagh masters made pottery and 
improving them created masterpieces. Population of ancient Garabagh was also 
skilful in processing of metal. Population in Garabagh was the first who acquired 
bronze in Caucasus. (R.Eyubov. Travel to the past of Garabagh. Baku, 1993, p.17). 
At the start of the I millenium B.C. on the territory of Garabagh people 
started to use iron. Bronze antler of deer and bronze statue of bird identified in 
1930 in Dolalanlar village evidence that metal was processed since ancient times in 
the region. As a result of further specialization such crafts emerged as gunsmithing, 
black-smithing, copper processing, casting, jewelry, processing of tin and metal. 
In a note dated from 1836 it is indicated that there were working 25 
68 
 
blacksmiths in Shusha only (D.Zubarev. Garabagh prov-ince.OPB3K, part Ill.SPb, 
1836, p.309). In 1860 their number reached 112 (A.Sumbatzaden. Industry of 
Azerbaijan in XIX century, p. 15 8-159). 
Jeweler's art of traditional art of metal processing in Garabagh specialized 
in the processing of gold and silver jewelry. The period of intensive development 
of jewelry started after foundation of Shusha. Golden jewelry was made by 
Azerbaijani. In 1860 and in 1902 in Shusha there were 8 i and 56 jewelers 
respectively. Jewelry made by Garabagh masters were distinguished decorations 
during many exhibitions. Writing about one of such exhibitions, N.Khanykhov 
wrote: "Here we can see enamel and niello, notches, filigrane made in Baku and 
Garabagh, in other words everything made by jewelers of the East. All this was 
created by their imagination to dress harem anchoress and for foppery of their 
owners, and all this has here worthy and curious representatives" (About exhibition 
of natural works in Tiflis. TKOCX, Nl-2, p.90). In jewelry art of Garabagh the 
work of forming was the most distributed. There was a whole dynasty of jewelers, 
which founder was jeweler Abbasgulu. Masterpieces created by his successors -
jewelers Rustam, Behbud, Ismail and Ali brought the fame to Garabagh jewelers. 
Their successors Jahangir and Fahreddin continued and preserved this art. 
Bringing up of world famous Garabagh horses made the basis for 
blacksmithing and saddlery. According to information of sources in 1859-1860 in 
Shusha there were 52 farriers. Farriers also lived in surrounding small settlements. 
In villages this task was fulfilled by blacksmiths. While of horse-shoeing the shoes 
of Asian and European types were used. 
The art of stone carving also was widespread in Garabagh. The roots of 
this art go back to Paleolite. Primary man lived on the territory of Garabagh made 
necessary tools from stone. Tools of stone found while archaeological researches in 
multistory caves of Azykh and Tartar allow to infer that Garabagh during Paleolite 
was one of the first centers, may be primitive, of stone carving. In the course of 
time fie technique of stone tools carving was improved. In middle ages the art of 
stone carving in Garabagh was widely spread. From this art the crafts of 
stonemason, sculptor, decorator, carver, gravers. 
Threshers found on the territory of Garabagh and m ^de of stone enable us 
to derive knowledge about agriculture and about tools used for stone carving. Such 
stony threshers were also found in former Zangezur district of Garabagh 
(S.Eseyan, A.Shaginyan. Archaeological findings in Zangezur. C.A., N3, 1962, 
p.200). Informing about this finding Armenian authors describe it as a sample of 
Armenian material culture. While doing this Armenians, which created their state 
in ancient Azerbaijani territories, silenced the irrefutable fact that Zangezur district 
of Garabagh was given to Armenian SSR while its establishment in 1921. 
Consequently, any sample of material culture found on this territory belongs to 
Garabagh and its indigenous population - Azerbaijani. 
69 
 
Depending on nature of farming of Garabagh population there was a huge 
requirement in horses as a transportation mean. Samples of material culture, found 
during archaeological researches allow to state that in Azerbaijan the horses were 
saddled since II millennium B.C. 
Avallable archive sources about craft of saddle-making in XIX- XX 
centuries evidence that in 1848 in Shusha there were 27 people, in 1860 - 41. E. 
Zedgenidze in his work shows that local saddlers made only saddles, while horse-
collars and bridles are made in Nukha and Elizavetpol. In Garabagh mainly 
complex, heavy saddles were used, which were called as "Moslem saddles". Such 
saddles made by masters - galtachi. 
Simple saddles were made for poor, while rich people used saddles made 
by special order, decorated by precious stones and with saddle-cloth, silver 
ornaments and smooth pillow. Russian poet M.Lermontov while being in Caucasus 
appreciated saddles made in Garabagh and Garabagh horses. 
Garabagh, one of the most beautiful places in Azerbaijan, played an 
important role in economic, political and cultural life of Azerbaijan, as well as 
Caucasus. Inhabitants of this region do not resist foreign aggressors and through 
the history of development of the region they created samples of richest material 
culture. Within the framework of small paper it is impossible to totally embrace 
theme of development of various crafts in this region, however, from all said above 
it can be seen that Garabagh made significant contribution to development of world 
culture. 
 
Hadjar Gasymova 
GARABAGH CONFLICT AS INTERNATIONAL    PROBLEM 
 
Study of Daglyg Garabagh conflict in the social and philosophical context 
is of important scientific-methodological value. Thorough consideration of this 
problem is a special part of politologi-cal studies. This conflict constitutes a certain 
universality by its character and nature since such conflict may emerge in any po-
lyethnic society. Of course, we are not of opinion that the situation is typical for all 
polyethnic societies and think that in regions of certain geopolitical value (for 
example, Caucasus) emerging of such problem is related to certain regional causes. 
However, ths major problem is that Garabagh problem soon after its stan 
became international and due to this its regulation was complicated. Ciashe
J
 of 
interests of great powers in geopolitical games taking place in South Caucasus, 
especially of interests of USA and Russia, opens the ground instead of problem 
regulation. 
In diplomacy fulfilled under the name "Garabagh card" the special role 
plays political participation of United States, Adva itage of political system of 
USA consists in ability to rationally use its political and economic potential by this 
70 
 
superpower. In addition, military superiority of this country in comparison to other 
large countries allows us to infer that United States can play a leading role in any 
conflict, including Garabagh conflict. However, as process show that despite this 
country is interested in resolution of conflict, it could not interfere or, may be, does 
not consider it necessary. 
Realistically evaluating the situation, it should be noted that the role of 
international organizations in regulation and management of conflicts is very 
important. The major task is to build fruitful cooperation with international 
structures. International organizations predicted that major causes of conflicts in 
former Soviet Union and East Europe are social and political structures of 
countries in those regions. In any case crisis taking place in these countries are the 
common factor causing these conflicts. And the interesting fact is that with 
collapse of socialistic system the factors preventing such conflicts were liquidated. 
Despite positive and helpful diplomatic efforts of countries interested in 
regulation of Garabagh conflict, even high status of international organizations 
does not provide any progress in conflict regulation process. For example, inability 
of OSCE to achieve any real results together with discrediting itself also decreases 
confidence of society into political institutions of Europe. At the same time, efforts 
of international organizations undertaken for resolution of conflicts meet serious 
hurdles and lead to emerging of crisis in those institutions. The second complex 
problem is that political integration process in Europe does not allow to control 
ethnic-political conflicts beyond the Europe. This, in its turn, creates good 
opportunity for United States, which is already striving for presence in Caucasus. 
Clashes of interests of Western Europe and the USA over the influence in 
Caucasus do not permit establishment of stability here. That is why, serious hurdles 
may arise while regulation of Garabagh conflict. If clashes of interests of great 
powers will deepen it is not the exception that there will be facts of violence. 
That is why, territory covered by security of OSCE must be enlarged. 
However, in practice, OSCE today regards post-soviet countries as a laboratory for 
testing ethnic-political conflicts. In general, OSCE is the only political institution 
which provides security related to conflicts emerged in Europe and removes 
hurdles jeopardizing peace processes. This institution plays an important role in 
preventive diplomacy and collapse of Soviet Union added new experience to 
activity of this institution. 
However, it must be noted with a regret that until now OSCE did not gain 
any positive results in regulation of Garbagh conflict. In fact, this political 
institution loses its major function - function of mediator. This is confirmed by 
words of OSCE representative: "if parties will not reach agreement between them, 
the regulation process will be prolonged". However, at present preventive 
diplomacy of OSCE may play a special role for regulation of Daglyg Garabagh 
conflict. Despite that it uses all its resources, it was unable to vtap&sQ&sA any real 
71 
 
work related to 4 resolutions adopted by Security Council of UN for regulation of 
Garabagh conflict. 
Regulation of this conflict is one of issues related to implementation of 
concept "Defend peace". In this respect, it is ultimately important to strengthen 
mediator mission of OSCE and efforts of Azerbaijan's diplomacy. 
 
Ismayil Musa 
DIPLOMATIC CONFRONTATION  
BETWEEN AZERBAIJAN AND ARMENIA (APRI-JUNE 1920) 
 
From the very first days of April aggression there was severely tense 
"diplomatic fight" between Azerbaijan and Armenia. On April 29 of 1920 the 
Foreign Ministry of Dashnak government -H.Ohandjanyan sent the telegram (note) 
number 2886 to N.Narimanov, chainnan of Azerbaijan Revolutionary Committee 
(ARC). The telegram contained information about sending additional troops 
indicated as Soviet armed units to the border of Armenia where Azerbaijan's armed 
forces were deployed. The note also stated confidence that new authorities of 
Azerbaijan will stop military operations in Garabagh and Zangezur and withdraw 
its troops from that region. 
Deputy of RC of ARC M.Huseynov in response note (April 30, 1920) to 
Armenia demanded in three days: 1) withdraw their troops from Garabagh and 
Zangezur; 2) go back to their borders; 3) stop ethnic confrontation and hostility. In 
other case Azerbaijan Revolutionary Committee will consider itself in the state of 
war with Armenian Republic. ("Communist" newspaper issued in Russian (May 4, 
1920. N2) wrote that refuse of Armenia to withdraw its troops from Zangezur and 
Garabagh may result with attack of Soviet forces to Armenia.) 
At the same time Azerbaijan forces were ordered to stop attack on Garabagh 
and Zangezur, hold favorable position and be ready to defense. In telegram (May 1, 
1920) signed by S.Kirov, G.Ordjonikidze and others and sent to Irevan it was 
demanded to withdraw troops from the territory of soviet Azerbaijan in "24 hours". 
It was also noted, that if this condition will not be implemented it will be considered 
as disregard to Soviet Russia and Russian troops will withdraw Armenian armed 
forces from those regions. 
Immediately after receiving note of Azerbaijan government, Armenian 
authority appealed to Soviet Russia. Foreign Ministry of Armenia in his telegram 
sent to G.Chicherin (April 30, 1920; number 2659) said 1 lat a regiment of red 
soldiers entered Gara-bagh and Zangezur and thus attempt to join to Turkey. It was 
also noted that delegation of parliament members consisted of L. Shant and others 
will hold negotiations with Soviet Russia. In other telegram (May 3, 1920) sent to 
G.Chicherin (copy was set to V.Lenin) it was stated that during the period of 
proclaiming of independent republics in North Caucasus the territories of Zangezur 
72 
 
and Gara-bagh fell apart from Armenia. Presence of any Armenian forces was 
denied. 
In note (copies were sent to V. Lenin, G.Chicherin, ARC) sent by 
H.Ohadjanyan on May 1 to Revolutionary Committee (G.Ordjonikidze) it said that 
there were no Armenian forces in disputed areas and requested to order withdrawal 
of Azerbaijan's troops from those regions. Desire of Armenians to use "mediation" 
of Soviet Russia for resolution of disputes between Azerbaijan and Armenia is 
clearly seen from these documents. 
At the meantime, exchange of notes is intensified between Azerbaijan RC 
and Armenian Foreign Ministry. H.Ohadjanyan in his note sent on May 3 to 
M.Huseynov (copies were sent to V.Lenin, G.Chicherin, G.Ordjonkidze) in respect 
of note-ultimatum of Azerbaijan government from April 30 repeatedly stated that 
there were np Armenian forces on the territory of Azerbaijan, ami! regarding 
Garabagh-Zangezur as its own territories expressed its concern
k
 due to deployment 
of Azerbaijan military forces theh. 
The note also indicated that Azerbaijan never had authority in Zangezur 
and therefore it has no juridical and actual bases to regard it as its territory. 
Zangezur is ruled by villagers themselves, by Soviet, which consider Zangezur as 
inseparable part of /irme-nia. Describing himself as pacifist H.Ohandjanyan 
finished his notes by proposals made in order to prevent new armed conflicts: a) 
stop all military operations; b) start negotiations in order to resolve dispute over 
borders between two republics. 
In response note (May 8, 1920) of Azerbaijan government to Armenian 
authorities, Azerbaijan did not agree with above indicated "arguments" and 
expressed its readiness for negotiations. On May 9, Azerbaijan RC made an appeal 
to "Armenian nation and Armenian government, Chicherin and everyone, everyone 
...". In that appeal Armenian-Azerbaijani conflicts occurred in Zangezur, 
Nakhchyvan, Sherur and Ordubad were reminded, the idea was underlined that in 
case of Sovetization of Armenia it would be easier (?!-I.M.) to agree with Armenia, 
and proposed to send their representatives to Baku not later than May 15 in order 
to hold negotiations. 
On May 12 Armenia's Foreign Ministry sent a note addressed to 
M.Huseynov, deputy of Azerbaijan RC and Azerbaijani nation (copies were sent to 
G.Chicherin and V.Lenin). This note contained a lot of "interesting 
considerations". It said that in contrary to repeatedly and firmly expressed will of 
Armenians located in Garabagh and Zangezur the first step of new Azerbaijan 
government is directed to keep them under servitude by force. In the note 
aspersions were cast to Mustafa Kamal, Enve" Pasha and Nuru Pasha (they were 
shown as organizers of Armenian massacres in their countries and in Caucasus) 
and blames of Azerbaijan government for relations with them. 
By this note Azerbaijan was blamed for voicing atrocities against 
73 
 
Moslems in Armenia and keeping silence about violence against civil Armenian 
population (?!-I.M) in Nakhchyvan. In the end Armenian government indicated 
that it accepts proposal of ARC to start negotiations and informed that diplomatic 
representative in Baku M.Arutyunans and others are assigned as representatives for 
these negotiations. 
Considering appropriation of Garabagh, Nakhchyvan and Zangezur 
regions of huge political and strategic importance, the Soviet Russia used 
diplomatic means and developed a special plan of military operations. There also 
were attempts together with some internal forces to create ideological basis for 
this. In this aim, the deputy of RC of Russian Federation - Garakhan, who was 
Armenian by origin sent telegrams to Irevan on May 15 (1101) and Baku (1102). 
Telegrams informed: a) positive response of Soviet Russia to proposal of 
Armenian government to play the role of mediator for regulation of disputes with 
Azerbaijan and b) required agreement of other party for mis (no doubt, this was 
just for formality and protocol). 
Soviet Russia government stating its aim by this teiegram informed that 
Red Army will enter territories of Nakhchyvan, Zan-gezur and Garabagh in order 
to prevent ethnic clashes and bloodshed. Azerbaijan RC agreed with mediator 
mission of Soviet Russia. It was also advised to speed up assignment of representa-
tives and proposed Baku as site for negotiations instead of Gazakh (due to distance 
from railway and from capitals of both republics, etc.) suggested by Armenia. 
Despite entering under the subjection of Russia, Russian forces did not 
hurry to enter Azerbaijani territories claimed by Armenians and where Armenian 
troops were deployed. This is confirmed by telegram (June 2, 1920) of G.Chicherin 
sent to G.Ordjonikidze. Telegram said: "Inform government of Azerbaijan that we 
have to confine by entering Shusha and Jebrail... I request to inform government in 
Baku about objective causes of impossibility to enter Nakhchyvan and Julfa and 
necessity to satisfy with military status quo... Please use your influence in Baku to 
make Azerbaijani government to accept as disputable areas not Sherur-Dereleyaz 
district, but territories of Garabagh and Zangezur". 
Later G.Chicherin in telegram N 168/174 dated from June 19, 1920 
underlined that Garabagh, Zangezur, Nakhchyvan and Julfa must be annexed 
neither to Armenia nor Azerbaijan, but have to stay under the occupation of 
Russian iroops with consent of local Soviets. However, from the telegram of 
G.Ordjonikidze to G.Chicherin (June 21, 1920) it became obvious that G.Chicherin 
meant annexation of Garabagh and Zangezur to Azerbaijan in his telegram to 
N.Narimanov. 
In our point of view, such indefinite (conflicting) position is explained by 
intention of Soviet Russia to make Armenia dependent due to territories of 
Azerbaijan regarded as "disputable" and increase pressure on our nation which 
started revolt in order to resist invasion of XI Army. 
74 
 
Important information was sent to G.Chicherin and G.Ordjonikidze in 
1920 signed by N.Narimanov, R.Mdivani, the member of Caucasus Committee of 
RK(b)P, A.Mikoyan, member of AK(b)PMK and A.Nuridjinyan, member of 
Armenian Committee of RK(b)P. 
It has been written in information: "In respect of Zangezur and Garabagh, 
which are already belong to territory of Soviet Azerbaijan and regarded as if these 
are disputable areas we resolutely state that these territories are not the subject of 
dispute and should be within the borders of Azerbaijan. Thoroughly populated by 
Moslems, separated for more than a year (?!-I.M.) regions of Julfa and 
Nakhchyvan defended from Dashnak government by local population themselves 
have to be invaded by our troops and annexed to Azerbaijan. Any negotiations with 
Dashnak government ... we consider as untimely". 
Following considerations in this information, N.Narimanov wrote: 
"Nobody in the world may stop us to influence decision expressed by population of 
indicated regions (Garabagh and Zangezur) to be annexed to Azerbaijan". "Now 
making a compromise (to Armenia) in issue of these regions ... will mean lost of 
prestige of Soviet rule in Azerbaijan, as well as in Iran and Turkey" (As it can be 
seen the concern was caused not by lost of territories, but by lost of prestige by 
Soviet power). 
Above   indicated   viewpoint at  first was defended  by G.Ordjonikidze, 
who seemingly held objective and neutral position (doubtful in best case) but in 
fact supported Armenians (named by N.Narimanov    as    "representative    in    
Caucasus" and by M.Mamedzadeh as "New Sisyanov of Russian Army"). Thus, in 
his letter addressed to V.Lenin, I.Stalin, G.Chicherin he wrote: a) occupation of 
Nakhchyvan-Ordubad region and its north portion by Bayazid division of Turkey; 
b) serious danger to this region by troops of Dro; c) Gabrielyan's intention to hold 
negotiations with N.Narimanov due to considerations "if Azerbaijan will refuse of 
Sherur-Dereleyaz district and Nakhchyvan region the Armenian delegation will 
immediately agree to annex Garabagh and Zangezur to Azerbaijan". 
It is clear from that information that G.Ordjonikidze expressed his 
confidence in possibility to annex Daglyg Garabagh to Azerbaijan in order to 
strengthen Soviet power and withhold Baku, but he was also firm that Zangezur 
and other regions are not the issue of dispute. He also stated that he will provide 
security of Armenian population in those areas and will hold Armenian population 
together by announcing of autonomy - without allowing there of Moslem armed 
forces. He also underlined that other way of resolution of this problem would make 
our position in Azerbaijan as unsteady and Armenia will gain nothing (of course, 
without exception that the latter will be useful for us under certain political 
circumstances); such approach to Azerbaijan will discredit us in opinion of its 
population and create basis for our opponents. 
Later while direct phone call N.Narimanov said: "You say: do not claim 
75 
 
other territories. It is interesting which territories are these... (It is not clear in the 
document - I.M.). Garabagh and Zangezur are indisputable territories of 
Azerbaijan... I agree with your formulation of the problem". In his response 
G.Ordjonikidze said: 
- in addition to Zangezur and Garabagh you have claimed also 
Nakhchyvan, Sherur-Dereleyaz district and Ordubad; 
-1 talked to Chicherin about Garaoagh and Zangezur and proposed 
immediately and unconditionally annex these regions to Azerbaijan, instead you 
have to refuse of claims for other territories, give autonomy to Garabagh and 
Zangezur without indicating this in peace agreement (between Armenia and 
RSFSR - I.M.) and strictly fulfill this agreement. 
In one of the letters sent by G.Ordjonikidze to G.Chicherin, he informs 
that he received telegram about dispute territories between Azerbaijan and 
Armenia, he hold meeting with B.Legran and Ter-Gabriyelyan and informed that 
Azerbaijan insists on immediate and unconditional annexation of Garabagh and 
Zangezur to Azerbaijan and necessity to agree with this. 
Explaining his position due :o political circumstances G.Ordjonikidze 
wrote: "both districts from economic point of view tends to Baku and absolutely 
separated from Irevan (in this case also the issue was not based on historic or 
juridical reasons but was explained by economic relations and ridiculous idea as 
separa tion from Irevan - J.M.). Especially now, when Bayazid division wedg s 
within, continuation of dispute over these regions will result vfl the- occupation by 
Turks and massacre of all Armenian population and we will not be able to prevent 
this". According to Sergo annexation of indicated regions to Azerbaijan will 
strengthen position of comrrumists there and induce official Baku to refuse from 
claims for other regions,, That is why at the end of telegram he underlined his 
opinion: "urgently annex Garabagh and Zangezur to Azerbaijan; 1 can force 
Azerbaijan to give autonomy to these regions, however this must be proposed from 
Azerbaijan and should not be indicated in the agreement." 
G.Ordjonikidze in telegram (June 19, 1920) sent to V.Lenin and 
G.Chicherin wrote: 
- Azerbaijan claims territories of Garabagh, Zangezur, Nakhchyvan and 
Sherur-Dereleyaz; 
- in Garabagh and Zangezur the Soviet power has been established and 
regions indicated above are regard themselves as part of Azerbaijan Soviet 
Republic. Nakchyvan for several months in the hands of rebels - Moslems (?! - 
I.M.) and I have no any information about Sherur-Dereleyaz; 
- Azerbaijan can not manage without Garabagh and Zangezur 
- in general, in our point of view it is expedient to invite representative of 
Azerbaijan to Moscow and discuss all issues related to Azerbaijan and Armenia. 
This has to be done before signing an agreement with Armenia. 
76 
 
G Drdjo'iikidze repeated these proposals in his telegram (July 16, 1920) to 
V.Lenin, I.Stalin and G.Chicherin. But, at the same time in other telegram sent to 
G.Chicherin on July 14 he described Zangezur as dispute territory and proposed to 
annex other regions... to Armenia. It can be seen that thi dubious position of 
G.Ordjonikidze, which in fact served to interests of Armenians, put the basis of 
documents and measures undertaken at the end of 1920 in order to annex 
Nakhchyvan and Zangezur to Armenia. 
 
Jamil Hasanly 
200 YEARS OF GARABAGH TRAGEDY 
 
Over 200 years passes from signing of Kurekchay agreement and 
Garabagh khanate entering under the rule of Russia. This is an important historic 
event and this event directly relates to Garabagh khanate of Azerbaijan and to 
Russia. Some Russian and Armenian scientists, journalists and even politicians 
without a hint of hesitation falsify historic events and lie about annexation of 
Garabagh to Russia as the Armenian province. However, this event took place not 
long ago and there are a lot of historic documents reflecting those events. Signing 
of Kurekchay agreement by Garabagh khanate and accept of Russian rule has no 
any relation to Armenians. At that period Armenians constituted such a minority of 
population and were unable to influence any political decisions. 
After collapse of Nadir shakh empire in 40-ies of XVIII century about 20 
khanate emerged in Azerbaijan. Garabagh khanate was one of the first and one of 
the largest. Emerged khanates such as Sheki khanate, Guba khanate, Baku khanate, 
Gandja khanate, Ta-lysh khanate, Derbent, Shamakhy, Nakhchyvan and Irevan 
khanates were independent administrative units in the north of Azerbaijan. 
Garabagh khanate was established by Panahali khan, the member of 
Jevanshir clan. In 1748 he built Bavat fort and according to renown historian Mirza 
Jamal Jevanshir "khan had settled in that fort with all family members, relatives 
and families of elderly of the clan". When Panahali khan established Garabagh 
khanate there was a Christian minority and these were Dizag, Varand, Khachyn 
and Chilaberd melikates. However, these melikates constituted such a small part of 
130 thousand population of khanate that they could not influence politics. Wars 
with neighboring khanates, in particular "Bavat war" with Sheki khanate, resulted 
in building of Sheki fort in 1751 by Panahli khan. After the death of Panahali khan, 
during the rule of his son Ibrahimkhalil khan (1763-1806) Garabagh khanate 
become even stronger. 
Russia, at the start of XIX century during the rule of Yekaterina II, started 
to implement its Caucasus plans, which basis was developed during the era of tsar 
Bejer I. In 1801 Georgia was annexed to Russia. In March of 1803 after Car-
Balaken was captured the fight over Ganja, started. After 9 raonths of siege Ganja 
77 
 
capitulated. Then, it was a turn of Sheki and Garabagh khanates. 
It must be taken into account that attitude of some Azerbaijani khans, 
which frequently faced aggression of Iranian shales, towards such distant protector 
as Russia was not bad. They thought that Petersburg is far away and with existence 
of such prelection khans may keep their independence-. These mistakes were 
mostly related to paucity of their knowledge about Russia. War started in 1804 
between Iran and Russia caused hard situation in Azerbaijan. After capitulation of 
Ganja the commander of Russian troops - General Sisyanov in the begging of 1804 
sent Major Lisanevich to Ibrahimkhalil khan of Garabagh in order to demand to 
enter "under the rule of Russia". In aim to protect khanate, Ibrahimkhalil khan 
agreed to meet Sisyanov. In May 1805 Ibrahimkhalil khan with his sons 
Mohammedhasan aga, Mehdigulu aga, Khaniar aga and son-in-law Salim khan, 
who ruled in Sheki, went to the Sisyanov's camp over Kurekchay. On May 14 the 
khan of Garabagh - Ibrahimkhalil khan sealed "Oath of responsibility" known in 
the history as Kurekchay agreement. Sisyanov signed the agreement. This was a 
process and as we can see, there were no traces of Armenians and no Armenian 
factor. 
Kurekchay agreement consists of 11 articles. According to the 1
st
 ar'icle 
the khan of Garabagh, his heirs and all population of khanate agreed to become 
vassals of Russia's tsar, enters under he rule of Russia and were obliged to be loyal 
to Russian tsar. In the second article, the Russian tsar as emperor on his own behalf 
and behalf of his successors guarantee to protect "integrity M country (Garabagh 
khanate) of his Highness (Ibrahimkhalil khan) and his successors. According to the 
fourth article Ibrahimkhalil khan refused of the right to lead foreign policy in favor 
of tsar. In the fifth article the tsar pledged to keep unchanged the rule of khan's suc-
cessors over "Garabagh khanate, internal governing, court and di-vankhana and 
income of the country within the authority of his Highness (Ibrahimkahalil khan). 
According to the eighth article, Garabagh khan obliged to pay annual tax to tsar 
treasury in amount of8000chervon. One of the severe articles of the document 
envisaged that Russia had the right to keep office of commandant of 500 people 
supplied by cannons in Khan garden adjacent to Shusha fort. According to 
Kurekchay agreement, khan had to send one of his grandchildren on his own 
expense to Tiflis to the headquarter of head commander. According to the 
agreement, by the decree of tsar, Ibrahimkhalil khan will be given the rank of 
General-Lieutenant of Russian army, his sons Mehemmedhasan and Mehdigulu 
aga the rank of General-Major, Khanlar aga the rank of Colonel. Due to their ranks 
Garabagh khan and his sons had to obey to orders of Commander of Caucasus. A 
week after, on May 21 of 1805 the agreement of the same content was signed with 
Sheki khanate. Of 11 articles of Kureckchay agreement no one reflect anything 
related to Armenians. The agreement is political and juridical document, which 
reflect convey of Garabagh, one of khanates of Azerbaijan, under the rule of 
78 
 
Russia and everything is clearly stipulated in that agreement. It is difficult to 
understand why those who consider themselves as historian and politicians distort 
this important document, which distinctly reflects historic events. 
As it can be seen all, obligations and privileges in the agreement relate 
directly to Ibrahimkhalil khan from Shusha of Garabagh, and not to Alban meliks. 
As usual, Russia did not keep its obligations, in spite of the fact that 
Kurekchay agreement was signed for ever. In 1806 then Iranian forces approached 
Shusha, Ibrahimkhalil khan, who earlier sent his family to nearby Khankendi, and 
all his family, except for his son Mehdigulu aga, were killed by the Major 
Lisanevich. This murder displayed that all obligations of Russia stipulated in Ku-
rekchay agreement had temporary nature.  At the same time, through the period of 
war with Iran, Russia did not change the status of Garabagh khanate. 
On September 10, 1806 by the decree of emperor Aleksander I, 
Mehdigulu aga was assigned as khan of Garabagh instead of his late farther 
Ibrahimkhalil khan. The decree stated: "We, emperor Aleksander I, who provides 
independence and prosperity of Russia, as well as other regions and countries by 
favor and assistance of God, who's highest mercy is for everyone, we say: Let all 
scientists, respectful people, famous and honorable courtiers, beys, commanders, 
village heads, elderly leaders of the tribe and all subjects, relying upon our royal 
favor and care, power and mercy, let them know that last year the late 
Ibrahimkhalil khan signed with General knyaz Sisyanov, representative of our 
royal authority, the "Testament", which was immediately brought to residence of 
empire. Upon familiarizing with stipulations of that "Testament" we regard all 
desires and demands expressed by late khan with unlimited royal mercy and care 
and taking him with all population of Garabagh under our protection, assigned the 
late Ibrahimkhalil khan by a special decree of emperor as independent ruler of 
Garabagh province. We guaranteed that all population of Garabagh, which become 
the subjects of emperor, and successors of late khan will be provided by the right to 
posses the khan throne of Garabagh and independent rule". The decree also said: 
"after such grievous event as murder of Ibrahimkhalil khan as a result of unrest, the 
good will and attitude of His Majesty to provide independence of his loyal subjects 
will be unchanged. Keeping his promise His Majesty with royal mercy and care 
assigns Mehdigulu aga, successor of highest rank on the throne of Garabagh 
province instead of his late father and this decision is confirmed by emperor's 
decree". By this decree all rights, which previously was given to Ibrahimkhalil 
khan, now was given to Mehdigulu khan and ordered to "all population to bow and 
obey him and fulfill orders and decisions of the khan". There was nothing related 
to Armenians. The decree of emperor Alexander I dated from September 10, 1806 
is very important docurient, which makes it possible to know to whom Garabagh 
was belonged. After Gulustan treaty of 1813 Russia's positions in Azerbaijan 
became even more stronger and despite "Testimonies" signed "for ever", Russia 
79 
 
started to liquidate khanates. In 1819 Sheki khanate and in 1820 Shirvan khanate 
were liquidated. In 1822 Garabagh khanate a so was abolished and instead 
administration of Commandant was established. Thus, after 17 years Kurekchay 
agreement lost i';s value. 
One year later in 1823, Russian authorities prepared "Description of 
Garabagh province..." (Opisannie Karabakhskoy povincii, sostavlennoe v 1823 
qodu po rasporajeniyu qlavnoupravleoshego v Gruzii Ermolova deystvitelnim 
statskim sovetnikom Mogilev skim i polkovnikom Ermolovim Tiflis. 1866). This is 
more or less reliable source about number of population, ethnic composition of 
Garabagh.  
Researches of prof. S.Aliyarly in relation of this source display that in 
1823 Russian authorities in Garabagh registered 18563 families and of these only 
1559 families, i.e. 8.4 % were within Aiban melikates. But Armenian scientists 
referring to this source wrote that in 1823 of over 20 thousand families in 
Garabagh 5107 were Armenian families. 
Even in this case Armenian themselves confirm that they constituted 
minority in comparison to Azerbaijani population before mass migration of 
Armenians from Iran and Turkey into Garabagh. Since "Description of Garabagh 
province..." do not suite interests of Armenians they took away and liquidated this 
book from all libraries across Russia. In this respect it is of vital importance to 
thoroughly study, publish (in foreign languages also) and disseminate 'his historic 
source. 
In 1828 aftei signing of Turkmenchay agreement, migration of 
Armenian*: from Iraii to Garabagh fulfilled in larger amount and had organized 
nature. At that period these events were supervised by General Paskevich and his 
assistant Lazarov, who was Armenian. On February 29, 1828 General Paskevich 
ordere.1 to "bcate Armenians mostly in Irevan and Nakhchivan provinces and par 
tially in Garabagh", "dislocate some Moslem villages to places where their 
coreligionists are densely settled" and locate Armenians in those emptied villages. 
Lazarov, who supervised move of Armenians from Iran wrote to Paskevich: "At 
first, Armenians of Maraga, then all Armenians decided to leave their locations". 
S.Glinka, who described dislocation of Armenians, wrote in 1831: "Armenians 
lived in villages bordering with Turkmenchay migrate to Garabagh. For three and a 
half months period 8 thousand Armenian families passed across Araz river". 
According to Russian authors, in particular according to N.Shavrov, 
through 1828-1830 from Iran 40000 Armenians and from Turkey 84600 
Armenians were moved to provinces of Irevan and Yelizavetpol, which included 
Garabagh. Shavrov also noted that of 1 million 300 thousand Armenians living in 
Caucasus over 1 million are immigrants. These figures given by N.Shavrov were 
also confirmed by 8 volume history of XIX century written by French authors 
Lavissa and Rambo. This thorough work published in 1925 in France was also 
80 
 
published in the end of 30-ies in USSR with editorial work of academician E. 
V.Tarlen. They also confirm that except for Irevan province Armenians were 
immigrants in Caucasus (History of XIX century. Editors: Professor Lavissa and 
Rambo. 1939, vol.8, p.298). In other words, Russia, after invasion into Azerbaijan 
and Caucasus, implemented policy directed to location of more Christians in those 
regions and as a result of this policy Armenian population number had increased in 
these ancient regions of Azerbaijan and this put the basis for future problems. 
After the first and second Russian revolutions tragic events happened in 
the region. For example, let us consider the speech of Ismail khan Ziyadkhanov, 
who was elected from Ganja to the I State Duma. On June 12, 1906 meeting of 
Duma he said: "Dear members of parliament, every minute I receive bad news 
from our country. Gentlemen, for about two years we walk over corpses in our 
country flooded by blood. But we already lose our patience. We have seen babies 
taken away from their mothers arms, thrown in the air and stabbed with daggers, 
we evidenced hands of unborn b&bies fallen out from body of pregnant women 
when stabbed by daggers. You, who take pleasure in screams and cries of mothers 
and children, in corpses full of wounds, you go away". This situation was also 
characteristic for the period after October revolution. Appearance of Bolshevism in 
Caucasus in face of Armenians caused tragic events for Azerbaijani Turks. Only in 
Baku in March of 1918 during 3 day period 12 thousand people were killed be-
cause of their ethnicity and religion. Similar events were repeated in Shamaf-hy, 
Garabagh, Nakhchyvan, Irevan and other places. Only proclaiming of Azerbaijan 
Democratic Republic in May of 1918 stopped this tragedy. 
Over 1918-20-ies Armenia was a country of South Caucasus with territory 
of 10 thousand sq.km. After establishment of Soviet rule its territory enlarged to 
29.8 thousand sq. km. Пobody expresses interest where these territories were 
taken. These 19.8 thousand sq.km added to Armenia's territory were Azerbaijan's 
areas. During era of Azerbaijan Democratic Republic it became possible to 
stabilize situation in Garabagh. In 1919, after members of National Council from 
Armenia were expelled from Garabagh, Armenian population hold a Congress and 
adopted a resolution about subjection to Azerbaijan government. That resolution 
given to the head of Azerbaijani delegation and sent to Paris Peace Conference, 
was handed to Versailles Supreme Council by A M.Topchubasbev. It said: 
"Representatives of Armenian population in Garabagh adopted resolution about 
their subjection to Azerbaijan government". 
Garabagh never belonged to Armenia. Armenians deceive international 
community by such false concepts and say as if Garabagh belonged to Armenia 
and was given to Azerbaijan by Stalin. By this, Armenians just wanted to take 
advantage from campaign against'Stalin started after collapse of USSR. In fact, 
everything was as ccWary
1
 Both mountain and plain portions of Garabagh was 
united and was always known as inseparable part of Azerbaijan. Namely due to 
81 
 
initiative of Moscow, by support of Stalin the mountain portion of Garabagh was 
separated as administrative unit from its plain area and was established as the 
DGAR in Azerbaijan. Thus a delayed-action mine was put in the Republic. 
Azerbaijan government made a serious mistake at that period. If we will 
consider settlements included into DGAR we will see that 90% of them are 
Azerbaijani settlements. There are a number of very important documents 
reflecting borders of Azerbaijan and Armenia in Central Archives of Russian army. 
For example, one of these: "Description of border of indisputable territory of Azer-
baijan Soviet Socialistic Republic with Armenia". It says: "The border of 
Azerbaijan and Armenia is along the former administrative border from Surmeli 
district to Araz river: through villages of Agamzaly, Bash-Gerni and Imizrin, then 
passes through Yeni-Bayazit and Sherur-Dereleyaz districts and turns from Goyce 
lake in such a way that Gozel-Dere village belongs to Armenia, Dash-kend and 
Basarkecher villages goes to Azerbaijan. The border passes in the middle of Goyce 
lake, then through Ganja and Irevan provinces in such a way that Chubuglu village 
stays in Armenia, the eastern portion of Goyce lake goes to Azerbaijan. Based on 
this division Azerbaijan territory includes Ganja province and all districts of 
Surmeli, Nakhchyvan, Sherur-Dereleyaz, Irevan provinces, as well as together with 
Kemerli, Beyuk-Vedi and Develi villages the districts of Irevan province and 
eastern portion of Ye-ni-Beyazit". 
The next campaign related to Garabagh started after the World War II. 
Claiming Gars and Erdahan provinces of Turkey, Armenian Communist Party 
leader G.Arutyunov on November 28, 1945 sent the letter to I.Stalin with a request 
to annex DGAR to Armenia. To investigate the subject, I.Stalin sends the letter to 
G.Malenkov, who in its turn sends the letter to Secretary of Azerbaijan Communist 
Party - M.C.Bagirov. The latter answered G.Malenkov on December 10 of 1945. 
M.C.Bagirov in his answer emphasized that it is impossible and noted that if 
Moscow insists it is possible to fulfill exchange of territories. He underlined that 
firstly, Shusha can not be the issue of discussions, secondly, Vedi, Garabaglar and 
Azizbeyov regions of Armenia with totally Azerbaijani population must be given 
to Azerbaijan and thkdly, fae issue may be considered only if Derbend and 
Gasymkend regions, which belonged to Azerbaijan until recently, will be given 
back to Azerbaijan. After such answer Moscow did not raised the issue once more. 
However, in December of 1947 Armenian government succeeded to gain 
the resolution signed by I.Stalin for withdrawal of Azerbaijani from Armenia. The 
issue was not related to the problem of provision of Azerbaijan villages by labor 
force, as it was stated in resolution. In fact, Moscow in order to ground territorial 
claims against Turkey in December of 1945 announced the decision of Soviet of 
People's Commissars about repatriation of Armenians lived in foreign countries to 
Soviet Armenia. Move of 360-400 thousand Armenians was planned. 
Unexpectedly the attitude of international community to that decision was not 
82 
 
good. Due to this decision in 1947 over 50 thousand Armenians came to Soviet 
Armenia. In total, through 1946-1949 the number of repatriated people was not 
over 90 thousand. When it became clear that it will be Impossible to get territory 
from Turkey, it had been decided to withdiaw Azerbaijani from Armenia in order 
to locate there repatriated people. This event is reflected in letter of G.Arutyunov 
and M.C.Bagirov to I.Stalin dated from December 3, 1947. In the letter, dislocation 
of Azerbaijani was explained by necessity to provide repatriated Armenians by 
area aid recurred living conditions. 2 weeks prior to this letter, on November 21 in 
Moscow at the meeting of Political Bureau the issue of Azerbaijan Communist 
Party was discussed. Up to now documents of that meeting are kept secret in State 
Archives of Social Political history of Russia. Due to some unknown reasons 
related to that meeting M.C.Bagirov on December 3 agreed with dislocation of 
Azerbaijani. Just imagine, that houses and savings of 100 thousand Azerbaijani 
were taken away and they were deported. Those deported seriously opposed this. 
On May 3, 1948 Ministry of Internal Affairs of Armenian SSR prepared 
11 paper document by a signature of General-Major Gri gory an : "Information 
about spirit among Azerbaijani population of Armenia in relation to their expected 
move to Azerbaijan SSR". It said: "We have identified a number of facts reflecting 
that they do not want to move to new locations and some of them go to cemetery 
and cry over the graves of late relatives praying not to be moved". Armenians 
themselves note the true course of events while deportation of 100 thousand 
people. 
The term Daglyg Garbagh emerged in Azerbaijan during Soviet rule. On 
August 1 of 1921 me extraordinary Congress of Soviets of Shusha district was 
held. Speaking at that Congress L.Mirzoyan underlined that he considers the 
decision of Caucasian Committee to establish a special administrative unit with 
subjection to Baku in mountain portion of Garbagh as absolutely correct and 
expedient. At the meeting of OrgBureau and PolitBureau in September of 1921 the 
decision about sending a proposal to Caucasus Bureau about autonomy of 
mountain part of Garabagh was not adopted because it was opposed by 
N.Narimanov and D.Buniyadzadeh. In December of 1922 members of Committee 
for Daglyg Garabagh (Garagyozov, Shaduns, Manusyan, Mirzebekyan) once again 
proposed to consider the issue of Garabagh administrative division into mountain 
and plain parts. For this, Commission involved Ga-rayev, Dovlatov and Mirzoyan 
prepared a proposal document and submitted it to Caucasian Regional Committee 
of Russian Communist Party. Based on recommendation of Regional Committee 
the Communist Party of Azerbaijan made a decision to give autonomy to mountain 
part of Garabagh on July 1 of 1923. The decision had been announced on July 7 
and DGAR was established. As we can see, this term and this evil have been 
brought to Azerbaijan by communists. 
Unfortunately, from that rime on, Azerbaijan government made serious 
83 
 
mistakes, DGAR establishment inclusive. Instead of displaying of clear, 
thoroughly considered and substantiated position, the government of Azerbaijan 
preferred to hold capitulating and compromising position with some minor 
exceptions, in respect of Armenians' claims. For example emissaries came from 
Armenia in 60-ies attempted to collects signatures for annexation of Daglyg 
Garabagh to Armenia. In 1961 the visit of N.Khrushov to Yerevan was expected 
on occasion of the 40-ieth anniversary of Soviet rule establishment in Armenia. 
Armenian authorities speculated that N.Khrushov will come with "present". 
Similar to the occasion of the 300 years anniversary of Ukrainian-Russian union in 
1954, when the Crimea was given to Ukraine, now the DGAR will be given to 
Armenia. It must be also noted, that this intention of Yerevan was not fulfilled 
because during that period Armenians of Garabagh refused to sign for such 
speculative aims. To pay back for that Armenian authority made conditions 
unbearable for Azerbaijani living in Armenia. In anonymous letters sent by 
Azerbaijani living in Armenia to L.Brejnev and A.Gromyko in March of 1965 due 
to 50th anniversary of fabricated Armenian genocide they warned "at present 
Armenia resembles the huge balloon filled with explosive and ready to blow at any 
spark". Authors of the letter wrote that oh day of "genocide" there is a danger for 
lives of Turks living in Armenia. In 1977 while adopting a new constitution of 
USSR, authority of Armenia once again raised the issue of annexation of DGAR to 
Armenia. However, as a result of firm refuse of Azerbaijan government these 
claims were turned down. In other words, during the whole period of Soviet rule 
Armenia's authority preserved the roots of Armenians hatred to neighbor nation. In 
June of 1981 while adoption of legislation about the status of DGAR the Supreme 
Soviet of Azerbaijan SSR made serious mistakes. Exclusive rights, which even did 
not existed during that period in autonomous units of USSR, were given only to 
Daglyg Garabagh by law adopted on June 24, 1981. For example, it said that 
without approval of Regional Soviet of DGAR it is not possible to make changes in 
its administrative territory. In addition two other privileges were given to DGAR. 
None of autonomous regions existed in Russia had such exclusive privileges. 
After H.Aliyev's move to Moscow, Armenians took an advantage of 
succession of rule by weak leaders in Azerbaijan. Azerbaijan authority, being 
afraid that Moscow will blame them for nationalism, played blind eye for activity 
of Yerevan m Garabagh and this resulted in falling of part of Garabagh Armenians 
under the control of Armenia. No doubt, M.Gorbachev arrival to power in 1985 
played significant role in intensification of Armenian claims. When I analyzed 
records of meetings of political Bureau I found that M.Gorbachov rendered his 
support to Armenians even before his coming to power. When K. Chernenko was 
ill, M.Gorbachov was the second person in the party, who chaired the meetings of 
Secretariat and Political Bureau. Let us consider, which problem was considered 
on February 21 of 1985 meeting of Political Bureau of Central Committee of 
84 
 
Communist Party. "Plan of events related to 70
th
 years anniversary of Armenian 
genocide". The aim was to make Political Bureau to make a decision for 
announcing April 24 as "Day of Remembrance of genocide victims". However, 
experienced members of Political Bureau N.Tikhonov, A.Gromyko, V.Grishin, 
M.Zimyanin seriously opposed this. V.Grishin said: "70 years we lived without 
this decision of Presidium of Supreme Soviet of the Republic, and now it is 
proposed to adopt resolution. Why we have to do this? In general, I doubt that the 
Republic has to adopt decision about remembrance day". A.Gromyko noted that 
"this was a dirty crime of Turkish Sultanate and Russia empire. But it was maid 
char that for the 6 years of Lenin's rule in the Republic, suvh problems were not 
considered". N.Tikhonov said: "I was concerned when I read proposal of Central 
committee of Armenian Communist Party. Our relations with Turkey renewed only 
, recently". Thus, M.Gorbachov's attempts to support Armenians were stopped. 
But, it became impossible after he became General Secretary of USSR. As a result, 
Armenian separatists received support of Kremlin and on December 1 of 1989 
violating international law and Constitution of USSR, the Supreme Soviet of 
Armenia adopted resolution to annex DGAR to Armenia. This resolution was not 
terminated up to now. When these events started our Republic's authority was 
unprepared to this. For example, when on July 18 of 1988 the Presidium of 
Supreme Soviet discussed the issue, the Azerbaijan delegation went to that meeting 
without thoroughly learning the history of this problem. For example, when 
representatives of Armenia and DGAR told fictions that Daglyg Garabagh was just 
mechanically separated from Armenia and given to Azerbaijan in 1921, the 
Azerbaijani delegation did not attempt to clarify this crucial issue and prove that 
Daglyg Garabagh never belonged to Armenia. 
Mirza Jalil with a specific sense of humor once wrote in the journal 
"Molla Nasreddin": "Let Unset (Russia) be devastated, since Uriset came here, 
affairs of Moslems are bad". No doubt, this was a humor with a drop of truth. 
Azerbaijan has a long, historic way within the Russia. But, losses along this way 
were also serious. And Daglyg Garbagh is the "souvenir" of 200 years spent within 
the Russia. Russian invasions at the start of XIX century, experiments of 
Bolsheviks in 20-ies of the XX century, deals of communists in the end of 80-ies 
brought Azerbaijan to the risk of loss of Daglyg Garabagh. This is historic result of 
200 years of Garabagh issue. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
85 
 
Kerim Shukurov 
KUREKCHAY AGREEMENT: BASIC CLAUSES, 
IMPLEMENTATION AND TERMINATION OF THE AGREEMENT 
 
Attempts of Russian empire to occupy territories of Azerbaijan at the start 
of XIX century, in fact, had turned into the war. Taking advantage from division of 
Azerbaijan into khanates, the tsarist government for its interests applied armed 
forces, as well as had signed agreements. After occupation of Char-Balaken (1803) 
and Gandja (1804) the Kureckchay agreement was signed with Garabagh khanate on 
May 14 of 1805 (Acts of Caucasian Archaeographical Commission. Editor Ad.Berse. 
vol.n. Tiflis, 1868, doc. 1436, p.702-705). Circumstances under which this agreement 
was concluded, its stipulations., obligations undertaken by Garabagh khanate were 
expounded in historic papers (Kh.Ibragimbeyli. Russia and Azerbaijan at the 
beginning of XIX century. M., 1969. History of Azerbaijan. Seven volumes. Vol. 
IV. Baku, 2000. p.22). However, the experience of development of clauses of 
Kurekchay agreement, mutual commitment undertaken according to tha
1
: 
agreement, especially that of Russia, implementation of the agreement, results of its 
termination, its value among other agreements concluded by Russia with 
independent or semi-independent rulers in South Caucasus and some other 
problems were not the subject of thorough studies. 
Along with analysis of clauses of Kurekchay agreement it is also necessary 
to study agreements signed by tsar government with South Caucasus rulers prior to 
Kurekchay agreement, stipulations made for annexation of any state structures, 
documents on their liquidation, etc. In this respect, we have to note such agreements 
as the one signed between Russia and Guba khanate in 1782 (Brothers forever. 
Documents. Two volumes. Vol.1 - 1922. Baku, 1987, p. 103-104), Georgiyevsk 
agreement with Kartli-Kakhetia kingdom in 1783 (P.Butkov. Documents for new 
history of Caucasus, from 1722 to 1803, part E, SPb, 1869, p.122-129; Problems of 
history of external policy of Georgian feudal states. Tbilisi, 1970, p. 186-245), 
Manifests of Pavel I dated from January 1801 and Aleksander I dated from 
September 12 (PSZ. Collection I, V.XXVII, N 20620; AKAK, v.I, Tiflis, 1866, p. 
132-133), Georgiyevsk agreement with Guba khanate and other rulers signed in 1802 
(AKAK, volfl, Tiflis, 1868, p. 1009-1011); sworn obligations of Char-Balaken (Same 
source, doc. 1179), stipulation made prior the battle against Gandja, agreements 
signed with dukedoms and kingdoms of Western Georgia (Papers on history of 
Georgia, vol.V, Tiflis, 1990, p.41), eta. 
Agreement signed between Guba khanate and Russia in 1782 was devoted to 
trade relations. The first agreement related to patronage of Russia in South Caucasus 
was Georgiyevsk agreement signed in 1783. 
Georgiyevsk agreement was in force for seventeen years and terminated 
according to manifests of Pavel I dated from January 18 of 1801 and Aleksander I 
86 
 
from September 12, 1801 (A.Novoseltsev. Georgiyevskiy tractate of 1783 and its 
historic value//History of USSR, 1983, N4, p.40-51). Georgiyevsk agreement dated 
from December 28 of 1802 was titled as union for peace and friendship under the 
patronage of Russia. But P.Sisyanov assigned as Senior Commander of Russian 
troops in Caucasus made occupational policy of Russia in Caucasus even more 
active. After occupation of Char-Balaken very heavy conditions were stipulated. 
When intention of Sisyanov to subject Gandja khanate by diplomatic means had 
failed, conditions became tougher. These included the following: 
1. Djavad khan Gandjali swears to obey Russian tsar together with all bis 
subordinates; 
2. The fort must be totally emptied and cannons and ammunitions of 
Russian forces are deployed there; 
3. Djavad khan Gandjali rules in his province while being under the 
subordination of Russian empire and gives 20 thousand manats of duty to Russia. 
Immediately after signing these conditions he pays the duty for 1804; 
Supplies food for troops deployed along the road to Gala and Shamshaddil; 
5. Population of Shamshaddil and its province must not be oppressed 
since they transferred under the rule of Georgian government. To guarantee 
implementation of above indicated stipulations Djavad khan Gandjaly sent his son 
Huseyngulu aga to live in Georgia. (AKAK, vol.11, dok. 1179.Translation into 
Azeri: Y.Mamedoglu. Letters: Sisiyanov-Djavad khan//Newspaper "Republic". 
September 22,1990). 
Through,the period from occupation of Gandja in January of 1804 until 
signing of Kurekchay agreement Sisyanov undertakes diplomatic efforts in order to 
give Garabagh under the rule of Russia. These diplomatic efforts resulted by signing 
of the agreement. 
Fulfilled analysis of text of the agreement shows that while concluding the 
agreement with Garabagh khanate .ainely basic articles of Georgiyevsk agreement 
signed in 1783 with Kartli-Kakhet kingdom were taken as a basis. Facts prove that 
Ibrahim khan of Garabagh had been acknowledged with terms of that agreement. 
Document, which informed about conclusion of that agreement also showed a list 
mentioning Garabagh khanate. (Russian-Dagestan relations in XVIH-start of XIX cc. 
Collection of documents. M, 1989, p. 181; S.Aliyarov, F,Aliyeva. Georgiyevsk 
tractate in context of evaluation of external political position of Azerbaijan//Role of 
organization of workers in development of revolutionary movement in Azerbaijan. 
Baku, 1984, p.75-83). 
At the same time, vizier of Garabagh M.Vagif participated at events related 
to signing of that agreement in Tiflis, where he read the short poem, which was also 
important from diplomatic and political viewpoints (Molla Panah Vagif. Poems. 
Baku, 1988, p. 140). From correspondence of Sisyanov and Ibrahim khan, his orders 
to Georgian aristocrat Ivan Djorayev, who played a role of mediator at negotiations 
87 
 
and to Major Lisanevich, it can be derived that Ibrahim khan attempted to sign the 
agreement with favorable conditions. To which extent this goal has been reached? To 
answer this question, let us consider conditions of Georgiyevsk agreement signed in 
1783. This  agreement consisted of 13 basic and 4  separate articles. 
According to the first article, tsar of Kartly and Kakhetia agreed to obey to 
Russia. According to the second article Russia promised to Irakliy II that he will 
keep his territories. Third article described rules of coming to power of Kartli and 
Kakhet tsar and the forth article stipulated that kingdom of Kartli and Kakhet will 
not possess of right for foreign policy. The fifth article envisaged that Georgian tsar 
will have its representative in palace of Russian emperor and the Russian tsar will 
have its representative in Tiflis (here and after selected articles had not been 
included into Kurekchay agreement - K.Sh.). According to the sixth article Russian 
emperor accepted internal independence of Kartli and Kakhet kingdom. Seventh 
article reflected obligation of Kartli and Kakhet kingdom to join to fight against 
enemy by demand of Russia. Eighth article envisaged that Georgian katalikos will 
be an eighth archbishop of Russia and member of Sinode, the ninth article stipulated 
equal rights of Georgian knyaz and aristocrats with that of Russian aristocrats. Tenth 
article reflected that population of Kartli and Kakhet have rights to settle in Russia, 
while the eleventh article envisaged that Kartli and Kakhet kingdom merchants 
may trade freely in Russia. Article twelve indicated that the agreement signed 
forever and the article thirteen reflected the rules   of ratification.   The   first   of  
separate   articles   indicated strengthening of good relations with Imeretiya, the 
second and third articles were about deployment of Russian battalions in Kartli and 
Kakhetia kingdom and use of local military forces, the forth article envisaged 
regaining by use of force or by peaceful means of territories lost by Kartli and 
Kakhetia kingdom. Thus, Russia by signing   of tractate   with   Garabagh   khanate   
on  the   basis   of Georgiyevsk agreement of 1783 underlined that it highly 
evaluated the khanate. 
The agreement consisted of preamble and 11 articles. Preamble stated 
subordination of Ibrahim khan of Shusha and Garabagh to Russian empire and the 
articles defined conditions proceeding from this subordination. Articles 1, 4, 6, 8 and 
9 reflected obligations of Ibrahim khan and the articles 2, 3, 5 and 7 the obligations 
of Russian emperor. According to the agreement, Russia recognized Garabagh 
khanate as an independent state, and confirmed Ibrahim khan and his heirs as the only 
sovereigns of the khanate. One of the important aspects is that in all articles Ibrahim 
khan was mentioned as Ibrahim khan of Shusha and Garabagh. The other important 
aspect that emperor guaranteed to preserve integrity of Garabagh khanate. Tenth 
article of the agreement stated that this agreement is signed forever and it would not 
be a subject of amendments in the future. Eleventh article was about ratification of 
the agreement. In Kurekchay agreement there is no a single word about claims for 
Garabagh by Garabagh meliks or Armenians. At the same time, due to Garabagh 
88 
 
khan£.e being a Moslem country, and because the agreement was signed under new 
historic conditions in distinction to Georgiyevsk agreement of 1783, it did not allow 
to take into account provisions stated in articles 5, 8, 9, 10, 11 and others. On the 
contrary, obligations of Garabagh khanate became eve I heavier oy making new 
stipulations. In distinction to Georgiyevsk agreement of 1783, which was written in 
Russian and Georgian, the Kurekchay agreement was signed only in Russian. This is 
shown in the text of agreement, especially in obligations undertaken by Garabagh 
khanate. Since Georgiyevsk agreement of 1783 was the basis for major articles of 
Kurekchay agreement signed on May 14,1805, the latter in its turn was the basis for 
Kurekchay agreement signed on May 22, 1805 with Selim khan of Sheki and 
agreement signed on December 25, 1805 with Mustafa khan of Shirvan. In these 
agreements only small amendments (taxes amount, etc.) were made according to 
local conditions (AKAK, vol.11, papers 1301,1366). 
One of the important aspects of history of Kurekchay agreement is related to 
its implementation. In this respect, it is also necessary to look through the history of 
agreements signed by Russia in South Caucasus. It can be seen, that none of 
agreements signed by Russian empire with rulers of South Caucasus was 
implemented forever as it was stipulated, including Kurekchay agreement from 
May 14 of 1805, which was liquidated seventeen years later, in 1822. However, 
through these seventeen years there were facts of violation of this agreement, mainly 
by Russia. And one of these was a cruel killing of p.208-214), occupation of North 
Azerbaijan except for Nakhchyvan and Irevan khanates, establishment of colonial 
governing system here endangered agreements concluded with Garabagh, Sheki and 
Shirvan khanate. Through the period when A.Yermolov was the commander (1816-
1827) of Russian forces in Caucasus above indicated khanates were liquidated. In 
1819 Sheki khanate was liquidated, in 1320 -Shirvan khanate and in 1822 - 
Garabagh khanate (Notes of A.P.Yermolov. 1798-1826. M.,1991, p.338, 366,382). 
After liquidation of Garabagh khanate it became the province. In 1823 the 
province was "described" (Description of Garabagh province. Tiflis, 1866). After 
liquidation of Garabagh khanate the tsarist colonial policy was implemented here 
without any hurdles. Russia, which gave emperor's guarantee for preserving integrity 
of Garabagh, did not kept its promise. The province established on the basis of 
Garabagh khanate in 1840 was named as Shusha district. Later on this territory 
along with Shusha district there were established districts of Zangezur, Javanshir 
and Jebrail. The rule of Ibrahim khan and his heirs in Garabagh was replaced by 
Russian administration. To increase a number of Armenians in ethnic composition 
of population of Garabagh they started to implement policy of migration. 
Armenians strengthening their positions in Garabagh, fulfilled here genocide against 
Azerbaijani in 1905-1906 similar 10 other regions of Azerbaijan (K.Shukurov. 
Garabagh within Russian empire// Garabagh yesterday, today and tomorrow. Baku, 
2004, p.118-121; Y.Mahmudov, K.Shukurov. History of Garabagh: From ancient 
89 
 
times up to now. // Garabagh: questions and facts. Baku, 2005, p. 1-52). 
Despite of all this, even after the liquidation of Kurekchay agreement dated 
from May 14 of 1805, Garabagh continued to he one of the major social, political and 
cultural centers of Azerbaijan and being its inseparable part played significant role in 
historic progress of Azerbaijan. 
 
Kubra Aliyeva 
SHUSHA AND SHUSHA CARPETS 
 
It is known that Shusha in the mid of XVIII century was the capital of 
Garabagh khanate. The city was founded by Panah Ali khan. His ancestors were 
noble, wealthy and famous people from Jevanshir kin. 
City Shusha was built on the cliff of a high mountain in most beautiful 
place of Garabagh on site of ancient town Shusha, which was destroyed by 
Mongolians. In a short time there were constructed a lot buildings in the city, 
including Khan's Palace, dwellings for local people, which came from villages of 
Garabagh, Seidli, Kocharli, Saatly, Merdinli, Kurtlar, etc. 
The city had its special architectural style. Houses were mainly two-or  
three   storey.   Houses   of wealthy   craftsmen,  poets, physicians were built by 
professional architects and negligibly distinguished from Khan's Palace. This 
feature was also noted by traveler August Fon Gagstgauzen, who admired by 
perfection of architectural style of Khan's Palace and did not see the difference 
with other houses in Shuhsa. Shuhsa was famous as a city of generations of 
craftsmen. Craftsmen were deeply respected here. Secrets of the craft were 
transferred from master to his student and sacredly kept this ancient tradition of 
teaching. Each craftsman was known not only by his works, but also by his master. 
In Shusha people loved to wear in nice and expensive cloths and on holidays a rare 
woman could not look like someone from khan's family. Men in Shusha wore 
cherkez, soft jackboots and high papakhs made of astrakhan. The city was 
populated mainly by craftsmen, musicians and poets. It was not accidental that 
Shusha was named the cradle of music and poetry. Almost all renown singers and 
musicians of Azerbaijan were from Shusha. Among them poetess and painter Khan 
gyzy Natavan Khurshudbanu, musician-theorist, painter avid poet Mir Mohsun 
Nawab, singers Bul-Bul, Rashid Behbutov, Kurban Primov; scientist, artist-carpet 
expert, who made famous Azerbaijani carpet around the world Lyatif Kerimov; 
founder of professional music Uzeyir Hadjibeyov and many others. 
In XIX century in Shusha there were 95 poets, 22 musicians, 38 singers, 
16 painters, 5 astronomers, 18 architects, 16 physicians and about 40 teachers. This 
large group of intelligentsia played significant role in transformation of Shuhsa 
into the cultural center. In houses a special attention was paid to interior. Life of 
citizens was influenced by holiday decorations. Since palacei were regarded as 
90 
 
etalons, the halls in houses were large and walls and ceilings were painted. 
Decorative painting was distinguished by refined lines and combination of colors. 
Frequently, the painting used floristic ornaments, images of garden and birds in 
paradise. In almost every house people were involved with carpet weaving, the 
traditional ancient craft. In each there were several weaving looms. Carpets were 
weaved for personal use and for dowry. Carpets were used as expensive presents 
for ambassadors and kings. Largest carpets were weaved in Shuhsa. Namely large 
spaces in houses dictated such large sized carpets. The carpet sets for an entrance 
hall were weaved in Shusha only. Carpet set "DestKhali-Gebe" consisted of three, 
four and five parts. The largest was named "Khali", on the right and left there were 
narrow sideway carpets "yanlyg". This group was headed by "bashlyg". All these 
parts were collected into a huge rectangular, which length reached about forty 
meters and totally covered the floor. But sometimes the hall was very large and the 
carpets were added by another one "ayaklyg", the carpe, by the threshold. This was 
the constructive solution of a complex task. Practical mind of Garabagh women-
weavers (only women weaved in Garabagh in distinction to South Azerbaijan) 
made possible the creation of carpet sets as a single carpet divided into portions. 
This allowed easily remote and clean them. 
In Azerbaijan Carpet Museum and in Arts Museum of Azerbaijan there 
are samples of carpet sets weaved in Shusha such as "Lempe", "Godja" (old), 
"Balyk" (fish) and "Bulud" (cloud), which is distinguished by originality of 
composition style, brightness of colors and complexity of decorative motifs. For 
example, composition of carpet sets "Lempe" (inhabitants of Shuhsa called ceiling 
by word lempe) is based on painting on ceilings of houses in Shusha. Frequently, 
they were so identical that it seemed that carpet and ceiling are reflected in each 
other, the effect of mirror emerged in empty space where almost was no furniture. 
The middle part of "Lempe" carpet usually was filled by large floristic 
medallion embraced on both sides by prolonged medallion and element, which is 
called "Gubpa", i.e. dome. Composition is enriched by small floristic decorations 
"Buta" and images of pairs of birds-nightingales, which symbolize birds in 
paradise. Carpet "Godja" is featured by complex floristic ornaments, where large 
flowers are neighboring with small buds. 
Shusha traded with Turkey, Iran, Georgia and Russia and merchants 
brought here a lot of goods from those countries. That is why in Garabagh carpets 
together with ancient ornaments there were decorations of carpets from Tabriz, or 
decorations of khokhloma products and jest trays. Decorations of these products 
fell into ornaments of Shusha carpets. Background of these beautiful carpets in 
distinction to other regions of Azerbaijan were dark-blue - indigo or black, which 
was received from fruits of tree "mazy", planted only in Shusha. Ornaments were 
of bright-red, yellow, white and green and were very expressive and many-colored. 
It is already over the decide that there is no Shusha. Shusha is captured by 
91 
 
Armenian aggressors. Population of Shuhsa now spread across the whole 
Azerbaijan with most of them in capital. But inhabitants of Shusha are joined 
together by one aim - feeling of beauty. Each of them is filled by remembrances 
about this city-fairy-tale, about peopb, nightingales, creatures of nature existed 
side-by-side with oreations of Shusha masters and craftsmen. 
 
Meshidikhanym Neymet EPIGRAPHIC 
MONUMENTS OF GARABAGH 
 
Engravings on monuments of XIII-XIX centuries of Garabagh-Shusha, 
Agdam, Barda, Fizuli, Zangelan, Jebrail, Lachin and Kel-badjar regions contain 
names of scientists, architects, sculptors, calligraphers and carvers. 
Tombs of XIV-XIX centuries with Arabian-Persian-Azerbaijani 
engravings and relief reflect diverse facets of everyday life, toponymy, history of 
ethnomedicine and ethnogenesis of Azerbaijani. According to epigraphic data of 
Garabagh monuments it is possible to trace migration of Turkic tribes to Caucasus. 
Engravings ihforn about construction works in Garabagh and about 
cultural-educational activity of Garabagh khans. They show process of generation 
in the region of political-economic base, which was necessary for creation of an 
integral Azerbaijani culture and reflect heroic struggle of population against 
aggres.' ors. 
Mausoleum of Yahya ibn Mohammed al-Khadja is situated on hill in 
Mamedbeyli village of Zangelan region on the Silk route. Arabian engravings on 
the tomb says: "I am the owner of this building (i.e. buried in mausoleum - M.N.) 
the weak slave, who needs the mercy of Most High Allah, Yahya Ibn Muhammed 
Al-Hadj constructed (by architect - M.N.) AH Madjd ad-Din in the month of 
Ramadan in 704" (28.III-27.IV. 1305). At the start of engraving there are Surah 
from Koran -111-16-18:61-13: 65-35 (17, 20, 21). 
Barda was one of the largest cities on the trade route East-West. 
According to descriptions of historians and geographers there were a lot of 
beautiful palaces, mosques, caravan-sarays, bazaars, mausoleums, baths and other 
buildings. Up to now the Mausoleum is preserved there and ruins of foundation of 
other mausoleum Akh-sadanbaba, creations of Nakhchyvan architect Ahmed, the 
son of Ayub al-Hafiz. Facing covered cylindrical body of mausoleum from lower 
belt with Kufic engraving up to upper coating, consists of green-blue lacquered 
bricks in combination with ordinary red burnt brick, creating the word "Allah", 
which is repeated over 200 times. Facings of red unlaequered bricks were laid 
horizontally and grey-blue lacquered - vertically. Thus, the engraving is in four 
different directions under the angle of 45° to horizon. Freeze engraving and other 
engraving along the belt of Mausoleum over socle and embracing both portals 
contain Surah of Koran: 2-256; 78. Engravings over stalacktite arches in upper 
92 
 
portion of northern and southern portals contain name of architect Ahmed, son of 
Ayub al-Hafiz an-Nakhchyvany and the date of construction -shavval in 722 year 
of Hijra/13.XI.1322. Names "Osman" and "Ali" are repeated many times. 
In village Shykhlar of Jebrail region located on Silk road there is Stony 
mausoleum. The yard of Mausoleum is surrounded by brick walling behind which 
is the huge medieval necropolis. Mausoleum had double cover - inside as cupola 
and outside tabernacu-lar. At the entrance into Mausoleum - the stone with 
engraving: "Holy month of Rajab, seven hundred seventh year" (27. XII. 1307-
26.1.1308). In the niche near the walling from the yard there is a marble 
tombstone: "Drunk from spring of knowledge. This grave of noble Sheikhzadeh 
Sheikh Abd as-Salam b. Sheikh Giyas   ad-Din,   died   on   20   Ramadan   of   the   
year   759" (27.VIII.1358). 
According to legends, the sheikh buried in Mausoleum belonged to order 
"Kadiriyya". Founder of this order was Abdulkadir al-Jilani (Gilani) (1077-1166). 
His students and sons in aim to disseminate doctrine "Kadiriyya" were traveling to 
Arab countries, Africa, India and Turkestan. Creation of orders in Azerbaijan can 
be referred to XIII century. 
Two-row engraving is carved over the entrance into round mausoleum 
into village Shykhlar of Jebrail region. The text is as following: 
1. "Its owner and possessor (i.e. mausoleum) the late 
2. Forgiven Khalil ibn Mirzadjan. May Allah give his mercy... year". 
According to paleographic peculiarities of engravings and architectural style of 
mausoleum this building may be dated back to the start of XIV century. 
The following is the engraving in Azerbaijan-Persian over the entrance in 
mausoleum in village Khubyarly of Jebrail region: "May always these passages be 
populated by possessors of the world, which seek mercy. Be aware that the one 
who restored this tomb was that highly ranked inhabitant of paradise, highest Abd 
al-Ali Ikhvan. Date of construction is the year thousand two hundred and two" 
(1787-1788). 
In Agdnrrj in 'architectural monuments "Imaraty" there were gathered 
tombstones of necropolis of XVI century. Two coffer-shaped monuments with 
engraving in Arabic belong to S-a-t-1-m-s-h-y, son of may (lana) Ahmad ad-Din 
(died in 965 year of Hi-jra/1557-1558); Mohammad, son of Karam (died in 945 
year of Hujra/1538-1539). On other tombstones there were carved images 
reflecting crafts and everyday life - horseman, rosaces - syrrnol of sun, jug for 
water, mace, dagger, bow and arrow, shoes. On one of the tombstones there is bas-
relief of the cow without head. Between legs of the animal there are images of bow 
and arrow, sledge-hummer, zindan for blacksmithing of metal workpieces and 
scissors for metal. 
Scenes of everyday life, reflecting professions of buried people and most 
widely displayed in memorials of foremountain regions, bring to nowadays the 
93 
 
ancient traditions reflected in applied art. Realistic motifs of local art dominate in 
these images. 
In Lachin region, in valley of Shalva to left from the road to temple 
Agaoglan there are tombstones of XVI century made in shape of horse figure and 
coffer made of stones. On the left facet of one of tombstones the relief of weaving 
loom is carved. On the right there is the figure of standing woman. Woman's arms 
stretched to opposite directions, in one hand she holds beetle, in the other the 
scissors. At the head level the ball of wool is carved while under ner hand there is 
multipronged beetle. Two similar monuments can be found in cemetery of Uruds 
in Zangezur. Indicated tombstones SLA other monuments in shape of horse and 
sheep figures made of stone (XIV-XVII centuries) by paleography, engravings in 
form of poems in Azerbaijani, relief images reflecting everyday life represent a 
single style of school of art of carving over stone and calligraphy, traditional for 
masters of foremountain regions of Azerbaijan. 
Sheep raising played an important role in farming of fore -mountain 
regions. That is why sheep turned into totem. Horses were also regarded as sacred 
animals, which served as a single mean of transport in mountains. This explains 
making tombstones in form of horse and sheep figures. 
In Malybeyli village of Lachin region there are three monuments in form 
of stony horse. Mane, saddle, stirrup and leash on one of them are distinctly 
carved. On blade-bone of horse there is the image of bird and on the left side of 
neck there is the date: "year of 977" (1569-1570). Technique of carving of the 
second figure is very similar to the first figure. Fore and back legs of both figures 
are made from a whole stone piece but divided from each other by line. On the left 
side of horse of the third monument there are images of rosace- symbol of sun and 
figure of a man, who holds bird in his right hand. It is known that ancient Turks 
had the cult of idol Umay, which protects children. Traditional image of a man 
with bird in his hands on monuments was regarded probably as a sign which 
protects them from destruction and damage. Mane of the horse is accurately 
combed to the right side. Near the saddle the round rosace is carved. All three 
monuments are made by one sculptor. They can be attributed to the XVI century. 
All horse figures have the image of the same tamga. Such tamga we can see on the 
figure of horse (XIV century) now kept h Mskheti affiliate of lapidary of State 
museum of Georgia in Armaziskhevi. 
In Gulebird village of Lachin region there are figures of horses made of 
stone. On the left side of one of them there is a note: "Koran 55-26, 27. Muharram 
b. Kordji 1022" (1613-1614). To the left of note there is the image of a man with 
rifle. On the other - figure of horse is decorated. On its forehead and around the 
horsecloth there are pendants. Long combed tail is ended with node. Back and fore 
legs are carved from a whole piece of stone but divided by a line. On the left side 
there were carved relief images of a man, which holds in his right hand the bird 
94 
 
(Umay) and the axe. The horseman takes an aim. 
In cemeteries of villages Zar, Zeylik, Keshdek and others in Kelbadjar 
region the tombstones in forms of sheep and horse (XIX century) made of stone are 
preserved with notes in Arabian-Azerbaijani and various scenes of everyday life. 
These monuments made for Khudaverdi b. Mohammed (died in 1228/1813), Rasul 
b. Bayram (died in 1253/1837-1838), Abbas b. Ismail Farahkanly (died in  
1305/1887-1888), Illaz bin Shakh Valu from shilany community of Farahkanly 
tribe (died in 1260/1844), Sheikh Far-man;   monuments   in   form   of  horse   -   
Muhammed   Bakir b.Mashkhadi Iskandar from community of shilanny, hasanly 
tribe (died in 1266/1849-1850), Alishakh b.Mashkhadi Iskandar from community 
of shilanny (died in 1226/! 849-1850), Kerbalai Orudju b.Kerbalai...  from 
Farahkanly tribe (died in 1228/1869-1870); Kerbalai Husayn b.Baba (died in  
1291/1874-1875). Engraved name of architect is Tahmaz son of Kerbalai 
Muhammad. On other figure of a horse the short poem in Azerbaijani: "This grave 
is a mansion of one delicate young man. Time has evened his delicate body with 
soil, 1297" (1880). The other version of poem is engraved on tombstones of XVI 
century in cemetery of Uruds in Zangezur. This engraving is the first part of 
tetrastich which carved in epitaph to Sheikh Safi in Pir Vahid village of Guba re-
gion of Azerbaijan (1054/1644-1645). Persian version of the first part of this 
tetrastich can be seen in tombstones belonged to XVI-XVII century made by 
masters of Shirvan-Absheron school of stone carving art. 
Chronology of monuments of Uruds embraces 883-1015 year of Hidjra 
(1478-1610-1611). Epigraphic and relief images on them evidence Turkic 
(Azerbaijani) influence over Alban tribes populated Syunik - one of historic 
regions of Alban state. 
In Kargabazar village of Fizuli region on the high cliff the mosque of 
Giyas ad-Din is built. Population call this the "mosque of Shakh Abbas". On two 
pieces of limestone there is engraving in Arabic: "O, Allah! O, Mohammed! O, 
Ali! This mosque-is built by Khadji Giyas ad-Din, who believes in mercy of the 
Most High Allah. 1095". (1683-1684). 
Marble stela - the monument devoted to founder of Azerbaijan's Garabagh 
khanate has the engraving: Panah-khan Jevanshir, who possess the greatness of the 
sun, which is kept in stone and glass (i.e. stony fortress named as Shusha - M.N.), 
and situated in mountains. 1172" (1758-1759). 
In mosque of Shusha there are several engravings. One of them says: 
"Said the envoy of Allah, May Allah bless him and greet him - bow Allah as if you 
can see Him. But if you do not see Him, He sees you. There are three letters of A 
in the word "abd" (slave): "ayn", "ba" and "dal". In respect of letter "ayn", it is 
comprehension (ilm) of Allah by him (slave); "ba" - his distinction from others; 
"dal" - its vicinity to Allah without questioning and without cover. And there is no 
larger punishment than putting on the shirt of Allah's servant without true belief 
95 
 
and without need. 1202" (1787-1788). 
On the main facade the engraving in Arabic: "Indeed Allah desires for his 
slaves, needing, turning to His Generosity. Based on will ihe plape in paradise for 
Govhar-aga is prepared (the mosque renovation is finished). 1302/1884-1885". 
Within rosecas located higher there is a relief carving in Arabic: "Allah, 
Muhammad, Ali, Fatima, Hasan and Huseyn. H^ (Allah) is eternal. Hand of Allah 
is over their hands"; Before the mosque there is a phonton divided into two halves. 
Withm the roseca on partition there is an engraving in Arabic: "It is made by 
Kerbalai Safi khan, architect from Garabagh. 1301" (1883-1884). 
Name of the architect is also found on the mosque of Gevhar-aga, situated 
in lower portion of Shusha and on mosque in Fizuli: "It is made by Kerbalai safi-
khan- architect from Garabagh. 1307" (1889-1890). 
According to the project of Safi khan the mosques were built in Barda 
(1868), Agdam (1870), "Tatar mosque" (1870) in Odessa, mosque Garabaglar 
(1880) in Ashgabad (27, 2004), several district mosques in town Shusha and other 
civil buildings in Garabagh. 
It can be inferred that Safi khan was the outstanding architect of Garabagh 
khanate at the end of XIX century. Names of other famous masters of Garabagh - 
artists Gambar and Ali (1302/1884-1885) are preserved in paintings of imarat of 
Shekhi khan Mushta-ga in city Sheki. 
Construction of large buildings in XVIII century, especially buildings of 
social, cultural and defense purposes, evidences important role of Garabagh 
khanate in political and economic life of Azerbaijan and its dominance over other 
khanates. 
Let us consider testimonial of Gevhar-aga on the mosque in Shusha. This 
mosque was built according to note of historian Mir-za Jamal, author of 
"Garabaghname", due to order of Ibrahim khan in 1182 by Hijra (1663-1769). By 
his order there were built other constructions, including Shusha fortress in 1198 
(1783-1784); fortress Askeran - in 1203 (1788-1789). The father of Ibrahim khan -
Panah khan also was involved with construction. He built famous forts Bayat, 
Shahbulag, mosques, baths and bazaar. According to Mirza Jamal, the mosque was 
reconstructed by daughter of Ibrahim khan - Gevhar aga and became more 
beautiful, which confirmed by engravings. According to the engraving- text of 
vagfname of Gevhar-aga, construction of upper and lower mosques and two 
madrasa in Shusha had to be completed by the time of compiling of text, i.e. by 
1282 (1865-1866). Dimensions of each stone on which vagfname is engraved 
constitute approximately  1.60 x 0.70m. Placement of a large number of words in 
small area evidences high skills of carver and distinction of chosen style. Name of 
master-calligrapher is not displayed in engraving. Engraving is embraced by a 
simple decoration in form of plant. Engravings said about vagf- will of Gevhar-aga 
to two mosques and two madrasa and about conditions of spending of their 
96 
 
benefits. The original vagfname is not found. Its copy is kept at the Institute of 
Manuscripts of Azerbaijan National Academy of Sciences. It has no date. 
However, the text carved over the stone has the date and the carver indicated that 
he has seen the original document and all its copies. 
Engraving listed all property, including shops, gardens and lands, which 
according to will have to be used for charity. 
In Shusha, near to mosque of Gevhar-aga there is a large two-storey 
caravan-saray. High over its portal there are four stone plates, on which the text of 
gift testimonial is engraved (vagfname) of Mashadi Husayn Inb Mashadi Mir 
Sayyaf. The text reflects convey of indicated mosque of Aksa (far) attached to 
caravan-saray to the vagf. Vagfname on the stone was engraved by Ali, son of 
Hadji Abbas in 1306 year of Hijra (1888-1889). 
In the cemetery of village Ashagy Aybasanly of Fizuli region on the 
tombstones the poems of famous Garabagh poet of Vidadi are preserved, which 
were unknown from other sources. On the front of one of stelas there is a note 
made in Azerbaijani: "1209 (deceased, forgiven Ahmad Sultan Kazzak). O, Vidadi, 
do not believe that you will make a new way in constant (i.e. in perishable world). 
(No one passes away from this oppressor with satisfied heart). Be aware that the 
owner of this grave was a good person. Known in the world by his piety. (He was a 
philanthropist, generous man). When the death came, he left the perishable world 
and passed away (with hundreds of wounds, grief, pain in his soul, ... )". The 
digital hemistich corresponds to date of his death: "accept to the walk to paradise 
of Ahmad Sultan Kazzak / 1202" (1794-1795). 
On the other stela there is engraving in Azerbaijani: "This is the grave of 
Peri, daughter of Ahmad Sultan Kazzak (At the death of Peri khanum this 
hemistich was agreeable) date Vidadi! Paradise became the mansion of this fairy 
(Peri) (22, 400). 
The last hemistich by abdjada (digital value) corresponds to 1206 (1791-
1792), i.e. the year of Peri's death. 
According to epigraphic data and other motifs over described earlier 
monuments of Garabagh, as well as on tombstones of Uruds in Zangezur, which 
represent a school of art of carving over stone and calligrapher, it is possible to 
trace process of falling under Turkic influence and later - converting to Islam of 
tribes populated Zangezur (Syunik). They assist to outline places of dense 
population of Turkic tribes, which played the important role in forming of 
Azerbaijan nation. Engravings evidence that Garabagh by its geographic position, 
military-strategic value, riches, beaut/, magnificence of nature always attracted 
attention of foreign aggressors and greedy neighbors. The region always was in the 
center of trade and caravan routes, which connected countries of West and East in 
political, economic and cultural sense. Garabagh was the favorite place for rest and 
meetings of political activists and statesman, including foreigners. 
97 
 
Studied engravings display names of architects, builders, sculptors, 
calligraphers, carvers, including name of founder of architectural school of XIII-
XIV centuries Ali Madjd ad-Din, architect of Garabagh - Safi khan, architect - 
builders Ibrahim Khalil, Alidjan, calligrapher Veli, sculptors Takhmaz ibn Kerbalai 
Muhammad. Their creations are evidences of high level of national culture of 
Azerbaijani nation. 
 
Mubariz Khalilov 
ABOUT KURGANS OF GARABAGH 
 
The V Congress of archaeologists of Russia held in 1881 in Tif-lis set the 
basis for wide-scale archaeological researches in South Caucasus. During the 
period of preparing for Congress archaeologists led researches in many areas of the 
region. But they did not pay attention to Daglyg Garabagh. S.Ter-Avetisyan 
studied monuments of material culture in Daglyg Garabagh in 1924 as a member 
of scientific expedition of Association for studies of East attached to Caucasian 
Central Committee. He wrote: "Albania, to which Garabagh is historically tied, has 
more remarkable centers of ancient culture than Partav (town Barda - M.Kh.), but 
archaeological congress considered the latter as more noteworthy, since most 
scientists expressed more interest to historic centers of the region duri lg feudal era 
than to monuments of primary society" (S.Ter-Avetisyan. Monuments of ancient 
Garabagh and skiffs problem. Tiflis, 1934, p.4). But, German teacher E.ResIer, 
founder of archaeology of Daglyg Garabagh, taught from 1P-91 at the school in 
Shusha, started his archaeological researches. According to S.Ter-Avetisyan, while 
his researches E.ResIer met "group of Armenians interested in history of the 
country" (StTer-Avetisyan. Monuments of ancient Garabagh and skiffs problem. 
Tiflis, 1934, p.4). In 1895 without official permission the priest Vagan Dadyan also 
started researches in Daglyg Garabagh. S.Ter-Avetisyan wrote about these 
researches the following: "As I already indicated, in regions where I went digging 
was carried out by two people: deacon Vagan Dadyan (archimandrite Khachik) and 
German Emil Resler. We have no any published information about researches of 
the former, so we are unable to evaluate their scientific value. However, it would 
not be a mistake to say that Vagan Dadyan digging kurgans of Arachadzor aimed 
to collect kurgan inventory. E.ResIer fulfilled researches with permission of 
Petersburg archaeological commission and had to submit reports about his work to 
that commission." (S.Ter-Avetisyan, Monuments of ancient Ga-rabagh and skiffs 
problem. Tiflis, 1934, P-12). All this reminds bishop from city of Marg (V 
century), who came to the land of Huns and dug the royal tombs and according to 
expression of Prisk Pa-niyskiy, author lived in V century, he "stole treasures 
hidden there" (Prisk Paniyskiy. Gothic history, III, 2). This occasion, which Huns 
"did not want to convey to judges" became one of the major causes of Hun-
98 
 
Byzantine war (Prisk Paniyskiy. Gothic history, 111,2). However, let us go back to 
our theme. 
The certain part of inventory found by E.Resler from kurgans in Daglyg 
Garbagh was transferred to Germany, where they were studied by famous 
anthropologist Rudolf Virkhov (1821-1902). Being very attentive and possessed by 
a strong intuition S.Ter-Avetisyan wrote: "Opinion of Virkhov that Garabagh 
kurgans are not the product of culture of Armenians populated mountain areas, or 
more correctly. South Caucasus, and the idea that these kurgans belong to other 
culture, which is not researched up to now, do not cause any doubts". (S.Ter-
Avetisyan. Monuments of ancient Gara-bagh and skiffs problem. Tiflis, 1934, p. 
19). Namely S.Ter-Avetisyan was the first who by mentioning influence of 
northern culture onto Garbagh kurgans attempted to clarify ethnic belonging of 
Daglyg Garbagh kurgans, attributing them to culture of skiffs or saks (S.Ter-
Avetisyan. Monuments of ancient Garabagh and skiffs problem. Tiflis, 1934, p. 19-
26). S.Ter-Avetisyan considered saks not as the ethnicity arrived from north, but as 
autochthonous population of South Caucasus, including Daglyg Garabagh (S.Ter-
Avetisyan. Monuments of ancient Garabagh and skiffs problem. Tiflis, 1934, p.24-
25). 
After 40 years, this conception of S.Ter-Avetisyan was confirmed to a 
some extent by researches of one of leading experts in skiff archaeology 
M.Pogrebova. Among tombstones of South Caucasus of Late Bronze and Early 
Iron ages she identified group of kurgans, which have characteristic features as 
wood constructions in grave, burial of horses together with his owner and traces of 
fire, which played a definite role in a ritual (M.Pogrebova. Iran and Caucasus in 
Early Iron Age. Moscow, 1977, p. 114-140). 11 kurgans were included to this 
group, located in steppe in vicinity of Gandja, 3 kurgans nearby to town Khanlar, 5 
kurgans of Minge-chevir and kurgans of Daglyg Garabagh nearby villages of 
Ballii-kay and Sirkhavend and kurgan N2 of tomb in Khodjaly. Bones of horse also 
were found in partially destroyed kurgan in Daglyg Garabagh in surroundings of 
Khankendi, where they were mixed with bones of human (M.Pogrebova. Iran and 
Caucasus in Early Iron Age. Moscow, 1977, p.115, 120, 122). 
Kurgan N2 in Khodjaly researched by E.Resler had a height of 11 meters 
and contained two-meters layer of soil with traces of fire. Within that layer the 
derricks of wooden platform are found, mixed with human and horse bones, as 
well as with bones of other animals and burial inventory. 
Height of hill with kurgan between Ballukaya and Sirkhavend, which also 
was studied by E.Resler is 9 m. At the depth of 5 m there was discovered a largd 
amount of ashy wood, obviously the residuals of woody cover. In the north-west 
part under the cover there was a stone, which probably served as a basis for one of 
columns. Under the platform the researcher found human skeleton without skull, as 
well as bones of horse, ox, dog and burial inventory. Approximately in the same 
99 
 
way the skiff kurgans were described by Herodotus in the V century B.C. 
According to his data, skiffs descended body of deceased to a large rectangular 
hole and in spare space of the hole they placed burial inventory, horses, other 
domestic animals, etc.. Over these they layered wood boards and then all skiffs 
together made a hill over the grave (Herodotus. History, IV, 71). Described 
peculiarities of skiff kurgan totally coincide with features of construction and ritual 
of described above kurgans of Daglyg Garbagh. Kurgan nearby Ballukaya and 
Sirkhavend dated back to XII-XI centuries B.C. and kurgan N2 in Khodjaly by XI-
X centuries B.C. (M.Pogrebova. Iran and Caucasus in Early Iron Age. Moscow, 
1977, p. 126). Similar kurgans in other regions of Azerbaijan indicated earlier in 
this paper are attributed to the period from XIII to VIII centuries B.C. 
(M.Pogrebova. Iran and Caucasus in Early Iron Age. Moscow, 1977, p. 126). But 
what about skiffs, being known from v/ritten sources only starting from VII 
century B.C.? In this respect it must be noted, that according to some sources the 
formation of the core of skiff ethnicity took place in XVI-XV centuries B.C. 
(Herodotus. History, IV,7). Researchers consider that namely during that period in 
Volga region the culture of Srubna was formed. At the end of its existence there 
were separate things, which later were developed by skiffs. According to experts, 
this indicates that there was no serious distinction between Srubna and skiff 
cultures. Descendants of Srubna culture during the early-skiff period might put the 
basis of skiffs culture. Moreover, kurgans with holes, which have woody covers, 
with woody frameworks (srubs) and traces of fire and buried horses are 
characteristic for skiffs lived in VII-V centuries B.C. (Steppes of European part of 
USSR during skiff-sarmatian period. Moscow, 1989. p.55-56, 217-221). 
In sfcSppes of Low Volga researched kurgans are close to those of 
Garabagh by wopden constructions, burial of horses, rituals, including those relat d 
to fire and by their date. According to experts, these monuments were predecessors 
of burials of skiff-sarmatian aristocracy in this region (M.Pogrebova. Iran and Cau-
casus in Early Iron Age. Moscow, 1977, p. 132-133). In viewpoint of 
M.Pogrebova, at the end of II millennium B.C. tl e ethnicity, which had relations 
with skiffs may migrate from Low Volga region to South Caucasus, including 
Daglyg Garabagh. fM.Pogrebova. Iran and Caucasus in Early Iron Age. Moscow, 
1977. p.133-134, 173). 
At the end of XX century the data about some other kurgans with woody 
construction and horse burials were published. These include kurgan dug in 1941 
by Y.Gummel (1893-1946) nearby to Khanlar (Y.Gummel. Archaeological studies 
to south-west from Khanlar in 194! - Journal "Vestnik drevney istorii", 1992, N4, 
p. 5-12) and also kurgan Borsunlu (XII-XI centuries B.C.), Beyima-sarov (X-IX 
centuries B.C.) in Terter region and Sarychoban (XI-X centuries B.C.) in Agdam 
region of Azerbaijan, founded through 1892-1986 by G.Jafarov (G.Jafarov. 
Borsunlu -- burial of tribe leader. Baku, 1986; G.Jafarov, F.Mahudov. Results of 
100 
 
work of the second team of Mil-Garabagh archaeological expedition - Arc-
haeological researches in Azerbaijan (1985). Paper abstracts. Baku, 1986, p. 14-15; 
G.Jafarov. Sarychoban - newly founded burial of tribe leader - Paper abstracts of 
the conference "Great October and development of archaeological and 
ethnographic sciences in Azerbaijan". Baku, 1988, p.21-23). Among them of 
special interest is Borsunlu kurgan, which was looted at ancient times. Its grave 
hole was of huge extensions - 256 m
2
. Even nails hammered into wooden things 
were made of gold (G.Jafarov. Borsunly..., p.4). Researches  of G.Jafarov  
confirmed another notion  of S.Ter-Avetiyan that kurgans were spread into Daglyg 
Garabagh from Garabagh plain through the passages along rivers Terter, Khachin, 
Gargar (S.Ter-Avetisyan. Indicated work, p.7-8). In these kurgans in plain area of 
Garabagh G.Jafarov detected skeletons of people, including women - concubines 
attending the leader to the other world, as well as a layer of cane over wooden 
cover, indicated by Herodotus in V century B.C. while description of kurgans of 
skiff kings (Herodotus. History, IV, 71). Comparing wooden beds from kurgan of 
Borsunlu and from kurgans with srubs and horse burials belonged to Tagar culture 
of skiff era in Siberia, G.Jafarov identifies similarity in them (G.'afarov. 
Borsunlu..., p.4). In srubna burial nearby to Khanlar a cart with two deer was 
discovered. Such cart was also found in kurgan with wooden framewok of skiff-
saks origin in Pazyrka in Altay, where buried cart-horse had a mask of deer on  its 
head.  (B.Piotrovskiy.  Appendix to the  paper of Y.Gummel - Journal "Vestnik of 
drevney istorii", 1992, N4, p.12). These parallels between two monuments of 
various epochs once more indicate that skiff culture, probably, constituted a new 
stage in generation of culture of "organs with srubs and horses". Srubna Burial 
nearby to Khanlar was dated by B.Piotrovskiy (1908-1990)    approximately    back    
to    XV-XIV    centuries    B.C. (B.Piotrovskiy. Indicated work, p. 15). This makes 
it possible to infer that the first group belonged to Srubna culture may emerge in 
South Caucasus before the date known earlier. 
According to G.Jafarov, tribe leaders buried in kurgans of Ga-rabagh 
plain, focused in their hands civil, military and religious power during the era of 
"military democracy" (G.Jafarov. Sary-choban..., p.23). According to similar 
kurgans of Daglyg Garbagh, their power was spread not only over Garabagh plain 
area, but also over Daglyg Garabagh. 
In viewpoint of M.Pogrebova, in VII century B.C. during the outstanding 
march of skiffs through Caucasus they met here relative ethnicities (M.Pogrebova. 
Indicated work. P. 173). It is interesting that saks, which had common origin with 
skiffs, were located in area btfween rivers Kur and Araz namely in the zone of 
allocation of kurgans with wooden constructions and horse burials. In VI-V 
centuries B.C. they populated in historic Saksene on the right band of Kur in area 
where Mingechevir, Gandja and Khanlar groups of kurgans were found. S.Ter-
Avetisyan indicates that "among population of Ganja region there are oral legends 
101 
 
about saks is reserved" (S.Ter-Avetisyan. Indicated work. p.23). but he did not 
writes it. S.Tel-Avetisyan developing a concept about links of Garabagh kurgans to 
northern culture, let "the final decision to the future, when these kurgans 'vere 
systematically dug and studied" (S.Ter-Avetisyan. Indicated work, p. 19). This far-
sighted message to next generations obliges population of Daglyg Garabagh to 
preserve archaeological monuments, including kurgans of this region and stop 
attempts of dilettantes and treasure-hunters to destoy them.  
 
Musa MArdjanly 
ARMENIAN EXPANSIONISM - THE  
SOURCE OF DANGER TO STABILITY IN THE REGION 
 
Each nation made its own contribution into development of common 
cultural heritage of humanity. The issue of the nation leading in the world culture 
was always the subject of discussions and contradictions. In fact, all nations to 
some extent participated in creation of monuments of material and spiritual culture 
of humanity. 
At the same time, history knows a number of personalities, political 
blocks, event states, which played negative role in historic processes, which 
damaged cultural heritage of a mankind. Undoubtedly, in each case such behavior 
grounds on some ideology, which formed for a long period of time and ultimately 
catches into its net the most part of society. In such case it is possible to talk about 
serious danger to that society, its moral health, and frequently about the danger to 
neighbor states and societies. It is known that Armenians migrated to Caucasus in 
XIX century under protection of Russian empire, later created their own state on 
historic lands of Azerbaijan. As a result of nationalistic policy, Armenians 
occupied Zangezur, Irevan, Geyche and finally Garabagh. But it seems, as if they 
have no intention to be satisfied with these. Experience of recent history evidences 
that Armenian aggressive nationalism started a total war against Azerbaijan, which 
has centuries-long history of statehood and made invaluable contribution into 
development of civilization and world-wide cultural heritage. Terror backed by 
ideological war along with open armed aggression, ruthless ethnic cleansing are the 
major components of policy of Armenian nationalists. 
So, we may infer that Armenian expansionism log time ago became the 
source of danger to stability in world scale. At the same time,  Azerbaijan as the  
most  suffered from Armenian aggression, at least, has the moral right for adequate 
defense by international community. For this international community has to learn 
the truth about Armenian aggressive nationalism, its historic roots, scale and 
consequences of its destructive activity in the region and international arena in a 
whole. Today, when everywhere in the world the necessity to fight international 
terrorism is the crucial issue, the problem of neutralization of Armenian extremism 
102 
 
gain a special value. 
Azerbaijan natio: from ancient times tried to build good relations with its 
neighbors, was far from hostility and attempts to occupy territories. On the hand, it 
frequently was forced to defend its territory from foreign aggressors. This is 
observed nowadays: one fifth of territory of Azerbaijan is occupied. The aggressor 
violates all norms of international law and ignores existed international documents, 
which regulate humanitarian and environmental issues. On territories occupied by 
Armenia, which are outside of control of international community, narcotics are 
produced and people are trained for various extremist groups. Monuments of 
Turkic-Alban and Alban-Christian culture are deliberately destroyed, including 
monuments of international value, flora and fauna of this region are damaged. For 
the last years in Armenia and other countries new absurd things were published to 
prove Armenians being extraordinary nation and justify their huge territorial 
appetite. However, it is not new, since various Armenian groups implement 
propaganda war for many decades. The old motto is the major thing in this war: the 
more absurd the lie, more easily it will be believed. However, despite the scale of 
lie and falsifications, despite cynical thrusting of absurd ideas, pretending that it is 
the truth, it must be remembered that lie has short legs. Today muddy flow of 
disinformation is more frequently smashed by wave of true data and there are air 
ady the fruits of dissemination of true information about so-called "Armenian 
issue" and the society starts to understand who is right and who is not. I would like 
to hope  that  sensible  part  of Armenian  society  will  influence politicians, which 
play with destiny of own nation. The history of Armenian-Azerbaijan conflict 
starts from time of inigration of Armenians to Caucasus in the first half of XIX 
century. Armenians came to Caucasus with assistance of powerful supporters, lies 
and false tears, they had no any significant historic-geographic roots in the region. 
That is why, Armenians-hays which arrive here, always desired to capture 
territories of indigenous population. Another twist of this "traditional" aggression 
policy of Armenians towards Azerbaijan's lands took place in 1988 initiating series 
of ethnic conflicts on territory of former USSR. In this case Armenian aggression 
targeted Garabagh, which they "selected" 200 years ago during their move into the 
region. Starting from 1989, Armenians with support of their protectors succeeded 
to occupy this historic land of Azerbaijan. History shows us a number of examples 
when in the end occupants were defeated, but Armenians never learned from 
history. If this was not true, then "Armenia would not swung between Eastern and 
Western states, like ping-pong ball...", because "it never acted as a host to itself, 
never firmly supported any party and always was the battlefield for diplomats and 
armies" (Ayzek Azimov. "Middle East: history often thousand years"). As a result, 
Garabagh being an ancient territory of Azerbaijan, at the end of XX century was 
occupied by Armenians, which withdrawn local Azerbaijani and undertake 
unrestrained destruction and looting of material and cultural monuments. Military 
103 
 
aggression of Armenia against Azerbaijan led to death of tens of thousands people, 
many innocent people were imprisoned and underwent atrocities and tortures, 
many wounded. Tragedy of Garabagh town Khodjaly is one of the most ruthless 
crimes against humanity in XX century. At night in February of 1992 hundreds of 
civil population - elderly, women and children - were killed, their corpses were 
disfigured and desecrated. This is a moral image of supporters of idea of "Great 
Armenia". To drive away the attention from their own bloody acts, they pretend to 
be nation-"sufferer", and by any means try to thrust on fabricated thesis of so-
called "genocide of Armenians". Unfortunately, sometimes they reach their goal. 
With assistance of influential lobby and their organizations, Armenians lead 
ideological struggle against Azerbaijan. Their long-term propagandistic campaign 
in Garabagh issue brought their "fruits" - great powers do not show any resolution 
towards aggressor and apply policy of double standards and thus justify occupation 
of Azerbaijani lands. 
Azerbaijan has not only lost its territories, sons and daughters in 
Garabagh. Losses also do not limit by riches on the eaith's surface and that 
underground. Azerbaijan has lost here the most part of history, culture, arts, in 
other words, spiritual heritage. Aggression of Armenia damaged Azerbaijan in a 
way, which can not be measured ordinarily: over vast area there were destroyed 
historic, cultural and environmental monuments, mosques and ancient settlements. 
The people fled from their own lands were forced to change their lifestyle and 
traditions. However, Armenians themselves already understand that aggression 
policy has no future. For the last period emigration from Armenia took intensive 
nature. One of reasons is social-economic problems, while the other undoubtedly 
relates to fear of waiting of "hour X" - time of liberation of occupied territories. 
With approaching of "hour X" we have to raise our voice of truth and make it 
known to a whole world. 
 
Nigar Geozalova 
STUDIES OF GARABAGH AND  
IREVAN KHANATES HISTORY REFLECTED  
IN HISTORIOGRAPHY WRITTEN IN ENGLISH 
 
In this paper we will consider most important works of authors who wrote 
in English and were involved with studies of history of Garabagh and Ire van 
khanates. These are the works of Atkin Murel and J.Bornotyan. 
The paper "Strange death of Ibragimkhalil khan of Garabagh" authored by 
A.Murel is the serious historic investigation of English author, which is devoted to 
one of Azerbaijan's khanates and personality of outstanding Azerbaijani khan. In 
this paper the author very objectively estimates historic processes of the second 
half of XVIII century, intentions of Russia and Gadjar's Iran to establish their 
104 
 
dominance in this region, inevitability of khanates rulers appeal to neighbor 
countries for assistance in order to preserve internal order and independence. 
According to A.Murel, Ibrahimkhalil khan became one of the powerful 
ruler in South Caucasus. By diplomatic means, sometimes by use of armed 
operations he established his power over the largest portion of territory governed 
by Moslem rulers. The author states that Ibrahimkhalil khan fiercely struggled for 
political survival and applied all means in this harsh struggle for power in South 
Caucasus. 
In his other publication "Russia and Iran, 1780-1828" issued later, the 
author studied the struggle between Russia and Iran over the power in South 
Caucasus. In general, it can be noted that this is the last and one of the thorough 
researches on Russian-Iran wars in the world historiography. A.Murel underlines 
aggressive and expansionist nature of policy implemented by Russia and desire of 
Iran to restore its dominance over the territories once belonged to it. Independence 
of khanates he considers,, as legal, objective, however temporary phenomena, 
because countries which fought for dominance in this region were not interested in 
existence of independent states here. In addition, the author gives short information 
about economic situation, administrative structure of khanates, etc. 
It must be noted that conceptual viewpoint of representatives of 
historiography in English in regard of Russia's policy in South Caucasus consists in 
notion that policy of Petersburg is shown as attacking, aggressive and colonial, 
however policy of England, France, Iran and Turkey as "defensive and peaceful", 
etc. It can be seen that these authors correctly evaluating aggressive policy of 
Russia in the region, left expansionist policy of Iran, Turkey and their own 
countries in the shade. 
English authors while writing about independence of khanates, recognize 
this only in respect of khanates of northern Azerbaijan. However, despite this, they 
consider these lands as territories of Iran, which rulers are temporarily separated 
from central power. Simultaneously they give correct evaluation for struggle 
between Russia, Gadjar Iran and Turkey over the influence in the region and regard 
this policy as outspokenly iggressive and expansionist one. A.Murel noted that 
Russian invasion into South Caucasus was not the part of "liberation of Caucasian 
nations from foreign yoke" as stated Soviet historians. For South Caucasian 
khanates the Russian suzerainty was at least the lesser evil than "foreign yoke" of 
neighboring countries dominated in the region until that period. Divided political 
power in Iran in XVIII century and weakness of Ottoman empire made possible the 
emerging of generation of Caucasian rulers, which attempted to develop their own 
states without interference of large states. During the period of struggle between 
neighbor countries the local rulers tried to keep and deepen their power by the 
union most favorable for the period. But khanates  almost had not any space for 
political maneuvers. According to A.Murel, Russia clearly understanding 
105 
 
advantages which it will gain interfering into Caucasian affairs, did not take into 
account that interests of local rulers may distinguish from that of Russians. 
The special group consists of works in English devoted to history of 
Azerbaijan and written by Armenian scientists. Among these a special interest draw 
researches of J.Bornotyan it must be noted that he is the author of a large number of 
papers and books on history 'of the region; his works as works of all Armenian 
historians are penetrated by the only goal: prove the concept of existence of 
Armenian state in Caucasus on the expense of distortion of Azerbaijan history. In 
ge eral all Armenian historiography tries to inculcate in historic science the idea 
about existence of Armenian state in Caucasus since ancieo' times, which is 
nothing else than illusion and fabrication of Armenian false historians. Until XIX 
century in the whole South Caucasus there was not Armenian state, not even dense 
settlement of Armenians. It should be noted that Armenian propagandistic machine 
became more active since start of Armenian-Azerbaijan conflict. 
Our attention draws his work "Irevan khanate while the rule of Gadjars 
(1795-1828), as well as his research devoted to Azerbaijani khan Huseyn Gulu 
khan Irevani, etc. 
We have already indicated tendentious approach and distortion of historic 
truth in works of Armenian "scientists" and in this respect, researches of Bornotyan 
are not the exception. However, in his works Bornotyan could not object historic 
realities. In particular, he is one of a few Armenian historians who recognize that 
Armenian population of Irevan khanate does not exceed 20% prior to Russian, 
invasion. Besides, Bornotyan indicates migration of a large lumber of Armenian 
population into Irevan khanate after Russian invasion, as well as changes made in 
toponymy of Azerbaijani settlements into Armenian on territory 0f Irevan khanate, 
etc. The author also wrote that in Irevan khanate "There are no evidences on 
dominating or eve , equal number of Armenian population with that of Moslems 
diiri.no Persian rule...". The author notes that immediately after the annexation of 
region by Russia some of "Armenians, who supported Russia were disappointed, 
during the first decades the Russian rule did not distinguish from the last years of 
Persian rule in the region, however Russian rule has brought more benefits to 
Armenians than to Moslems of khanate". 
Bornotyan is also the author of translation of the most valuable and 
important sources of history of Azerbaijan in XVIII-XIX centuries, that is 
"Garabagh Tarikhi" (History of Garabagh) by author Mirza Jamal. Pro-Armenian 
positions of the author serve as initial point while researching history of region 
(which is briefly expounded in foreword to the translation). Bornotyan proceeds 
from preconception that Azerbaijani researchers deliberately decreased the value of 
some parts of the book where there are indications about Armenian population of 
Garabagh. Even he did not give any proofs of this. Bornotyan had to be praised for 
his "excellent" manipulations by historic realities. Such skillful "historic method" 
106 
 
(many incorrect, almost absurd comments to the text) may embarrass the reader, 
which did not acknowledged with true historic realities. Thus, in the light of all 
said above there is a certain necessity in publication of this and other Azerbaijani 
sources in English with authentic comments of Azerbaijani researchers, which 
undoubtedly will assist to restoration of historic truth. 
I would like to specially note the issue as if there were Armenian "lands" 
in south Caucasus from ancient times. It is known that such tendency set in almost 
all western historiography. It must be underlined that there was no "Armenian 
state" on the territory of South Caucasus, because Armenians did not have their 
own state until the XX century. Delusion of many authors, which write in English, 
including A.Murel, consists in indication of existence of so-called "Iranian 
Armenia" or "Eastern Armenia" (In Armenian, as in all western historiography to 
"Eastern Armenia" they refer lands of Nakhchivan, Gandja, Garabagh and also 
Irevan khanates). We explain this, firstly by "successful" falsification by 
Armenians of historic facts according to their interests; secondly, by insufficient 
knowledge by those authors of all sources and as a consequence in their works 
there are gaps while researching of some historic processes undergone on the 
territory of Azerbaijan. This leads to mistakenly made conclusions while critical 
description of these problems. First of all, it must be noted that there was no 
"Iranian Armenia" or "Eastern Armenia" and all lands in fact were Azerbaijani 
territories. Our arguments are confirmed by researches of famous American 
scientist Jastin Makkarti. He noted that despite persistent use of these terms by 
Europeans there never was "Ottoman Armenia" or "Iranian Armenia" both 
demographically and territorially. 
Characterizing books written in English it should be noted that 
methodological approach of these historians in distinction to that of Soviet period 
is more objective and true. Despite some incorrect statements and subjectivity in 
description of events in those books it is possible to derive some interesting facts, 
which allow better comprehension of some characteristic feat res of international 
struggle in South Caucasus in XVIII century. 
Despite some shortages these researches are frequently useful for 
substantiation of some scientific issues, because they contain a lot of facts from 
valuable sources which absent in archives of our country. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
107 
 
Niyazi Mehdi 
RESOLUTION OF CONFLICTS IN THE CAUCASUS 
ACCORDING TO THE PRINCIPLE OF 'SEMIOTIC ANOMALIES' 
 
In the present phase of the conflict over Mountainous Karabakh, the 
deadlock in the peace process is due to symbolism. There is no solution through 
standard methods: the Armenians are not ready to give away the symbol of an 
independent republic, while the Azeris refuse the alteration of their borders. 
Similar situations exist in the conflicts between Chechnia and Russia, and between 
Abkhazia and Georgia. In order to resolve this deadlock, we are proposing a new 
autonomy model ('nomy' is law in Greek, 'autonomy' means 'ruling oneself 
according to one's own laws'). 
Although the model we propose is thought of in the context of the 
Caucasus, it may be applied in other places, for example in Cyprus, or in Southern 
Azerbaican which is tied to Iran, after the necessaiy transformations there. 
The autonomy we are proposing solve the conflicts with the principle of 
semiotic (related with the system of signs) anomalies. First the model of 
anomalous autonomy is examined in the face of the facts of the Mountainous 
Karabakh case. 
To give the context of the proposal, it is needed to present the current 
situation: Factors obstacles to a solution from the Armenian perspective: the 
Armenian army has succeeded in factually removing Mountainous Karabakh from 
the Azerbaijani state system. However, international law prevents this 'fact' from 
entering into force. There seems to be no way out from this problem. Naturally, the 
Mountainous Karabakh Armenians have the opportunity of conceding some 
political symbols to Azerbaijan while de facto continuing to live as an independent 
state. But the Armenians are worried of such a prospect. 
Their first worry is that in case Azerbaijan is strengthened on the military-
economic-mental level, and international attention on the Caucasus is reduced, 
Azerbaijan would take advantage of its symbolic sovereignty over Mountainous 
Karabakh to remove the factual independent situation of Mountainous Karabakh. 
That means that in the absence of totally reliable guarantees, the Armenians be 
very cautious with regard to symbols that would connect them symbolically to 
Azerbaijan. 
Secondly, in a paralyzed situation, the Armenians are worried of 
migration and the Azeri demographic dynamic. They argue that the 'Nakhcivan 
version' could be repeated in Mountainous Karabakh, implying that in 
Mountainous Karabakh, Azerbaijani demographic increase could pressurize the 
Armenians by peaceful means; that is, victory could be achieved through peaceful 
means. (This is the Armenian version and the Azerbaijani side has an answer 10 it.) 
Third, the acceptance of Azerbaijani state symbols over Mountainous 
108 
 
Karabakh is related to the show of strength of Armenia and the Mountainous 
Karabakh Armenians. Officials on the Armenian side note that after the efforts 
spent, the socie' y refuses to return to the past and accept Mountainous Karabakh's 
previous status. 
Factors obstacles to a solution from the Azerbaijani perspective: First 
of all, according to the Azerbaijani civil, national and state consciousness, 
Karabakh, together with its mountainous part, is a part of the nation's geography. 
To separate out Mountainous Karabakh from the rest of the country would be a 
national disaster, close to a cosmic catastrophe, for the national consciousness. 
Secondly, the system and logic of international law (for example, the 
inviolability of borders, the recognition by the UN of Azerbaijan in its present 
borders, etc.) is in Azerbaijan's favour. Giving in from this favorable position 
would be absurd. 
Thirdly, the prospect of the strengthening of the state should not be 
forgotten, that is, there is a possibility to reclaim the losses in the future. 
Fourthly, international law has its own automatism. Accordingly, a small 
compromise in political symbolism carries the risk of a 'Japanese domino', leading 
to the full loss of Mountainous Kara-bakh. For example, to carry out negotiations 
with the Karabakh Armenians as a party to the conflict, with the automatism of 
international law, immediately implies an important step towards the recognition of 
Mountainous Karabakh's independence. 
Hence, the vector of the motives of both parties takes the Mountainous 
Karabakh conflict into a corner, a deadlock. 
The civilization order of the present international powers is in the pathos 
of creating stability; as such, the chance of removing the peace process from the 
deadlock is zero. If, as in the case of countries like Armenia and Azerbaijan, where 
there is a frightening degree of corruption at the leadership level with large bank 
accounts abroad, then the fear of this being discovered or the danger of 'losing the 
bank accounts' makes the leadership of these countries weak to foreign blackmail. 
This is the only serious method to exert pressure on a the leadership of countries 
like Azerbaijan. 
Section 907 enacted by the US congress, Russia's longtime lowering of 
trade with Azerbaijan with the intention to inflict damage, and certain analogical 
measures from the Iranian side showed that the country can survive this kind of 
actions. In this sense, the elementary show of honor by Azerbaijan can keep the 
conflict in its present blind alley. 
Nevertheless, most people know that a solution that can solve the conflict 
and satisfy all sides to it (that is Azerbaijan, Armenia, and Mountainous Karabakh 
Armenians) would be beneficial. All sides approaching the problem agree that the 
Armenians of Mountainous Karabakh should live with maximum demographic, 
economic, and military security, whereas Azerbaijanis of Mountainous Karabakh 
109 
 
would be able to live in their former lands, cities, and villages with maximum 
security. Naturally, after military victories the Mountainous Karabakh Armenians 
have a wish, that their place of residence should be a state of their own. 
Azerbaijan's Armenian minority want Mountainous Karabakh to be factually a part 
of their national statehood consciousness. This wish creates severe difficulties. 
In this context, we give the Mountainous Karabakh model for resolving 
the conflict peacefully. The methodology that permits this model is the following: 
first, the model acknowledges Mountainous Karabakh as an Azerbaijani anomaly. 
(Anomaly in Greek means something in law standing out of the norm.) This 
means, the status of Mountainous Karabakh is built on certain principles that do 
not fit squarely with the principles of international law, and becomes legally the 
Mountainous Karabakh anomaly. Secondly, it uses the procedures that lead to the 
situation, that we metaphorically term as stalemate situation. The situation of 
stalemate emerges in the game of chess, when it becomes impossible to create any 
new situation or development. 
The Stalemate situation created in this model gives to Azerbaijan that 
Mountainous Karabakh Armenians through some principal concessions and 
through the automatism of international law do not secede from Azerbaijan. For 
the Armenian side, the procedures leading to the Stalemate situation provide the 
opportunity of protection from a threat from Azerbaijan. 
In this model the stalemate procedure leads to one concession in return of 
another, thereby securitizing and neutralizing the situation. Hence, the model 
creates a path for the fulfillment of the ambitions of both parties and as a result 
enables the two ethnoses of Mountainous Karabakh to live with their national 
consciousness. 
The model we propose, if the tendencies of the 20
th
 century are converted 
into grounds of resolution, may work. Events like Kosovo or Bosnia elucidates the 
tendencies: 
- It is not possible to suppress a national, ethnic minority; there is no perspective in 
succumbing to the wish to oust them from their place of inhabitancy; 
- The civilized world will not allow anyone to realize a wish to annihilate its ethnic 
or religious enemy; 
- The world will not allow that one party emerges winning of an ethnic conflict. 
On the level of ethnic and other minorities, progress and development is managed; 
-At the same time these minorities will not be given the opportunity to alter state 
borders through separatism. 
- Controversies that do arise must be solved through the coordinates of civilized 
relations. 
From the Azerbaijani perspective, if this so-called world system is 
weakened, and the Mountainous Karabakh Armenians take the below-given 
autonomy model as a basis for separating from Azerbaijan, Azerbaijan must be 
110 
 
ready to use force to counter that process. In this model, the ability of perpetual 
motion, and the inability to exit from this perpemal motion and create a new 
situation, paradoxically unite. This is what we intend by the term stalemate. 
Below, the key principles of Mountainous Karabakh anomalous autonomy are 
given; the details and aspects can be elucidated by the work of experts. We here 
draw the conceptual lines as follows: 1) Azerbaijan, Armenia, and the Armenian 
and Azerbaijani communities of Mountainous Karabakh agree to Mountainous Ka-
rabakh being an anomaly within Azerbaijan, and as such the problem is to be 
solved in an anomalous way. 
Having accepted this, a stalemate situation is created in order to solve the 
Mountainous Karabakh anomaly through the logic of new principles of 
international law; this situation is achieved through the following: 
2) Azerbaijan accepts Mountainous Karabakh as the 'Mountainous Karabakh 
Republic' - although this could mean the recognition of MKR's independence; 
however, without a referendum in Azerbaijan, the MKR cannot change its name to 
exit from Azerbaijan's borders (for example, the Armenians cannot unilaterally 
change the name to Artsakh or some other name, and this is a compensation for the 
recognition by Azerbaijan of the MKR. It is also possible that the MKR is 
permanently written into the documents of Azerbaijan.) 
3) MKR will nominally keep an army, however the institution known as its army 
will be under the inspection of Azerbaijan and functions as a police force, and is 
not converted into an army with heavy weaponry, (it cannot through the 
automatism of international law turn into a real army, as it is locked by the 
stalemate prin ciple). Armenians and Azerbaijanis serve in this army in a propor-
tion suitable with Mountainous Karabakh's demography. 
4) MKR has a parliament of its own, and the Azerbaijani minority is represented 
through quotation. The parliament modifies the rules of the Milli Maclis of 
Azerbaijan, however it has legislative power on matters previously agreed upon. 
5) MKR is represented in the Azerbaijani Milli Maclis through a quota system, has 
the right to propose legislation, and participate 
in voting. 
6) Every five years the Azerbaijani parliament raises the issue of annulling 
the MKR, however in this matter (other symbolic matters could be added) the 
MKR representatives veto this proposition. As the matter comes up, the 
representatives of MKR auto matically put a veto in the base of the official 
document. (The rea son is that it would interrupt the possible action of 
representatives who would not want to put the veto, due to corruption or acci 
dents). Every five years the MKR parliament legislates to secede 
from Azerbaijan (create its own currency etc.) and the Azerbaijani 
minority vetoes this through documents given by Baku. 
7) This veto procedure follows the stalemate principle insofar as it is 
111 
 
managed to guide highly loaded matters to a symbolic value. As time passes, 
anomalies through stalemate procedures lose their rhythm and strength, and 
transform into original rituals. Such rituals remain in certain English political 
actions. We call this se-miotic anomalies: Their significance and importance in 
reality may have been annihilated, and although they may be pointless or dis-
credited, their psychological value and cultural importance rises. That Elizabeth II 
is the head of state of Australia is one of such semiotic anomalies. The therapeutic 
and psychological factors that may serve as stalemate functions in the Azerbaijani-
Armenian controversy may be further researched. 
8) If Armenia declares war on Azerbaijan or any other country, MKR 
would not through the automatism of its status as a republic have the right to enter 
into an alliance with Armenia.  
If Azerbaijan declares war on Armenia or another country, MKR will not 
need to take part in this war. Hence the ambitions of both sides are controlled 
through symbols. Thanks to the stalemate procedure, an imitation of the painful 
acts that would be understood as threatening to the other side is created. However, 
these acts have no chance of being realized, and are halted. 
The given anomalous autonomy model should be guaranteed by the UN. 
Any party which tries to alter the agreed situation will be considered to have 
declared war on the UN and should be subjected to adequate responses.  
As we have said, the paradigm of the anomalous autonomy is given as a 
key, introductory model. Beyond this model there must be agreements on Shusha, 
Lachin, Kelbacar, and Agdere (Marda-kert). Here other anomalies or stalemate 
situations may be considered. (All examples given above are intended to open the 
principles. If all four sides are ready to solve the problem through the anomalous 
autonomy and stalemate model, keeping the principles outlined above, our 
examples of application may be altered or alternatives may be given.) 
 
Nurani 
HISTORY OF ARMENIAN TERRORISM 
 
On March 11, 2005 the world paid tribute to those killed in bloody 
terrorist attacks in Madrid, which victims reached 200 people. Memorial services 
also were accompanied by anti-terrorist summit in Madrid. Spain has invited more 
than a hundred and a half of experts in the sphere of anti-terror and heads of 14 
countries, which citizens became the victims of terrorist attack on March 11. 
However, despite that in capital of Spain on the remembrance day of 
tragedy in Madrid railway stations, which journalist named as "European 
September 11", there were a lot of talks about terror and ways to combat it, no one 
due to ethic considerations said that if September 11 is the day of a total war with 
terror, then tragedy in Spain, happened in thousand days after terrorist attack in the 
112 
 
USA, has shown that state machine may be defeated in a fight with terrorists: after 
blasts in mined trains authorities in Spain informed that they withdraw their troops 
from Iraq and namely this was demanded by terrorists. And no one remember other 
date - March 15 of 1921. It was when European community for the first time dem-
onstrated its readiness to "cave in" to terrorists. 
First blood: On March 15 of 1921 on desert street Gardenbergshtrasse in 
quiet district of Berlin shots were heard. Later just a few eyewitnesses will retell 
that a young man shot into the elderly, well-dressed man and tried to run away, but 
he was captured barehanded. Policemen, who captured the "shooter" considered 
the case as very simple and "firm" and the verdict caused doubts not more than 
tomorrow's sunrise. The case was conveyed to court in only in June of the same 
year. At this moment, authorities of Germany made it clear that the case which 
seemed as "clear and simple" in fact is political, and consequently, the unexpected 
twists are quite possible. Murdered person was Talat pasha, former interior 
minister in government of Young Turks. And the killer was Armenian student 
Sogomon Tey-leryan, who immediately declared that he took a revenge for "ex-
termination of Armenians" in Ottoman empire - according to Armenian 
"researchers" the mythic order on extermination of Armenians was given namely 
by Talat pasha. Legal proceedings lasted for three days and became almost a 
classic case proving that if the politics starts to dictate to law, proceedings turn into 
a farce. Germany did not regained yet from shock of Versailles treaty, which 
became the clear illustration to known postulate "Sorry for those defeated!". 
Negotiations "settling" post-war order in Europe were underway in the 
international arena and it was not profitable to "tense" relations with winner-
countries and the trial of Sogomon Teyleryan gave a unique chance to " gain favor" 
of winners on the expense of Turkey. Besides Armenian activists made titanic 
efforts to turn the process into show-trial. Immediately the fund of Sogomon 
Teyleryan was created into which the "gold streams" of donations were flown. 
Lawyers and "public activists" widely speculated the theme of "genocide". They 
displayed, in particular, "original" telegrams and stated as if they contain the order 
on "extermination of Armenians" signed by Talat pasha. 
History of these "telegrams" was repeatedly described later in media, 
including our newspaper. At first, some telegrams as if proving the fact of 
"genocide" of Armenians were published in British newspaper Daily Telegraph in 
1919, and it was stated that they were discovered by occupation forces of General 
Allenbi in the same town of Aleppo. However, when Great Britain's Foreign Office 
held own investigation, it turned out that these documents were fabricated by one 
of Armenian groups in Paris. Documents related to investigations of 1919 are kept 
in Great Britain archives up to now. However, failure in London did not chill the 
heat of falsifiers. In a year period, in 1920, Armenian historian Aram Andonyan, 
who lived in Paris since 1915, published in France a book "Me moirs of Nairn bey. 
113 
 
Official Turkish documents about migration and massacre of Armenians". In the 
book he displays another "documental evidences", which as if prove the fact of 
existence of order by the Talat pasha, internal affairs minister in government of 
Young Turks, about extermination of Armenians. Andonyan stated that he had 
received those documents from Ottoman state person from town Aleppo (at present 
Khaleb in Syria), who acquired them by official channels. Photo copies of these 
"documents" are shown in museum of "genocide of Armenians" in Yerevan. Later 
he declared that he had "lost" originals of those telegrams. In any case, according 
to opinion of historians "proofs" shown in the book are beneath any criticism. In 
another year these "telegrams" are shown in trial of Teyleryan and following to the 
opinion of British Foreign Office experts, the court experts in Berlin came to the 
conclusion disappointing for Armenians: neither paper on which "documents" are 
written, nor writing style can be considered as characteristic for Ottoman empire. 
Later apologists of the theory "Ay data" - "Armenian trial over the 
Turkey" - will describe in detail as court in Berlin declared Teyleryan not guilty 
upon hearing his stories about "horrors of genocide", while other researchers will 
oppose, stating that in fact, the court in Berlin did not justified Teleyryan, but 
judged him as mentally incompetent taking into account that he suffered nervous 
fit. In addition, judges in Berlin tried not to pay attention to emerged proofs that 
"mentally incompetent" Teyleryan was not alone in his actions.  
Dashnaks "Nemesis": Details of those events became known later, and 
what is most surprising, they became known from memoirs of participants, more 
precisely, of culpable participants, which soon after convinced that they will not 
face judicial responsibility and started to paint their "feats". In the autumn of 1919 
in Yerevan "Dashnakt-syutun" party held its ninth congress. Shagen Natali, who 
entered into ARFD ten years earlier, was among attendants of the congress. He 
insists to create a special organization "Nemesis" with its special mission: "to take 
revenge for sufferings of Armenians". They formed responsible body (head - 
Armen Garo) and a special fund (head - Shagen Satchaklyan), supervision and 
financial provision were governed to Shagen Natali and Grigor Merjanov. As 
headquarters they used offices of two newspapers: "Chakatamart", published in 
Istanbul occupied by Britons and ""Droshak" of Boston. There was considered the 
list of those "subject to extermination" consisted of 650 names, of which 41 were 
urgent. Later, in accordance with "t chnologies" of international terrorism the 
preparation of "bloody" actions started. Information was collected by Grach 
Papazyan, shown himself as "Turkish student". 
In May of 1920 Armenian terrorist-dashnak shot Nasib bey Yu-sifbeyli- 
prominent political and public activist of Azerbaijan Democratic Republic (ADR). 
In a period less than a month, on June 19 of 1920 one more bloody action was 
fulfilled by Aram Erkamyan and Misak Grigoryan: in Yerevan square in Tiflis, ter-
rorists shot to death Fatali khan Khoyskiy, one of founder of ADR and heavily 
114 
 
wounded Khalil bey Khosmamedov. In a month, on July 19 of 1920 Armenian 
bullets reached Hasan bey Agayev. 
On  this  background the  killing of Talat pasha in Berlin represented some 
sort of "probing action", check of reaction of European justice on Armenian 
ravings about "genocide". When Sogomon Teyleryan was freed after short 
proceeding, his "partners" in "Nemesis" evaluated this as a command "Fire!". On 
July 18 of 1921 in Istanbul occupied by Britain's troops, in front of hotel "Pera 
Palas" Armenian terrorist Torlakyan shot to death Beh-bud khan Jevanshir, former 
minister of internal affairs of ADR. The case was considered in Britain's court-
martial, which almost repeated scenario of trial in Berlin: the court-martial a few 
months later decided that he had committed a crime, but pleaded him as not guilty 
stating as if in 1918 in Baku the relatives of Torlakyan were killed and he hed shot 
B.Jevanshir being mentally unfit. Several months later in Rome another Dashanak 
terrorist- Arshavir Shirakyan- killed Said Khalim pasha, former minister of foreign 
affairs of Ottoman empire. Only in four months period, on April 17, 1922, 
Shirakyan takes Aram Erganyan as a partner, shot to death Baheddin Shakir Bey 
and Kemal Azmi Bey in one of streets of Berlin. Several months later in Tiflis two 
Armenians killed another Turkish official - Kemal pasha. Kemal pasha, who 
according to Doctor Joan Lepsius (named as "fierce Turcophobe and friend of 
Armenians" by Austrian scientist Erik Faygl) regarded Armenians with sympathy: 
"Kemal pasha, head of the fourth army in Syria, hold a certain distance to those 
w^io were iri power in Konstantinopol. He warned about serious revolts in his 
district and helped refugees and forced migrants". On July 25 of 1922 Jemal pasha, 
former defense ministry of Ottoman empire was shot to death in Tiflis. "Operation" 
was fulfilled by two dashnak fighters: Zare Melik-Shahnazaryan and Stepan 
Tsagikyan. The other fact is less known: among victims of "Nemesis" there were a 
certain number of Armenians, which were blamed by dashnaks in excessive loyalty 
to Turkish authorities: Amayak Ara-myants, Arshavir Yesayan, Vage Yesayan, 
Artin Mkrtchyan... 
But there was another fact during Bacchanalias of Armenian terror. On 
August 4 of 1922 Enver pasha was killed in surroundings of Bukhara. According to 
official version Enver-pasha was killed in the battle with Red army soldiers. 
Unofficial version becomes known only now. 
"Dashnak trace" in holy Bukhara: Contemporary history of Central 
Asia still waits for objective and unprejudiced researcher. This mainly concerns 
period of establishment of "soviet rule" in this region, in which soviet Russia was 
forced to b§ the rival of Turkey. For example, in Bukhara emirate by that moment 
there was influential organization of "Young Buk-harians" or jadidists supported 
proclaiming of democratic republic in Bukhara. Besides in Central Asia, except for 
Tadjiks the nationalism was severely mixed with panturkism v- that was the -period 
of "non-traditional Islam", however Wahhabi preachers did not come yet. 
115 
 
It is not known who was struck by "excellent idea" to rely on dashnaks 
while struggling with "Basmachi", or calling things by their proper names - with 
rebel war for independence of Central Asia. But dashnak squadrons frequently just 
renamed as Red Army units. 
In 1922 Semen Budenniy headed Turkestan front, was replaced by Gaspar 
Voskanov, who with understandable eagerness started "liquidation" of Enver-pasha 
- undisputable leader of armed struggle for independence in Central Asia. 
During the Soviet period official historiography named Enver-pasha as 
"head of Basmachi" and "spy of international imperialism". And they even do not 
bother to remember that prior to his leave to Central Asia, Enver-pasha, fleeing 
from Turkey through Germany, lived for some period in Moscow, took part in 
Congress of Eastern nations in Baku and supported "Lenin's national policy" while 
severely opposing Kemal pasha Ataturk - new leader of Turkey. 
Now, it would be expedient to decline from a subject. According to 
historians, any state is a "black case" and no one could know intentions of its 
authorities: details of adopting of crucial decisions, deep motives stay behind the 
closed doors, and if later someone publishes memoirs, events there will be 
probably described taking into account "requirements of the moment". However, 
many facts indicate that rendering assistance to Mustafa Kemal and his supporters, 
Moscow was not driven by sympathy to Turkish revolution. Historians, especially 
those in countries with authoritarian regimes, due to certain reasons, try not to 
remember this, but de-jure up to 1922, unless the Turkish Parliament adopted a law 
about dethronement of sultan and abolishment of caliphate, the Ottoman Porte was 
the government of Turkey. No one believed that the Turkish army, after heavy 
defeat in the World War I, might resist Entente and their own government. On this 
background, assistance rendered by Russia to those whom sultan Vaheddin named 
as "rebels" and conclusion of beneficial agreements, such as Kars and Moscow, 
most probably was dictated by desire to maximally weaken positions of Turkey. 
For the same goal, those in Moscow showed warm attitude to Enver pasha - in 
order to have "an ace behind the sleeve" against Kemal pasha Ataturk. Even after 
Enver pasha went to Central Asia to initiate rebellion among Moslems of Britain's 
India, Lenin, Trotskiy and Dzerjinsky "bombarded" armed units deployed in 
Turkestan front bv telegrams: "Enver must be taken alive". 
But soon after, Voskanov sent a noteworthy telegram to Akop (Yakov) 
Melkumyan, commander of the I Turkestan cavalry brigade: "I need dead Enver. 
Read. Think. Immediately burn it." Then Yakov Melkumyan outspokenly talked to 
Armenian journalists: "I killed Enver" - According to Melkumyan, death of Enver 
pasha is continuation of terror by dashnak "Nemesis". 
"Revenge in order to assist to diplomacy": According to official 
version, Armenian terrorists of 20-ies and 30-ies were impelled only by feeling of 
revenge. However, even brief analysis of the situation left no doubts: similar to the 
116 
 
end of XIX - start of XX century, reasons of Armenian terror were purely political. 
In fact, for Armenia the period of twenties-thirties was the period of ups 
and downs of their hopes. On August 10, 1920 in Sevres of France the Serves 
agreement was signed between 10 countries of Entente, representatives of Armenia 
and Khidjaz, future Saudi Arabia as a one party and the Ottoman empire as the 
other party, which envisaged to turn over to Armenia of those "six provinces" of 
Eastern Anatolia. To say, that Armenia was embraced by euphoria, it means to say 
nothing - a little bit more and on the map will emerge "Western Armenia", the west 
would help us and it seems easy not to pay attention to the fact tha" in April of the 
same year in deserted railway station Ankara the hero of battle near Chanaggala - 
Mustafa Kemal pasha convened alternative parliament - Great National Assembly 
of Turkey and proclaimed Turkish Republic. 
However, negotiations were prolonged and the process did not give 
Armenians a basis for optimism. At first, two-year Paris peace conference, then 
start of negotiation process in Lausanne... 
Situation speedily changed: Serves treaty, which promised creation of 
"Western Armenia" on lands of Eastern Turkey was thrown into the rubbish-bin of 
history and hope of "grab-it-isation" of Turkish lands, which seemed so close, had 
suddenly vanished. It is just the rhetoric question whether Armenians would at-
tempt to "remind the world" about their "tragedy" by use of terror. Moreover, 
terroristic methods of Armenians were not just used by Armenian politicians - due 
to various reasons, which detailed analysis could not be fulfilled within the 
framework of one newspaper article, terror became one of the major method of 
struggle for interests of Armenian political elite from the end of XIX century. 
Choose of victims is also meaningful: bullets of "avengers" reach members of 
governments, which were removed from power. Azerbaijan Democratic Republic 
was annexed by Soviet Russia, the government of Young Turks also was thrown 
aside... It is impossible to find better victims of "demonstrative terror" - on the one 
hand "response measures" of the state would be, is any, not so severe as for 
"acting" official, on the other hand, victims were famous and "promoted" persons 
in order to attract attention of media by demonstrative murder.  
"Cult of terror": Whether the terror unleashed by dashnaks in twenties 
of the last century allowed to reach their goals in diplomatic arena is the theme of 
separate study. In any case they failed to reanimate Serves treaty. Besides there 
were a lot of "unsolved problems" between Entente countries and Turkey - and 
absolutely unexpectedly for European diplomacy! - now they had to negotiate with 
Turkey, not dictate their conditions. In Europeans capitals they were more 
concerned by issues of maritime traffic in Bosporus and Darda-nelle straits than by 
"historic rights of long-suffering Armenian nation". Armenians caused the interest 
until they could be used as a mean of pressure over the Turkey, but later, when the 
war was lost, they turned into "poor relative" to which no one wanted to mess 
117 
 
about. But political murders of twenties played more ominous role in the history. 
That is because namely those events ultimately led to generation of cult of terror in 
Armenian community. Sogomon Teyleryan like his many "crime-partners" from 
"Nemesis" rested on laurels as "national hero" until his death in San-Francisco in 
1960. Many newspaper articles, literary works were devoted to "Avengers", the 
people literally kissed their hands. Right-minded people in western countries just 
sniggled: any nation has its own history... 
"Political technologies" of twenties were turn to be useful after tens of 
years - at the start of seventies, when Middle Eastern Armenians, who better than 
their neighbors-Arabs knew why Sogomon Teyleryan and Shagen Natali were 
"canonized", entered Palestinian terroristic organizations of "Black September" type. 
Arab leaders started to express opinions that company of terror forced the world to 
remember about "tragedy of Palestinian people". In the middle of 70-ies "Group of 
Gurgen Yanikyan" emerged, which later became "Armenian Secret Army of 
Liberation of Armenia" - ASALA. More than fifty Turkish diplomats in many 
countries around the world became the victims of Armenian terrorists, among them 
citizens of the USA, France, Switzerland and other countries... Later, when 
independent Armenia emerge i on map, terroristic methods became more needed 
and here, irrespective of whether these are attempts to "pressure" over Azerbaijan 
(Armenian secret services organized tens terroristic acts on the territory of our re-
public) or internal political "shootout" - in practice almost each internal "shake" in 
Armenia starts with a series of political murders and "parliamentary shooting" on 
October 27 of 1999 was considered as most high-profile scandal on post-Soviet 
territory until the start of Chechen terror. But in September of 2003, after shock of 
October 27 in Armenia and world-wide distress after September 11, 2001 terrorist 
attack in the USA, the monument devoted to Sogomon Teyleryan has been opened. 
And similar to the events of March 15 of 1921, the world played blind to this. 
 
Rauf Huseyn-zadeh 
CHARACTERISTICS OF ARMENIANS BY 
THEIR COMPATRIOTS AND CONTEMPORARIES 
 
Migration of Armenians' ancestors from their historic motherland into the 
region of Frakia (i.e.in Europe, in Balkans) into the Minor Asia and further to the 
East, up to Caucasus inclusively, and accompanied perturbations influenced many 
facets of history and life of Armenian nation. 
Armenians and other nations populated in Fore Asia were influenced by 
Antic Greeks and Romans, Persians and Syrians. A lot of things were taken including 
vocabulary, many elements of culture, social-political, trade and economy and 
confessional life, traditions. This was objective process, which confirmed known 
notion that there are no pure races or ethnos, languages and cultures. 
118 
 
The final accord in process of influence onto Armenians was probably 
done by Russians started from XIX century. Thus, for formation of Armenian and 
Russian collective memory the grounding on historic and historiography narrations 
is characteristic: "Russians and Armenians once formed narration patterns, which 
permanently penetrated and also deliberately inserted into collective memory of 
these nations... If Russian historic narratives made an accent on "Russian nation 
being selected by God", the Armenian narratives accents were oriented to 
restoration of "Great Armenia" and memory about "former power". However, there 
are nuances allowing to speak about specific peculiarities of Armenians and this 
were noted by their compatriots and contemporaries. In geopolitics there are such 
terms as "consumer of safety" and "producer of safety". To the latter the great 
powers and large states do belong. The former includes average, small and tiny 
states. Besides there are "sources of danger", which may be any countries and 
various states, known by their "non-traditional" orientation and activity, which did 
not fall into common norms of international community. 
In Caucasus the "consumers of safety" and simultaneously "sources of 
danger" are several local political and administrative subjects. Due to these 
definitions it is noteworthy to pay attention to Armenian ethnos -allochthon 
(migrated) and how it is characterized by compatriots and contemporaries. This is 
very important since the image of Armenians is unambiguous due to their ability to 
acclimatize and adapt to the environment of their inhabitance, where they are 
thrown by fate, more precisely by military and political realities. This was the 
situation in the past, and it is similar today. At the same time, Armenians are so 
dissimilar that even living in the same country they adhere to traditions and rules of 
initial "starting ground". As a result, "Western" Armenians do not understand, even 
do not accept "Eastern", "Russian" that of "Caucasian", "European" do not accept 
those "American", etc. 
Most early detailed characteristic of Armenians belong to Armenian 
author of XVII century Simeon Lekhatsi, who had opportunity to observe lifestyle 
and activity of his compatriots in Ottoman empire. He spent several years there and 
through that period had seen and heard many things, being in Istanbul, Bursa, Izmir, 
Jerusalem, Cairo, Damascus and Ankara. At this "Simeon naturally was interested 
first of all in Armenians, their population number, activities and positions in all towns 
and villages, where he had went". 
Simeon Lekhatsi thoroughly describes favorable conditions under which 
Armenians-Christians lived under the rule of Ottoman Sultans-Moslems. Thus, he 
indicated that almost in all towns and many villages of Minor Asia populated by 
Armenians they had their churches, monasteries, bishops and monks. He finishes 
his appeal by phrase: "I do not know for what, all nations, believers or unbelievers, 
all love us, except for Greeks, although our nation have no unanimity and 
[Armenians] do not like each other, for which they became famous". 
119 
 
After occupation of Caucasus by Russian empire in the first half of XIX 
century Russian experts studying Caucasus paid attention to behavior of 
Armenians, moved to the region from Ottoman empire and Iran state: "Due to 
historically developed conditions Armenians allocated around the globe. That is 
why, the Motherland for Armenians is a country, where they may use their tricky 
minds with a most profit and safety...They dominated in trading in Tiflis and all 
Caucasus... They are translators, presenters, factors, i.e. Armenians are everywhere 
there the profit is. Profit is the first motive of all their thoughts and actions". 
Paradox, to which it is hard to find something similar and which is stated 
always by Armenians themselves, consists in duality of Armenian ethnos. Paradox 
also in definition "various nations" - as now Armenian intelligentsia say about 
Armenians of Diaspora and republic of Armenia. That is why, according to modern 
Armenian intellectual "in my opinion we are various nations. Armenia is the 
country of Caucasus. Diaspora by its Constantinopol roots and various influences 
is quite the other world. Independently from us, two various nations were formed. 
Similar by blood, almost similar by language, they are almost antipodes by their 
world-view". 
At the end of XIX century Russian General N.Dubrovin noted: "Being 
under subordination of various states and spread all over the globe, Armenian tribe 
had lost its common features under the influence of various climate, lifestyle and 
activity". This expression confirms that for a long period of time interrelations of 
Armenians in Republic of Armenia and Armenian Diaspora undergo deep crisis. 
Many centuries of "separation" led to creation of almost insurmountable "Chinese 
wall" between them. Such situation resembles recent problems of western and 
eastern Germans united in a single FRG, when after first few weeks of euphoria, 
both started to comprehend based on their own experience what is the "soviet 
mentality" and how it may influence to members of any nation. 
That is why "money sacks" of Armenian Diaspora, seized by 
"nationalistic" feelings may render "humanitarian aid" to their compatriots in 
Republic of Armenia. But investments will be made to sphere where the payoff is 
possible, because tribal feelings are good but they do not bring dividends. That is 
why considerations of writer and linguist Ervand Azatyan,  cited above  are not 
groundless. The fact is, that the Diaspora was formed starting from IV century. 
Armenians themselves give information describing allocation of Armenians 
through various periods of the history. Naturally, such disperse allocation could not 
and did not create a single mentality,  and sometimes self-identification, despite of 
preserving of religious, linguistic, cultural and ethnic community. This is quite 
understandable and logical: living for centuries in various countries, under various 
conditions Armenians were the subject of various influences. And when they 
succeeded to join together, the rule of "attraction-repulsion" came into the force. At 
the same time, there were conditions for their influence to various important 
120 
 
spheres of life and activity in countries of their location. However, this caused 
unambiguous reaction. Thus, characterizing nations of Caucasus, the Russian 
philosopher N.Trubetskoy wrote in 1925: "Putting stake on Armenians would be a 
mistake. Being powerful economically, keeping in their hands the governing by a 
whole economic life in Caucasus, they have at the same time all features of nation-
parasite and slave and gain common antipathy, which reach almost to hatred in its 
neighbors". 
The same was noted by M.Menshikov at the start of XX century: 
"Armenians gradually turn into hosts of Caucasus, capturing lands, capitals, fields, 
trade and almost commanding influence onto local administration. When peaceful 
occupation of Caucasus by Armenians will be completed, do agree that this will 
significantly move Armenian patriots toward their final goal". 
Namely this happened in 1918, when Armenians created Armenian 
statehood in area of Caucasus there previously was no Armenian statehood, which 
lost its statehood in IV, and then in XI centuries in Minor Asia. 
Consequently, if the major reason of "duality" of Armenians consists in 
centuries of absence of their own statehood and migration from West (from 
Europe) to East (to Caucasus), which led to development of Diaspora, then their 
settlement on any territory leads to accumulation of economic levers in their hands. 
Thus, definition "various nations" in respect of Armenians has centuries-
long history. And this is noted by Armenians themselves. Thus, in the North 
Caucasus there was noted the internal tension related to mass migration of 
Armenians from Caucasus Armenia to Stavropol: "As a result of a large number of 
entrants the tension is emerged within Armenian Diaspora between representatives 
of "old" and "new" parts and also between representatives of various regions. Such 
situation is observed in Stavropol, Budennovsk, Pyatogorsk, Kislovodsk, 
Georgievsk, settlements of Kursk and Predgorniy regions". 
The attention must be drawn also to attitude of Ottoman Turks to "their 
own" Armenians. During Russian-Ottoman war through 1877-1878, when Russian 
army was in eastern part of Minor Asia, Russian General I.Amiiokhvari paid 
attention to position of Armenians under Ottoman rule: "Up to now I used to hear 
from all sides and read in all our newspapers, that Turks severely oppress Armenians 
and brought them to poor plight. But, immediately after we cross the border, the 
first village, populated by Christians to our extreme surprise, makes us doubt in 
correctness of such ordinary attitude we have to Turks. In fact, inhabitants here have 
not such oppressed appeaiance :is we expected. Women do not hide here, as our 
Armenians do. They are cheerful, communicative and well-dressed. Arable farming 
and cattle-breeding are in a huge amount, lands are vast. In other words, the life is 
free and not oppressed." 
R.Ivanov, who gives this citation in his book, decided it necessary to 
comment it: "General Amilokhvari noted with wonder that on territory of Turkish 
121 
 
Armenia the Armenian population is less oppressed than in Irevan province. In 
economical and cultural sense Turkish Armenians, according to his opinion, even 
dominate over local Kurds and Turks". 
In 1923 in Tbilisi there were published "Notes" translated from English 
into Russian and authored by high rank military and statesman of Ottoman empire 
Jemal-pasha, one of the activists of party "Unification and progress". Nuance of his 
memoirs is that they had been written after 1915. The chapter IX is devoted to 
"Armenian issue" and it starts with characteristics of Armenians: "We, Young Turks, 
undoubtedly prefer Armenians, Armenian revolutioners in particular, to Greeks and 
Bulgarians. Armenians are better and more courageous than those two nations; this is 
an open and honest nation, faithful in their friendship and hatred. We are firmly 
convinced that responsibility for Turkish-Armenian dispute rests only with politics of 
Russia. Sixty years ago, more precisely ten years before Russian-Turkish war of 
1877-78 there were no any clashes between these two nations based on their 
religions. In Anatolia, Rumelia and in Konstantinopol, across the whole Turkish 
empire, Armenians and Turks lived together as good neighbors and in history of 
Turkey for that period there is no indication of such issue as "Armenian problem". 
In our life the Turkish-Armenian friendship was unlimited. When Turks of Minor 
Asia left their villages for several days, they trusted to Armenians-neighbors to 
care about their families, property and rights; Armenians regarded similarly to their 
neighbors-Turks. In all Anatolia and Rumelia and also in Konstantinopol there was 
no Armenian, who spoke only in Armenian. Turkish language was taught in all 
Armenian schools and Church services were in Turkish. There was access to all high 
state positions for Armenians and they were considered as most loyal subjects of 
Ottoman empire. 
...since forming of Turkish empire and speedy distribution of Turkish 
power was grounded on justice and tolerance, similarly by generosity and 
friendship shown by Turks to Armenians, was gained their gratitude to Turkey. 
That is why, there were not a single conflict between these two nations for along 
five hundred years and there was not a single Armenian, which refused to accept 
Turkish language and our traditions. 
...until the end of Crimea war, up to 1856, Turks and Armenians preserved 
best relations with each other. 
When Russia diverted its stingy gaze onto Ottoman empire, it understood 
that it would be a huge political effect to turn Christian elements of Rumelia into 
the weapon of its intentions... 
In 1863 Armenians received Constitution. Constitution gave them a right 
for election of their own supreme council in Konstantinopol. The council consisted 
of four hundred members and of these a hundred and twenty deputies were elected 
by Armenian population. 
Even president Wilson might not think about better way for satisfaction of 
122 
 
rights of ethnic minorities". Thus, in 1895 even 176 Armenian missioners 
accompanied by 878 assistants preached in Anatolia, i.e. in central provinces of 
Ottoman empire. They put the basis for 125 Armenian churches, in which there were 
13 thousand worshippers and other 400 schools with more than 20 thousand pupils. 
"Father of Armenian history" Moisei Khorenskiy in the V century said 
about his compatriots: "I would like to note the hardness of heart, as well as 
arrogance of our nation... which refutes good and betrays the truth... obstinate and 
criminal ...who's spirit does not believe to God! ... Why do you love the fuss and 
godiessness? You have done enragement and in your lodges you did not bring 
remorse; you made immolation of lawlessness and hop ,d for God were disdained. 
That is why, you will be captured in nets of the one, whom you do not find out and 
prey for which you strived, will make its own prey and you will be captured in the 
same nets". 
These are words said by Armenian 1500 years ago. But even today his 
words are actual, besides these characteristics may be significantly added and 
widened: "Today each forth Armenian is subjected   to   stress,   various   psychic   
disorders   and   mental deficiency to some extent. Tens of thousands of mentally 
sick people can be met down the street and no one of them is registered", - such 
sensational statement was made by Samvel Torosyan, senior psychologist of 
Ministry of Health of Republic of Armenia. In report based on results of studies 
held by Yerevan representation of UN was underlined that "catastrophic increase 
of people with psychic disorders in Republic is mainly explained by the following: 
extremely low quality of life, unsolved Daglyg Garabagh problem and also by 
pseudo-national imperatives". 
 
Rena Bakhyshova 
DEVELOPMENT OF EDUCATION IN 
GARABAGH AT THE END OF XIX CENTURY 
 
At the end of the XIX century due to growth of capitalism the changes 
happened in different spheres have seriously influenced Azerbaijan culture and 
created an opportunity for the cultural development of nation. In spite of tsarizm's 
hypocritical policy, educational activities have been developing under influence of 
representatives of Russian culture. As a result of such development the transition 
from religious to secular education system became wider. 
In the XIX century new type of schools appeared in Azerbaijan and made 
their first steps in the way of progress. Due to influence of schools and efforts for 
education the region of Garabagh took the first place in Azerbaijan, as well as in 
South Caucasus. This tendency strengthened by the end of XIX century. 
Besides the new schools, religious and other religious schools of Moslems 
known as madrasa were still remaining. There were being taught the Persian, 
123 
 
Azerbaijani languages and Shariat (principles of Moslem religion). But after forced 
adjoining of Azerbaijan to Russia there was a need for Russian and this resulted in 
parents desire to educate their children in state schools. Changes happened after 
liquidation of serfdom in Russia on February 19, 1961 have been shown also in 
educational sphere. 
Town schools were established as a consequence of reforms of 60-ies in 
Russia. Prof. Huseyn Ahmadov underlines that schools opened by individuals, 
communities and state according to Bylaws of schools of 1872, were established 
on the basis of district schools. Let us confirm the fact that the first town school in 
Azerbaijan and a whole Caucasus established in Shusha in 1874. Thus, Shusha 
district school had three classes in 1830, later, in 1878 it had four classes. 
An education term in three-classed town school was two years in each 
class. Since 1878-79 (since education became four-classes) at the third and fourth 
classes the education term became a year. Shusha town school had left far behind 
district schools and there had been taught Shariat, reading, writing, Russian, 
algebra, geometry, geography, history, physics, drawing, music, gymnastics and so 
on. But, in Shusha district school mainly prevailed education of the native. Russian 
c ad French languages. Citizen of Shusha paid special attention to studying of 
native language in schools. From this point of view, teachers at Shusha school 
Mirza Hasan and Asian bey Amirovs were very successful in teaching of the 
mother tongue. French was one of the main factors required by d strict merchants 
for their trading relations with France and was taught on the expense of people's 
additional payments. 
Education was on a paid basis. If the yearly tuition fee was 5 manats for 
every pupil while the town school was opening in Shusha, in 1876 this sum has 
been 8, and in 1878 it reached 12 manats. In spite of decision of teachers council to 
free the poor people from tuition fee a great deal of pupils were paying it. 
However, number of pupils was increasing each year. For the initial period 375 
pupils were studying in Shusha town school. In was the highest number of pupils 
in Russia for that period. 
On May 6 of 1875 there was organized a special school for poor 
aristocrats and other rich levels of population. They studied on a state expense. 
Libraries attached to town schools were also established. Shusha school is 
distinguished by its school library and had a plenty of textbooks and necessary 
class-rooms. 
In 1880 special music classes were opened at Shusha town school. These 
classes have played an important role in growing up generation of professional. 
The same year silkworm breeding profession took special place in 
curriculum. 
To provide merchants and craftsmen desires, which looked enviously at 
those who improved their lifestyle and widened poiitical and world views due to 
124 
 
education, special professional trainings were organized as Sunday schools at 
school of Shusha. 
Always being in the centre of attention Shusha school began to lose its 
position by the end of the century. On September 20, 1881 at the urgent requests of 
population, which was not satisfied with the quality of education the 6 classed real 
school was established in Shusha. 
In 80-ies of XIX century eagerness of rural children for education 
necessitated creation of village schools attached to Shusha school. Lessons in 
village schools were taught by students graduated from pedagogical courses and 
Azerbaijani section of Caucasus Seminary of Teachers. The first village school in 
Garabagh was opened in 1876, in Jabrail village of Jabrail district. In 1882 village 
schools in Garakilsa, Arsevan and Gubadly (12.IX) villages of Zangazur were 
opened. 
Since 1883 more village schools were established in the area. This was 
related to increasing number of students graduated from Gory Teachers Seminary. 
In 1883 there were opened schools in villages of Aghdam (12.1X), Lambaran 
(18.IX), Aghjabady of Shusha district; in Garghabazar of Jabrail district (17.X); in 
Alpout (25.X), Barda (25.X), Kasapet (26.X) of Javanshir district; in 1884 in Hin-
darkh of Shusha district; in 1885 in Hadrud of Jabrail district, in Tugh and Gulably 
of Shusha district, in Sarov of Javanshir district; in 1890 in Minkand of Zangazur 
district; in 1891 in Vang of Javanshir district (15.XII); in 1897 in Khankandy and 
Tagh of Shusha district, in Garabulag of Jabrail district and in Digh village of Zan-
gazur district. Aghdam school with 10, Lambaran school with 20, Garghabazar 
school with 12, Alpout with 6, Barda school with 4, Kasapet school with 17 pupils 
began their primary school-year. 
Touching the problems of provision in Garabagh village schools it can be 
said that Sadig bey Malik Aslanov and teacher Hashimbey Narimanbayov supplied 
Gubadly school with textbooks and also helped financially, as well as, Mehdi bey 
Malik Aslanov helped Tugh and Gubadly schools, Shukur Lambaranski to 
Lambaran village school. 
By the end of the century an increased number of Russian-Azeri schools is 
observed in Shusha. By initiative of J. Fatalibeyov, graduate of Shusha school, 25 
pupils started to study at the third rate Russian-Azeri school opened in Shusha in 
1893. One of them was future educationalist and pedagogue F.Aghazade. In 1896 
the number of pupils reached 70. According to official sources, elementary school 
teacher Mukhtar Mammadov made efforts to establish such a school and received 
permission to open Russian-Azeri school in Shusha in 1893. On September 19, 
1895 Hussyna-libey Rustambeyov graduated from Irevan Teachers Seminary 
opened the third rate special school, however it functioned only a year. Pupils 
studying in the schools, consisted of two classes were fluently learning Azerbaijani 
and Russian languages. Pupils of these schools were basically composed of poor 
125 
 
and middle section of population. 
At the end of XIX century being inspired by Russian-Azeri schools, 
intelligentsia in Shusha endeavored to open new type of schools. It can be said, that 
Shusha community for the first time in Azerbaijan proposed an idea to open 
Russian-Azeri school attached to mosque and this was approved by population. As 
a result, on the October 6, 1896 two-classed Russian-Azeri school was opened 
under supervision of Hashim bey Vazirov and admitted 210 pupils. 
Taking into account that a great number of pupils desired to study at 
school, tuition fee was defined as 10 manats for every pupil, but only 20% of them 
were free from payement. Four member staff - director H.Vazirov, teachers Rasim 
bey Tahirov and Mirza Pakhish Yusifzade, teacher of Shariat - Molla Mehdi 
Sancalinsky decided to include into curriculum Azerbaijani and Russian languages, 
algebra and also the native language with new methods. In 1898 the teachers were 
given the status of state official at request of the town's Moslem society and on 
occas'on of coronation of tsar the school was named as "Shusha-Nikolayevsk 
Russian-Tatar School". In 70-ies of XIX century there were efforts to open school 
for girls. These efforts were stronger in Shusha. Until then, girls were only taught 
by their parents and at religious schools. In Shusha where a great importance was 
given to woman education a special school for girls was founded by charity society 
on October 26, 1875 year. The school was situated at Amanevs' two storey house. 
School curriculum included subjects as the Russian, reading and writing in the 
native language, algebra, drawing, geography, history, music and so on. Since 
1894 it became four-classed Marinski maiden school. At the last year of the 
century (1900) population were able to study in two languages at night courses for 
adults. It can seen that after reforms of 60-ies schools ruled by regulations, but 
educational system was not agreed with local condition, only with Russian Empire 
system. 
 
Rena Mirzazadeh 
GENDER HISTORY OF GARABAGH: 
SOCIAL-POLITICAL IMAGE 
 
While studying historic past of Garabagh it becomes clear that this ancient 
territory of Azerbaijan has encyclopedic gender history. History of Garabagh 
distinctly shows that in deep distinction while identification of man-woman 
relations there were women with exceptional role in history. These women are 
gained respect and influence for their activities in the spheres of charity, education 
and even attempts to unify men. 
There were several factors which influenced this process. First of all, it is 
Azerbaijani-Turk culture generated long time ago in Garabagh. Secondly, in point 
of view of men from Garabagh intelligentsia, who have studied in Europe, it was 
126 
 
very important to integrate into the Western culture. Finally, Garabagh was known 
as a cultural center of Azerbaijan. 
Who are these women? What does the history write about them? Historic 
sources show that sometimes namely due to the efforts of these women the wars 
and conflicts were stopped. "Marriage diplomacy" known in history is underlined 
as one of major causes. Ibrahim khan surrounded by separatist meliks in order to 
take thorough power in Garabagh and continue activity of his father Panah khan 
sought for allies. As a first step he married the sister of Umma khan who ruled in 
Jar-Balaken. Later this "marriage diplomacy" was very useful to him. This 
prevented conflicts and attempts to distance from the central power after end of 
rule of Panah khan. Ahmed bey Jevanshir wrote: "Fatalikhan Afshar from Urmia, 
being one of viceroys of Nadir shah, gathered a large number of troops from 
Azerbaijan, Urmia and other provinces and in aim to remove Panah khan went to 
fort Shusha where he made his camp at a length of tree distance from fort... In this 
attack about two thousand infantries and cavalry-men from Fatali khan Af-shar's 
troops were killed and taken as war-prisoners... After this event due to defeat of his 
troops, Fatali khan Afshar requested for peace and proposed: if Panah khan will 
give back war-prisoners, I will give my permission for marriage of my daughter 
with his elder son Ibrahimkhalil aga and we will be relatives and friends forever. 
Providing, that he will send here his son, who will stay here for two or three days 
(as a guest) and return back after celebration of marriage" (History of Azerbaijan, 
1996, p.515). What is the interesting matter here? Through traditions preserved by 
ages it is known that marriage proposal is made by a man's family. Paradoxically, 
here we see the opposite case. In any case, circumstances and relations, sometimes 
dictate to beak old "traditions" and create new ones. 
Let us consider other historic fact. After assassination of Aga Mohammed 
Shah Gadjar in 1797 in Shusha the throne goes to Fatali shah. Fatali shah for 
"assurance of both parties" proposes to Ibrahim khan to send his daughter 
Agabeyim aga (aunt of Khur-shud Banu Natavan) to his harem. Ibrahim khan 
agrees with that marriage. Agabeyim aga, along with being skilled and beautiful 
woman, was also the patriot of her country. Agabeyim aga succeeded to free 
prisoners from zindans and pardon those pleaded guilty and sentenced to death. 
Carefully considering these facts and looking at them through the prism of modern 
world, could not we say that Agabeyim aga was the human rights activist?! This is 
history of women in Azerbaijan. 
The sources show that Agabeyim aga was taught by vizier of her father - 
Molla Panah Vagif. Later, she had learned French and spoke fluently to Europeans 
and communicated through sending letters with renown personalities of that period. In 
1811 she met with a spouse of emperor of France and sent a letter to Napoleon 
Bonaparte. There was a certain role of Agabeyim aga in establishment of peace be-
tween Russia and Iran. Queen of Russia in her letter to Agabeyim aga wrote: "Beyim, 
127 
 
You due to your wisdom became the second Venus and star for the shah" (Woman, 
beauty and sanctity". B. 2001, p.46). We may say that Agabeyim aga was 
activist.who devotedly loved and missed Garabagh and hated betrayal of Armenians. 
According to other source she helped to free Hasan khan, khan of Irevan, nick-
named "Sary Asian" from Russian prison. 
Touching the gender history of Garabagh we have to remember a special 
role of Khurshud Banu Natavan known as Khan qyzy (khan's daughter) in social 
life of Azerbaijan. Who was Natavan? She was an intelligent and noble woman, 
famous by her social activity. Rza Aladdin ibn Fahraddin wrote the following 
about Natavan in his book "Renown women" devoted to his daughter Zeyneb and 
published in 1904: "Active and clever, speaks Turkish, Persian and Arabic, she 
spent all her life reading. Being merciful to poor, she enjoyed spending her wealth 
for the benefit of community. Spending thousand roubles she brought spring, fresh 
water to Shu-sha (Garabagh)". 
Azerbaijani historian S.Gandjali wrote: "Spending her life for charity, 
culture and education, this poetess and woman-painter, possessing of a sensitive 
heart, participated at the World Exhibition in Paris in 1867, and agricultural 
exhibitions in Moscow in 1869 and in Tiflis in 1882. There were exhibited famous 
Garabagh horses belonged to Natavan, her handicrafts and kinds of corn yielded in 
Garabagh. She had been awarded by the I Prize and gold medal. Information about 
this can be found in the 2
nd
 and 11
th
 issues of "Konnozavodstva" journal published 
in Russia. 
Why we considered it is important to write about Natavan while studying 
gender history? According to professor Aziza Jafarzadeh, in 1872 Natavan 
established a literary association titled "Majlisi-uns" in order to bring together 
litterateurs in Shusha, and she headed that majlis for a long period of time. Despite 
that there were no publications in Azerbaijan at that period, works of Natavan 
speedily distributed and were discussed. As Natavan said "Because there are lot of 
wanderers in this garden" - or "times are not going by my desire, ah!". A.Duma 
senior also wrote well about Natavan. A.Duma wrote about the East, which was 
traditionally described as a place of darkness, obsolete and fanaticism: "In the 
place where I have been invited there were two noble women". This was Khan 
gyzy Natavan, poetess who disseminated progress and culture and whose social 
and cultural activity may play an example not only for the East but for the West 
also. Naturally, for Natavan with her free thoughts and her courage there w
a
,s no 
need to demand her rights. Being a woman she v^as an active citizen, intelligent 
and known public figure. 
Nigar Rafibeyli, poetess of the XX century correctly indicates: 
"Azerbaijani poetesses mourn for misfortunes of the nation -earthquakes, war 
bloodshed, looting, those killed and lost. Poetesses cry for tragic destiny of eastern 
women - lack of rights, inequality and obedience. At the same time, each poetess 
128 
 
had her own pain, grief and loss". Activity of eastern poetess, artist woman living 
in Islamic country along with double efforts also required fivefold, tenfold 
courage. They answered lack of women rights by poems, bayaty (shot poems), 
while in the West M.Uolstounkraft struggled by her essays, Natavan by her social 
and cultural activity, while Olympia by execution of Gudj. One aspect draws 
attention in these parallels. Despite these women were unaware of each other, lived 
at various periods and were representatives of various nations and religions, we can 
see similarity of their thoughts and views. To a certain extent this is the real 
reflection of destiny of women. In "Tesnifi-Gulshad" - the only available work of 
Gulshad khanum, who lived in the I half of XVII century, she wrote: We have oeen 
taken to Tatar khan, they give a fitva to the blood of Ye-sir, I sent a message to 
Meshed Kanyn". In these words there is a call for justice written as a poem, which 
also contains a protest of woman's courage and perfection against injustice of 
soc'ety. 
Studying gender history of Garabagh we have to mention name of other 
renown woman - Fatma khanym Kemir; She wrote about 500 poems and gazelles. 
Detailed information about her is given in the book "Historic sources of Azerbaijan 
literature" authored by Firudin bey Kocharly. Fatma khanym Kemine was known 
by social value in literary-cultural history and her activity in "Majlis-Faramushan" 
established in Shusha. 
Among women who glorified gender history through that period was the 
other daughter of Ibrahim khan - Govhar aga. This noble woman distinguished by 
her charity work totally renovated and gave her property to Juma mosque built in 
town Shusha by her father. Namely at the expense of this wealth in Shusha the 
madrasa "Darrus-Shafa" had been opened as a gift for all population. Known by her 
charity mission, she also financially supported a bridge known as "Aga bridge" on 
the way to Agdam. She also rendered two schools, two baths, two bridges and a 
hospital for poor people. 
One of supporters of progress in XDC century and those who wrote the 
history of Garabagh was Hamida khanym Jevanshir (spouse of Jalil 
Mammedguluzadeh). She opened school for girls in village where she lived and 
actively participated in establishment of Charity Society of Caucasian Moslem 
Women. It should be also noted that Hamida Jevanshir is one of the leading 
personalities in history of women's movement in Azerbaijan. Her social, political, 
literary and cultural activity may be the subject of separate studies. This respectful and 
clever woman also played a certain role in life and work of Jalil Mamedguluzadeh. 
Hamida khanym made a speech at the 13 Congress of cotton-growers held in 
Caucasus in 1912. It must be also taken into account that she was the first Azerbaijani 
woman who delivered a speech from such high tribune. 
It should be noted that despite scientific literature of Azerbaijan did not 
mention feminism, it always progressively approached women's problems and 
129 
 
liberty of women. Of course, the society does not devoid of negative cases. Those 
beaten, insulted, exploited and with violated rights included both men and women. 
Despite this, most of cultural and journalistic works are devoted namely to 
problems of women. 
Summarizing, it can be inferred the following: it is very important to learn 
and propagate Women known in history of Garabagh as philanthropists, educators, 
social and cultural activists and those who reach the highest level of intelligentsia. 
These women, who were all a life school by themselves, showed equality with men 
by the role they played in society. This is the history of Garabagh Woman and 
Gender issue in Azerbaijan. 
 
Rizvan Garabagly 
MONUMENTS OF WESTERN AZERBAIJAN 
 
According to famous Turkish traveler Evliyya Chelebi (915 by Hijra) in 
1509-1510 AC Shah Ismail Sefevi gave an order to his vizier Re van Gulu khan to 
built a fort (on sit
;
 of present Yerevan-along the right band of Zengi river). Revan 
Gulu khan completed building of a fort in 7 years. 
The fort had three gates: "Tebriz gate", "Shirvan gate", "Kerpu gate" and 4 
districts "Gala", "Sheher", "Tepebashy" and "Demirbulag". Starting from 1864 the 
walls of the fort were totally destroyed. Most characteristic buildings of the town 
were now skyscraping minarets of Yerevan mosques. 4 of these mosques situated 
in "Sheher" district: "Novruzeli khan", "Huseynali khan" (Geuy mesjid), "Khoja 
Seferbey" and "Mohammed Sertibkhan" mosques. 
After liberation of Irevan from Ottomans in 1604 by Shah Abbas I the 
magnificent mosque was constructed on the eastern side of Serdar palace. The 
architect of this mosque constructed in 1606 was renowned Sheikh Baheddin. 
Irevan Jame which was similar to Ganja Jame consisted of madrasa, 
library, hotel and various facilities. Until 1918 the Jame and surrounding buildings 
were preserved, even dilapidated. Later it was totally demolished. 
In 1725 in Irevan fort a new mosque was constructed by Redjeb Pasha. 
The other mosque built by Abbas Mirza in XVIII century was extraordinarily 
beautiful by its architectural style. 
After occupation of Irevan fort by Russia: ;s (1827) the mosque 
constructed by Abbas Mirza was totally destroyed and instead of the mosque 
constructed by Redjeb Pasha the Russian church was built. Huseynali khan mosque 
known as Geuy mosque at first had four minarets. After World War II three 
minarets of the mosque were destroyed. Until recently despite being with one 
minaret Geuy mosque was one of the monuments which attracted attention as 
symbols of Islam. In general, until the beginning of XX century there were 8 
mosques in Irevan. Now there is even no trace of it. The most ancient mosque in 
130 
 
Irevan was built by the order of Shah Ismail in 1510. In 1918 Armenians gathered 
Moslems to that mosque and put them on fire. The mosque with a lot of people 
inside it was burnt to ashes. 
In total until 1912 on the territory of Western Azerbaijan (present 
Armenia) there were 42 mosques in Irevan district, 33 in Echmiadzin and 35 
mosques in Zangezur. At present none of these mosques exist, all of them were 
destroyed by Armenians. 
Serdar palace  (Khan  palace)  located  in  Irevan  fort  once fascinated 
travelers which came here. The Palace was built almost at the edge of frightful 
precipice of Zengi river. Along the other band of the river Khan garden was 
cultivated with a lot of various flowers and fruit trees and through most part of the 
year they were green. During the rule of Sefevi and Turk shahs this Palace was 
restored and enlarged. In XVIII century by the order of Huseynali Khan Khoylu 
intensive restoration works have been implemented in Palace by architect Mirza 
Jafar. In 1791 Mohammed Khan added hall with mirrors and summer mansion. In 
1798 Mahmud Khan in his turn held restoration works in the Palace and ordered to 
build various facilities. Final decoration of the Palace was fulfilled by famous 
Azerbaijani painter Mirza Gadim Irevani in 1850. 
Featured by beautiful architectural style and its decoration the Palace 
resembled Hasht-behisht in Isfahan and Chinili Koshk in Istanbul. However, the 
Palace was totally destroyed through 1913-1918 by Russian and Armenian armed 
groups. As a result, a beautiful sample of palace architecture belonged to the period 
of Sefevi and Gadjar rule had vanished forever. 
There were a large number of caravan-sarays in Irevan fort. These 
included Sardar, Sheykhulislam, Taghly, Sulu, Susuz, Haji Ali, Kemurchi, Gurdju, 
Julfa, Haji' Ilyas and other caravan-sarays. Evidently, none of those caravan-sarays, 
which even by their name resembled Moslem world, left no traces today. 
Researches show that liquidation of any historic or cultural heritage 
belonged to Moslems became an ordinary task for Armenians. For example, in 
Jafarabad village (territory of present Armenia) a high tomb made of red tuff was 
preserved until recently. In general resembling to Mominekhatun tomb in 
Nakhchivan, the dome of this tomb was kept safe until 1956. 
According to M.Nemet, correspondent member of Azerbaijan National 
Academy of Sciences, along the whole eaves the writings of suls elements by 
naskh inscriptions in Arabic mentioned names of emir Pir Huseyn and his father 
Emir Saadi from Saadlu tribe of Sed province. According to inscription this 
monument attributed to period of rule of Garagoyunlu and Aghgoyunlu (XV), and 
there were several ancient cemeteries and tombs in its surroundings. Today there is 
no any trace of them. Destiny of caravan-saray in the Salim passage is also 
unknown. Built in 1328 by use of local stones, Salim caravan-saray had double 
coverage. 
131 
 
The first hall of caravan-saray, which consisted of two large halls, was of 
15x7 arshin extensions, while the second was of 45x21 arshin. On sides of portal 
made of stalactite there were figures of animals, in the center there were stony 
inscriptions (1.87x0.76 m) framed by nebati decorations (inscription was read by 
M.Nemet). Armenians taking into account that this is not the religious monument, 
made inscriptions in Armenian on internal walls of the caravan-saray in order to 
display it as their own monument. 
I would like to remind, that until 1988 in Western Azerbaijan more than 
1870 historic-cultural monuments of Turkic-Azeri origin, villages, settlements and 
geographic locations were renamed to made them Armenian or were absolutely 
liquidated. 
It seems that to wipe out any nation from the earth it is not suffice to 
occupy its territory. In turns out, that it is necessary to liquidate historic and 
cultural monuments of the nation. Armenians clearly understanding this, 
implemented this against Azerbaijan. And the world still in silence! 
 
Sh. Fatullayev-Figarov, E.Avalov, R.Garabaghly 
ARCHITECTURE OF GARABAGH 
 
On the territory of Garabagh there are a lot of monuments of architecture 
and urbanization reflecting various epochs and periods. Many of these monuments 
are in form of ruins, however most of them to some extent preserved their initial 
shape. 
Through the history of Garabagh various world religions flourished hero 
(Zoroastnanism, Christianity, Islam), which set a deep trace in social and economic 
development, as well as on architecture and urbanization in the region. 
The mountain area due to its geographic location and climatic features, as 
well as, due to peculiarities of constructions stipulated development of mountain 
settlements in the form of terraces, similar to other regions of Azerbaijan. 
Distributed across the whole region the buildings, such as settlements, 
ancient towers, rich monasteries, religious buildings (chapels, temples, mosques 
and madrasah), dwellings, palaces, memorial buildings, caravan-sarays, bridges 
and springs created a special artistic world of architecture. 
Architecture here is represented by various volumetric-spatial and 
compositional solutions and constitutes inseparable part of history. Various 
architectural-planning and constructive techniques developed definite system while 
interpretation of artistic image of any building. 
Masters and architects, brought up with traditions of local architecture, 
skillfully and masterly used experience of the past and simultaneously fostered the 
feeling of modernity and connection to their epoch. 
This is the material, which characterizes the trend of architectural 
132 
 
development in this region of Azerbaijan and possesses by its own specific and 
individual peculiarities reflected architectural heritage of Caucasus Albania. 
Specific features of art are preserved here through the whole history of this 
country. Mardakert (Agdere) region is abundant by architectural monuments. In 43 
villages of the region and its surroundings there are forts such as Shah-bulaq, 
Soltan-put, Shikarar, Ulu-papa, Tarkhan-gala, Natarin-gala, Khatra, Lachin-gaya, 
etc. 
These forts are situated in beautiful places and previously were excellently 
reinforced covering quite large areas. Built of rock-faced stones and excellently 
engraved into local relief, they dominate over the surrounding landscape and are 
valuable heritage of ancient Garabagh. 
Martuni (Khodjavend) region is represented by medieval forts as Gyz-gala 
in village of Gyz-gala, Gali-Khut in village of Mush-kapet, in village of Low 
Tagovert; by monasteries: tower-temple in village Nagatak, in uplifts Small Kirs, 
Bogar-khan, Ag-oglan, churches, chapels, cemeteries, etc. 
The most ancient monastery of Garabagh is Ag-oglan. Its foundation is 
attributed to the IV century. Archaeologists suppose that of this monument only the 
underground part of chapel is preserved, which could be reached by descending 18 
steps down. Length of chapel is 3 m 70 cm and width is 1 m 90 cm. 
Existed building of monastery was built in 1858 and surrounded by high 
walls and reinforced by battle pikes at angles of the monument. The church is in 
the middle of the yard, which contains auxiliary facilities. 
Among magnificent monuments of Albania the Gandzasar monastery is 
one of the most significant. It was built by Alban knyaz Hasan Jalal-doloy from 
1216 to 1238 and sanctified in 1240 in "Patriarchate of Nerses - Katalikos of 
Agvan". 
But where are Christian monuments of indigenous population - Albans? 
S.Yeremyan, Armenian researcher of the East, wrote in 1958: "A huge 
number of Christian monuments, most of which belong to pre-Arabian period, are 
preserved in Armeniated part of ancient Albania, on the territory of ancient 
Albanian regions - Artsakh (Autonomous area of Daglyg Garabagh and 
neighboring north-east spurs of Small Caucasus, including Shamshaddin and 
Idjivan regions of Armenian SSR) and Utik, where at present mainly Armenians 
live" (Documentary of history of USSR. IIMX c. 1958, p.326). 
According to this citation the answer is clear -today they describe 
monuments as Armenian monuments. After subjection of Alban church to 
Armenian Church in 704 the worship and spiritual services were fulfilled in 
Armenian. This known fact is ignored at present and because notes on Christian 
monuments of Garabagh are in Armenian, authors state that they are all Armenian 
monuments. Famous monument - Gandzasar monastery, in which in XIII century 
Armenian Katalicos was located, is also among these monuments. But what about 
133 
 
notes of S.Eremyan mentioned earlier about presence in A^tsakh - ancient 
Albanian territory of a huge number Oi* Christian monuments, most of which 
relate to pre-Arabian period, i.e. to period of existence of independent Albanian 
church?... 
Khankendi region similar to other regions of Garabagh is abundant by 
architectural monuments reflecting tendencies of stylistic trends honed for many 
centuries. In this area monumental buildings of military architecture are located 
such as Aslan-kala in Anabert village (IX c), village of Chanakhchi and fort 
Askeran (1788/89). Many hieratic buildings as churches, chapels, memorials such 
as mausoleums in village Khodjaly (XIV c.) and others are located here. 
Mausoleum in village Khodjaly (XIV) is situated on the territory of 
historic cemetery with ancient stelae and is very important element of architectural 
heritage. Octagonal in plane, traditional for memorial constructions of Azerbaijan's 
architecture of medieval period the mausoleum is circular inside. Along the axis of 
entrance - on opposite side - the plain niche of mikhrab type. Cylindrical structure 
inside is in form of elongated camera with double cover - half-circular arch and 
tented roof in cone shape. External cylinder faced by large stone blocks has small 
rectangular entrance decorated by arch of ogival shape with Seldjuk chain. Tht i 
;pei part of mausoleum is finished by tent, which is also faced by stone. Transfer 
from lower to upper part is in form of cornice of simple but distinctly shown 
profile. At the same time, architectural and spatial-volumetric composition of 
mausoleum reflects high esthetical functions and broad historic information. 
To the mid XVIII century the strong Garabagh khanate was created by 
Panah-khan from Jevanshir clan. His name is related to building of forts Bayat, 
Shakh-bulag and town-fort Shusha. Famous poet, diplomat and vizier of Garabagh 
khanate Molla Panah Vagif took an active part while initial period of building of 
Shusha. He defined major strategic and defense sites for the fort, citadel, castle, 
khan's palace and other buildings for khan's attendants. 
Planned structure of the fort was constructed in two stages: initial period - 
foundation of fort and next one, when construction finished in relatively quiet 
eastern part and started in western part of complicated relief. 
Choose of major planning and compositional axes of town were closely 
related to topographic features. Within the major streets of town there were blocks 
of houses of various sizes and sketch, which was influenced by topography of the 
area. Free and picturesque rendering is not the result of chaotic construction but a 
consequence of settlement of people according to social-economic and territorial 
features; people came from various parts of Garabagh organized independent 
mahalle similar to modern micro-regions. In eastern part of Shusha there were 17 
mahalle: nine lower -"ashagy mahalle" and eight upper - "yukhary mahalle". In the 
second half of XIX century all mahalle are formed within the structure of town as 
integral units with developed social centers -mosques, baths, fountains and shops. 
134 
 
Center of mahalle serve as major planning nodes, which jointly expressed 
common idea of general plan - its picturesque and conformity with relief, free 
distribution of basic buildings and delineation of city center. In western part of 
Shusha there were 12 blocks with their planning centers. Eastern and western 
portions of the town constituted a unity in architectural and construction plane. 
Outstanding architect of Garabagh lived in the second half of XIX century 
was Kcrbalai-Sefi-khan Garabagy (1817-1910), the founder of architectural school, 
which built almost all cult buildings (mosques, madrasah, imam-zadeh). He 
changed stylistic trend of architecture, creatively used peculiarities of traditions 
and developed new compositional and constructive techniques. It is possible to 
note Juma-mosque of Govhar-aga, Ashagy-mosque, mosque "Saatly" and other 
buildings associated with that epoch. They can not be attributed to architecture of 
other regions or zones of Azerbaijan. These buildings have individuality: they 
constitute the gallery of architectural images of Garabagh school of architecture 
because they hold vitality of traditions under new social-economic conditions and 
displays perspectives of further development of local architecture. Renowned 
architect of Azerbaijan Kerbalai Sefi-khan Garabaghi devoted his whole life to 
development of local architecture at turn of the XIX and XX centuries. 
At present, when works of famous architects of Garabagh are subjects of 
thorough studies and propaganda, his masterpieces are destroyed and outraged by 
Armenian aggressors. According to resolution of UNESCO cultural monuments 
are protected and are under the aegis cf UN, but unfortunately this resolution is 
deliberately ignored by aggressors. 
 
Tevekkul Aliyev 
GARABAGH AS A CENTER OF  
ANCIENT CIVILIZATION OF AZERBAIJAN 
 
INSTEAD PROLOGUE. They were beautiful times... Worms created by 
decaying brains were immobile. Dark clouds without touching peaks of great 
Garabagh mountains moved away. Green slopes, springs of limpid water, quietly 
flowing rivers fondled eyes, silver rocks which touch the blue sky glittered in 
bright sunlight. Herds, traditionally ascending the hill along the used paths went 
blindfold to summer pastures in Lachin and Kelbadjar. 
The year was droughty. . Green cover of mountains became yellow and 
withered, flowers bended to earth, thorny bushes spread. Routs became impassable, 
it wasn't raining, it wasn't snowing, old worms crept and spread over slopes. Black 
clouds started to rush. Pus and mud flowed out of dried springs and flowed into the 
rivers and made them turbid. Songs of love, devotion and happiness became 
unheard in storms of groans. 
1989. Ten days as the fall entered. It's came heavily, leafs already fell. 
135 
 
Today I went from Gubadly to Lachyn and returned. Gubadly-Lachyn road is not 
the same. Along the whole way the speed of car was not higher than speed of 
pedestrian: cars were stretched along a road as unaccountable carriages of a train. 
People went back from mountain to valley, herds succeeded each other as if after 
the heavy rain by the side of turbid waters of Hekeri another Hekeri flown twisting. 
Narrow, endless roads were small for inexperienced frocks. Rock had not been 
familiar with this road along Hekeri. To reach winter camp in Mil these humble 
and silent people had to overcome the distance of 180-200 km instead of 50-60 km 
because of those lost their minds. Newly born lamb rocked in the saddle of 
shepherd's horse. I wonder, how many days this tiny lamb will be rocked on these 
unknown roads?! 
How  does  Gubadly-Lavhyn road withstand this  flow, this strike? People, 
cars and herds lost their way. The flow twisted around Alem tree- Garabagh 
mountains. While 1 looked at this picture I went back to far past, to holy root. I 
looked at Azygh cave, which is the beauty of Guruchay valley, of million years old 
Tug trough. Azygh is my window to the world. For the first time I burned fire here, 
seen the magic and power of fire flames, which rush to sky, felt the heat 
resembling to that of sun. In order not to allow this fire, this hearth to went out I 
guarded it for centuries. I was helpless facing unlimited miracles of the world 
surrounded me. Now I face events, which meaning and reasons I do not know. 
Sunlight, clouds, rain, snow, flooded rivers, fire, the ground which sometimes put 
on it the grey, green and yellow colors and sometimes run away under my feet with 
a horrible roar... Each of them was my belief, the supporter of my faith. I carved 
the special niches in walls of my Azygh. I believed into heads of bears-totems 
placed into those niches. First knowledge about digits and numbering was 
expressed by notches made over these heads of bears. Placing stones side-by-side I 
built the first shelter, the first house for one person, for one family, for one village - 
Azeri community. Despite that tools m .de by breaking stones collected in 
Guruchay were rough, they were useful for me. Once I went out of Azygh and 
looked around, I went to unknown places smelled as cradle. Wandering on this 
land I found that the world consists not only of mountains and valleys, it has also 
vast plains: my cradle Garabagh is turned out to be precious stone. 
Years and centuries passed. Number of my consanguineous sheltered in 
native land increased. The fire stoke up on four sides of my cradle. Yells were heard 
from valleys of Guruchay and Kondelen-chay. Generations of those lived in Azygh 
and Tagh settled in new places: Toraghaytepe, Garakopektepe, Leylatepe, 
Guneshtepe, Khan-tepe, Zergertepe, Kultepe, Uzerliktepe, Govurgala... 
MONUMENTS PRESERVING OUR HISTORY. Garakopektepe is 
one of magnificent monuments of Garabagh and it is located on the right bank of 
Kondelenchay, at the entrance into Fizu-li city. Archaeological researches led by 
Professor Gudret Ismay lov for along fifteen years give complete information 
136 
 
about this ancient land. 
Garakopektepe is the ruins of settlement embraced the period of 10 
thousand years. By variety and thickness of its cultural stages it is one of exclusive 
cultural monuments in our country. Storms of centuries wiped out a number of 
states, cities, settlements from historic scene, however Garakopektepe had not lost 
the flow of life. Due to its location at cross-roads to the East it evidenced major 
social and political events for thousands of years. Labor tools and arms, utensils, 
cloths and knick-knacks, construction and architectural elements found here while 
researches allow to turn the pages of our historic past and trace development of 
manufacturing, adherence to sedentary life, farming and cattle-breeding, discover 
and manufacture of the first metal - copper and, later the bronze, cultural and 
economic relations with Eastern countries and formation cf new, social relations 
and religious views. At the start of the II millennium BC, Garakopektepe was 
surrounded by huge walls of 3 meter width made of large rocks and this had turned 
it into impregnable fort. The interesting fact is that the other settlement in 
Garabagh - Uzerliktepe was also strengthenec' by walls. 
Arrows with three wing heads made of copper frequently met in 
Garakopektepe evidence that in VII century BC the skiff tribes, which played an 
important role in political life of Fore Asia, also attacked this settlement while their 
marches to the East. For some period after attacks of skiffs - up to the mid IV 
century BC there was a peace in Garakopektepe. The peace was unexpectedly bro-
ken in the second half of the same century, the settlement was totally burned to 
ashes and left under the layer of coal. According to G.Ismaylov, who compared 
notes of antic authors with archaeological researches, during that period 
Garakopektepe was plundered by Greek-Macedonian soldiers. 
In III-IV centuries Garakopektepe had turned into strategic post of Sassani 
shahs, through the period of rule of Eldegiz it became the economic and cultural 
center, the large feudal castle with a large number of population. This settlement 
subjected to heavy attacks of Mongolians underwent some period of recession and 
then strengthened again during the rule of Hulakies. Through the period of rules of 
Teymuri, Garagoyunlu and Aghgoyunlu dynasties the busy life in Garakopektepe 
continued. The ancient cemetery of Khodjaly had a special value among 
tombstones found in Garabagh. These monuments were known to scientific world 
due to efforts of Emil Resler, the German scientist, teacher and archaeologist, who 
taught at school in Shusha through 1891-1899. Researches on most of 
archaeological monuments (Khodjaly, Ballygaya, Balchyly, Gushchu,  etc.)  of 
Khodjaly-Gedebey are related to his name. Over the period of 1893-1894 E.Resler 
researched a huge kurgan in Khachynchay valley. He had found a grave of stone 
with 4 skeletons in this kurgan Nl. One of skeletons lied with its head towards the 
east, while the other three were in sitting position. There were a lot of things in 
grave: bronze sword, arrow heads, dagger, axe, helmet and various plates. 
137 
 
In 1895 E.Resler held archaeological researches in ancient cemetery in 
Khodjaly. The grave number 11 draws attention. A lot of samples of our culture 
invaluable for our history, were found in this stony grave of an elderly man. 
Among things recovered from grave there were pottery, bronze figure of bird, 
knife, a couple of rings, gold beads, plate with ornaments and beads made of agate. 
Over these beads the name of Assyrian king Adadninari was engraved by 
cuneiform. At the first sight E.Resler decided that it is not the writing over beads, it 
is just signs resembling Moabite and nebati writings. But later, academician 
I.Meshaninov showed that the opinion is not correct and devoted several papers to 
that cuneiform. Khodjaly beads were researched by other scientists, including 
R.Vikhrov, T.Passek, B.Latinin, I. Jafarzadeh and I.Dyakonov. There were 4 rulers 
with name Adadnirari in Assyria from end of XIV century to mid VIII century BC: 
Adadninari I, II, III and IV. How those beads were brought to Khodjaly and to 
which Adadninari was it belong? Scientists have no definite answer to this 
question. Most of them insist that beads belonged to Adadninari I or Adadninari 
IV. However, I.Dyanokov is of opinion that Khodjaly beads belonged to 
Adadninari III, who came to throne in his childhood. During his rule (811-781 BC) 
Assyrian troops attacked Mamies and Medians lived in surroundings of Urmia and 
reached even the "sea of sunrise", i.e the Caspian sea. Most probably, namely while 
these attacks the beads were brought to ancient Khodjaly. 
E.Resler, who researched about 20 kurgans in Khodjaly came to 
conclusion that ancient cemetery of Khodjaly was used for about 600 years (XIV-
VIII centuries BC). He divided Khodjaly kurgans into five groups and 
I.Meshaninov and I.Jafarzadeh, who researched several kurgans in the same area in 
1926, agreed with this division. Studies conducted here by archaeologist H.Jafarov 
several years prior to occupation of Khodjaly by Armenian-Russian forces also 
proved this and revealed new evidences of cultural and economic relations of 
Azerbaijan with Fore Asia countries. Arms frequently found in kurgans of 
Khodjaly, is dagger, knife, lance heads, etc. show that through the? indicated period 
one of the major activity of population of Garabagh was martial arts, along with 
farming, cattle-breeding and crafts. Favorable geographic position and natural 
riches of Garabagh always tempted neighboring tribes and due to this, local people 
were forced to defend their lands for along centuries. 
One of largest settlements of town type in Garabagh through the Middle 
Ages was Govurgala, which ruins are preserved in Boyahmedli village of Aghdam 
region. Magnificent architectural works have been found here. Researches 
recovered Christian temple built of white stone and it was defined that brother of 
Alban ruler Hamaman was buried within stone grave in the temple. In part of 
Govurgala, which named as "Thrashing-floor" the temple with a large hall was 
discovered and it was attributed to the end of Antic period. Archaeological findings 
(fine plates of glass, jewelry, coins, etc.) evidenced relations of population of 
138 
 
ancient town with Syria, Bizance, Iran and other neighbor countries. Due to opi-
nion that this cemetery belonged to dynasty of rulers and based on some historic 
sources prof. Geoyushov is of opinion that Govurga ly was a summer residence of 
Alban rulers and the ruins of town Aluen situated over trade route Barda-Dabil 
(Dvin). It must be noted that several Christian temples (Amaras, holy Yelisey, etc.) 
in mountain part of Garabagh were studied by R.Geoyushov for a long period of 
time. The last page of "Atlas of Azerbaijan SSR" published in Moscow in 1979 
showed archaeological map which displayed territories of Jebrail, Zangilan, 
Gubadly and Lachin regions as "white spot". But, archaeological researches 
conducted in these regions ten years later discovered tens historic monuments here. 
In Jebrail region ancient settlements of cave type (Palace of Ogres) were found. 
Similar to other western regions in Jebrail also the monuments attributed to various 
historic periods were discovered. Kark-hulu, Toraghaytepe, Gishlag, Abbaskhalken 
settlements, Niftaly kurgans, Sirik and Gyz forts, Khub-yarly and Chelebiler are 
the monuments of Middle Ages. Tombstones made in form of ram figures are 
frequently met in Garabagh and West Azerbaijan (now "Armenia").  Meshadik-
hanym Nemet, the outstanding researcher of epigraphic monuments and 
correspondent member of Azerbaijan National Academy of Sciences, considers 
those figures belonged to XIV-XV century due to their paleographic properties and 
applied technique. Ram figures, which were found on the territory from south-west 
shore of Caspian sea to Goyche lake belong only to our nation and are clear 
examples of culture of nomad Azerbaijani tribes. Each ram figure made of stone 
being the original sculptural work, in fact, is eternal passport which prove the right 
of Azerbaijani to live on these lands. The note "Ibrahim from dynasty of Agvan" 
engraved over the ram figure made of stone in cemetery of Urud village in Sisyan 
region and attributed to the second half of XV century is very valuable for our 
history. Armenian vandals undertake enormous efforts to destroy these pieces of 
art - our historic roots spread over the territory from Turkmenchay,  from Urmia to 
Goyche. Some Armenian "intelligentsia", fed by absurd ideas, express nonsensical 
notions just in order to hide history and falsify truths. The history of building of 11 
span and 15 span Khudaferin bridges over Araz river in south of Garabagh and the 
fact of Azeri Turks settling on both sides of these bridges for last thousand years 
are known even to those, who are not historians. In spring of 1989 S.Khanzadyan 
on pages of "Communist" newspaper expressed nonsense idea about "the most 
ancient and magnificent sample of Armenian art of building bridges is Khudferin 
bridge, which connects northern Armenia with Atropat province of south 
Armenia". 
Hundreds of monuments found in Garabagh and West Azerbaijan, 
including those described above and those have not been mentioned in this paper, 
thousands stones with inscriptions of phrases from Holy Koran in Arabic script 
embraced the whole II millennium, examples of writing attributed to Middle Ages 
139 
 
display tradition end inheritance of cultural, economic and everyday life of our 
nation. Life started from Azygh in Garabagh and continued through ancient and 
Middle Ages show that this region is one of ancient civilization centers of 
Azerbaijan. 
INSTEAD EPILOGUE. Our monuments suffered from vandals in 
occupied Garabagh together with our territories, trampled by sworn enemy, wait 
for day of liberation. Millions of our compatriots, who foster love to Motherland in 
their hearts, never will refuse of idea to liberate Garabagh. The fog over Garabagh 
will be dissipated soon, worms over the hills will dissolve, smile will return to the 
pressed lips and peace will be established in ancient Cradle of God. 
  
Tofiq Najafly 
GARABAGH İN XV CENTURY 
  
One of the crucial problems of historic science consists in detailed studies 
of Garabagh of ancient times and through the Middle ages. Garabagh, which 
covered a large area in Azerbaijan in most cases was named as "Arran Garabagh". 
The term "Arran Garabagh" for the first time was mentioned in book "Came et-
tevarix" authored by Fezlullah Reshidaddin while his descriptions of events of 
1284 (Reshid ad-din Fezullah. Djami at-tavarix. Vol.III. Sostaviteli nauchno-
kriticheskogo teksta na persidskom yazike - A.Ali-zade. Perevod s persidskogo 
yazika A.Arendsa. Baku, 1957, p.170; V. Piriyev. Azerbaijan in XVIII-XIV 
centuries. Baku, 2003, p.98). Historians of that period named this region as "Arran 
Garabagh" in order to distinguish it from other Garabaghs, first of all to distinguish 
from "Bagdis Garabagh" existed in southeast of Turkmenistan and south-west of 
Afganistan. (V.Piriyev. Indicated source, p.98). Mountain and plain areas of 
Garabagh, which historically had close economic and cultural ties with each other, 
geographically was part of Arran. In some cases in historic sources Garabagh and 
Arran were shown as the same entity. Being greater administrative-geographic 
unit, the Arran was considered as part of Azerbaijan. According to Azerbaijani 
historian Aby Bakr al-Gutbu al-Ahri, Garabagh was regarded as "capital of Arran", 
more precisely as its center (Aby Bakr al-Gutbu al-Ahri. Tarix-e Sheikh Uveys. 
Translation and introduction from Persian, comments of M.Kazymov and 
V.Piriyev.  Baku,   1984, p.87). "Garabagh" was used together with term "Arran" at 
the end of XIV century -start of XV century, in some cases replaced it and 
administratively embraced central portions of Arran. Garabagh consisted of a 
territory comprised of mountain and foothill areas. Garabagh as a part of Arran was 
the center of social and political events taking place in Azerbaijan in XIV-XV 
centuries. Since Elkhans always spent winter time in Garabagh, some state level 
events happened here. Three Elkhani rulers - Gazan khan, Arpa khan and 
Anushiravan came to throne in Garabagh, two others -Argun and Abu Said died in 
140 
 
Garabagh (V.Piriyev. Indicated source, p. 101-102.). 
After the death of Elkhani ruler sultan Abu Said in 1335 the state of 
Elkhanies underwent regression and later collapsed. This also influenced 
Garabagh. Ruler of Garabagh Emir Surghan and his mother Satybey Khatun turned 
into active participants of feudal war occurred in Hulakiler state. Feudal groups 
struggling for power in 1338, on the basis of agreement signed between Chobaniler 
and Jelaliler as a part of Arran had stayed under the rule of Satybey Khatun and 
Emir Surghan. In a short period of time the ruler of Garabagh Satybey Khatuntl 
became the shah of Hulakuler and from that period Garabagh was the center of 
historic events related to activity of Chobanies. (Hamdullah Mustofi Gazvini. Zeyl-
e Tarix-e gozide. Introduction, translation, comments are made by M.Kazymov and 
V.Piriverdiyev, Baku, 1986, p.32; V.Piriverdiyev. Indicated source, p. 103). 
In the second half of XIV century when Azerbaijan entered Jalaliler state 
the territory of Garabagh also went under the control of this state. At the beginning 
of Sultan Ahmed rule the territory of Garabagh was ruled by Jalairi emirs. After 
attacks of Emir Teymur to Azerbaijan, Garabagh almost totally was under the 
subordination of his representatives. Garabagh became the place of winter 
residence of Emir Teymur. In sources of that period there were a large number of 
facts mentioning Garabagh as a winter residence of Emir Teymur and preceding 
him rulers of Hulaki and Jelairi dynasties. Emir Teymur used Garabagh as a 
starting point for his attacks to the west. 
In the beginning of XV century Jelairi state, which also contained 
Garabagh, collapsed as a result of attacks of Emir Teymur. Since Sultan Ahmed 
fled to Bagdad, Azerbaijan was ruled by Miranshah, son of Emir Teymur. 
In March of 1404 when Emir Teymur went from Garabagh winter 
residence back to Samarkand, he assigned his grandson Omar Mirza as a ruler of 
territories in Hulaky area (F. S timer. Kara Koyunlular. Vol.1, Ankara, 1967, p.70). 
Death of Teymur in 1405 caused discords between dynasty members in his empire 
and continuous struggle for power between his children. Azerbaijan has turned into 
the arena of new wars. Local rulers taking advantage from political situation started 
the fight for independence with a support of population. (History of Azerbaijan. 
Seven volumes. Vol.HI, Baku, 1999, p.78). This struggle was headed by Shirvanshah 
Ibrahim (1382-1417). Ibrahim I, who took advantage from struggle, which started in 
various provinces of the country against ruling of strangers, crossed Kur river in 
1406 and established his control over large portion of Gandja and Garabagh. 
According to data shown in various sources, through that period the ruler of 
Garabagh was Yar Ahmed from Garamanly tribe (A.Ali-zadeh). 
Ruler of Gandja and Yar Ahmed Garaman, Shirvanshah I Ibrahim, Bistam 
Jagir- ruler of Ardebil, Seid Ahmed Teymiri -ruler of Sheki joined their efforts 
against Omar Mirza. Omar Mirza refrained from fight with joined forces and went 
back. Thus, northern territories of Azerbaijan were free from rule of Teymuries. In 
141 
 
May of 1406 Shirvanshah Ibrahim I captured Tabriz. However when he became 
aware that Sultan Ahmed started attack from Bagdad, Ibrahim I was forced to 
return. Attempt of Shirvanshah I Ibrahim to unite territories of Azerbaijan had 
failed. 
Through that period the South Azerbaijan territories were under the rule 
of Teymuri Abu Bakir. Gara Yusif Garagoyunlu in battle in Nakhchyvan in 1406 
and in Sardrud in 1408 defeated Teymuri Abu Bakir and brought to the end the 
rule of Teymuries in Azerbaijan. In 1410 Gara Yusif defeated former ally Sultan 
Ahmed in vicinity of Tabriz and thus ended the rule of Jelairi state and established 
Azerbaijan state of Garagoyunlu with center in Tabriz. The state included 
Garabagh, South Azerbaijan, part of Eastern Anadolu, Arabic Iraq and Adjem Iraq 
(History of Azerbaijan, Vol.111, p.81; T.Najafli. History of Garagoyunlu and 
Aghgoyunlu states in Turkic historic sciences. Baku, 2000. p.56; O.Efendiyev. 
Garabagh within states of Garagoyunlu, Aghgoyunlu and Sefevis. (XV-XVII cc.)// 
Garabagh. Stories on history and culture. Baku, 2004, p.62-63). Garamanly tribe of 
Garabagh joined Garagoyunlu tribe and played a significant role in history of this 
state. In December of 1412 in fight of Gara Yusif against joined troops of 
Shirvanshah I Ibrahim, ruler of Sheki - Seyid Ahmed and Georgian king 
Konstantin the "soldiers of Garaman" under supervision of Yar Ahmed also 
participated. In this battle on the bank of Kur river Gara Yusif won with support of 
Garabagh units. (I.Petrushevsky. States of Azerbaijan in XV century. Collection of 
papers on history of Azerbaijan. Issue 1, Baku, 1949, p. 160; T.Nadjafli. Indicated 
source, p.58-59; O.Efendiyev. Garabagh within.. .,p.62). After death of Gara Yusif 
in 1420 Teymuri Sultan Shahrukh occupied Azerbaijan. 
Among neighbor rulers who came to meet Sultarr Shahrukh spending 
winter in Arran Garabagh, was the ruler of Garabagh -Yar Ahmed Garamanly and 
his brother Shirzad (Xavari Fasix. Mudjmali Fasixi. Translation, foreword and 
notes of D.Osupuvoy, Tashkent, 1980, p.188). In April of 1421 Sultan. Shahrukh 
left Garabagh and this gave a start to revolt of Yar Ahmed Garamanly in Gandja 
and Barda. Teymuries historian Fasih Xavafi wrote that at that period Sultan 
Shahrukh sent his son Baysungur Bahadur against Yar Ahmed (F.Xavafi. Indicated 
source, p. 190). Faruk Sumer wrote that Yar Ahmed Garamanly attacked those 
who collected taxes from Cagatay district nearby to Gandja-Garabagh and took 
away everything they had. Due to this, Shahrukh sent Baysungur to attack Yar 
Ahmed. Despite that Yar Ahmed left Gandja and found a shelter in Esferzen fort in 
Georgia, he was captured  brought  to  Shahrukh,  who  forgave  him.   (F. Sumer. 
Indicated source, p. 118; O.Efendiyev "Vseobshoe istorie Hafiza Abru kak 
istochnik po istorii Zagafkaziya pervoy chetverti XV c"// istochnikovedcheskie 
raziskanie 1979. Tbilisi, 1984, p.226-227). Xevafi wrote that when Sultan 
Shahrukh fought with Karakoyuniu Isgender nearby to Aleshgerd, Yar Ahmed 
Garamanly was brought from Barda fort and executed (F.Xevafi. Indicated source, 
142 
 
p. 19). 
Garagoyunlu Isgender seriously resisted strengthening of Sultan 
Shahrukh's position in Azerbaijan. In spite of struggle between Garagoyunlular, 
Isgender succeeded to preserve integrity of the state. During his second attack to 
Azerbaijan in  1429, Sultan Shahrukh defeated Isgender in battle nearby to Selmas 
and took Azerbaijan  under the  control.  While  leaving the  country he assigned 
Abu Said, the brother of Isgender, as a ruler of the country, however later Isgender 
took back the power. In 1435 Sultan Sh ihrukh again attacked Azerbaijan and spent 
winter in Garabagh. In spring of 1436 he assigned Cahanshah, the other brother of 
Isgender, who agreed to be the subject of Teymuri, as a ruler of Azerbaijan. 
Isgender disagreed with this and started the fight against his brother. However, in 
1438 Piri bey Garamanly, who was one of "major emirs" of the state, took a side of 
Cahanshah and due to this, Isgender did not fight with his brother nearby Heft-
Cheshme and went to Elindje fort, where he was killed (E.Tehrani. Kitab-
Diyarbekriyye. Translation from Persian, foreword, comments and notes by Rahile 
Shukurova, Baku, 1998, p.90; F.Sumer. Indicated source, p. 139; O.Efendiyev. 
Karabax v sostave...,p.62). 
It may be supposed that Piri bey Garamanly became the ruler of Gandja 
and Barda and replaced Yar Ahmed Garamanly. During the rule of Cahanshah also 
Garabagh was part of Garagoyunlu state. In 1467 Cahanshah was killed in the 
battle with Uzun Hasan and after this, Garabagh like other territories of 
Garagoyunlu went under the control of Aghgoyunlu. Hasan Ali, son of Cahanshah, 
after death of his father gathered his own troops. But defeated by Uzun Hasan in 
1468 in vicinity of Marand, he fled to Garabagh and settled in Barda. Abubekr 
Tehrani wrote that after the death of Cahansnah, sons of Piri bey Garamanly 
intended to capture him and sent to meet Uzun Hasan, however later they changed 
their mind and. allowed dm to go to Ardebil (A.Tehrani. Indicated source, p.250; 
O.Efendiyev. Garabagh v sostave..., p.62). 
In historic sources of that period Garabagh was mentioned as traditional 
winter residence of troops of Sultan, Shahrukh, however, the amount of distinct 
data is small. Through the period of rule of Sultan Yagub (1478-1490), who was 
the son of Uzun Hasan, the districts of Gandja and Barda were ruled by heads of 
local tribes assigned by the central power. According to notes of Fezlullah ibn 
Ruzbehan Xunci, historian of Aghgoyunlu, Gandja and Barda provinces were ruled 
by Baysungur, son of Sultan Yagub (F.Xindci. Tarix-I alam-ara-yi Amini. Perevod 
s anqliyskoqo na ruskiy T.A.Minorskoy. Baku, 1987, p.87; O.Efendiyev. Karabax 
v sostave..., p.63). F.Xunci gives information about Garabagh while describing 
marches of Sefevi Sheikh Heydar in 1488 to Shirvan and Dagestan. The author 
wrote that Sheikh Heydar "when approached Chalabert district of Barda province, 
the property of head gazi, he looted this area and confiscated possessions of zimmi 
community. These zimmi (i.e. Christian Albans - T.N.) during the peace period 
143 
 
paid such taxes as cizye and ushr, and were free from torments and oppression" 
(F.Xunci, Indicated source, p.86). While depicting period of rule of Sultan Yagub, 
F.Xunci indicates that he had spent winter time in Tabriz or in Garaagach area of 
Garabagh (F.Xunci, Indicated source, p. 119; O.Efendiyev. Karabax v 
sostave...,p.63). According to historian of Aghgoyunlu, Garaagach was situated on 
"Laps of Tall Sultan and its peak directed towards the stars from the center of the 
camp. It is surprising that such a peak located in surrounding of a plain area in the 
middle of a forest" (F.Xunci, Indicated source, p. 101; O.Efendiyev. Karabax v 
sostave...,p.63). It can be derived from descriptions of Aghgoyunlu historian 
F.Xunci that this area was located on territory of Sultanbud. That is because, the 
ruler arrived at Garaagach "was greeted by newly blossoming flowers of Sultanbud 
lands" (F. Xunci. Indicated source, p. 101; O.Efendiyev. Karabax v 
sostave...,p.63). It must be noted that Sultanbud lands indicated by historian of 
Aghgoyunlu were situated to the east from Barda-Agdam route. Garabagh 
mentioned again in sources of that period while describing events during the short 
period of rule of Baysungur, the son of Sultan Yagub. In 1492 the battle between 
Eybe Sultan Bayandur and Baysungur took place between Gandja and Barda. 
According to the information given in sources Eybe Sultan succeeded to unite 
Gadjars of Garabagh under his banner. That is why, Baysungur was defeated in the 
battle and was killed in the second battle in surroundings of Barda in August of 1493 
(F.Xunci. Indicated source, p. 143-144). This fact once again proves that during that 
period Gadjars already lived in Garabagh. There are various versions in historic 
researches in respect of origin and history of settling in Azerbaijan of Gadjars, which 
were one of Gyzylbash kins and played a major role while development of Azerbaijan 
Sefevi state. According to opinion of Turkish historian Z.Toghan, Gadjars arrived at 
Azerbaijan while travels of Oghuz khan to Iran and during the period of Mongolian 
attacks to Azerbaijan they settled in surroundings of Khalkhal. Gadjars assisted 
Hulaku troops and went together with them to Sham, however they returned during 
the rule of Emir Teymur and Garagoyunlu. (Z.Toghan. About ethnography of 
Azerbaijan. "Azerbaijan Yurt Bilgisi", vol.H, issue 14, Istanbul, 1933, p.56. For 
detailed information refer to: T.Nadjafli, G.Nadjafli. Role of Gadjars in political life in 
XVI-XVH centuries.//Azerbaijan and Azerbaijani. Baku, 2006, 1-4, p.137-138). The 
author of "History of Gyzylbashes" confirmed that Gadjars lived in Gandja and Barda 
from ancient times and part of them came from Sham ("History of Gyzylbashes". 
Translation and comments of M.Mahammadi, Baku, 1993, p.36). 
These facts prove once again Gadjars being from Oghuz tribes lived in 
Azerbaijan even prior to Mongolian attacks and due to attacks of Mongolians were 
forced to go back to Eastern Anadolu along with other Turkmen. In XV century 
Gadjars joined the Aghgoyunlu. Histoiic sources reflect that Gadjars lived in 
Garabagh were actively involved with fierce struggle over the throne of 
Aghgoyunlu in 90-ies of XV century. According to F.Sumer and sources of that 
144 
 
period Gadjars settled in surroundings of Gandja played a major role in liberation 
of Rustam Mirza, the grandson of Uzun Hasan, from Elindje fort and bringing him 
to throne. (F.Sumer. Role of Anadolu Turks in establishment and development of 
Sefevi state. Ankara, 1976, p.53). When in'1497 Rustam shah was defeated by 
Gyodek Ahmed, he again found a shelter nearby to bey of Gadjars in surroundings 
of Gandja and requested his support. Despite that Gadjars bey supported Rustam, 
he defeated in the battle in 1497 and was killed. According to F.Sumer, during that 
period Gadjars dynasty was headed by Ziyad bey. (F.Sumer. Indicated source, 
p.54). In the last quarter of XV century Gyzylbash tribes gathered besides of 
sheikh Heydar also involved Gadjars. According to I.Petrushevsky, at the end of 
XV century Gadjar Turk tribes (Aghgoyunlu Gadjar), which once entered the 
Aghgoyunlu tribes union, joined Gyzylbash tribes (I.Petrushevsky. About feudal 
relations history in Azerbaijan and Armenia in XVI cenuries, L.1949, p.91). At the 
end of XV century the internal contradictions in Azerbaijan Aghgoyunlu state, 
became deeper and in 1500 the state divided between emirs of Aghgoyunlu. South 
Azerbaijan, Garabagh, Nakhchyvan and Diyarbakr were under the rule of Sultan 
Elvend, while Arab Iraq, Fars and Kirman went under the rule of Sultan Murad. 
(I.Petrushecsky. States of Azerbaijan in XV century, p. 179; O.Efendiyev. 
Establishment of Azerbaijan state of Sefevi at the start XVI century. Baku, 1961, 
p.84). In 1499, when Ismayil left Lahidja and moved toward Ardebil he was 
followed by loyal to him Gara Piri bey Gadjar. Zeynalabdin AH in his book 
"Tekmiletul-exbar" wrote that Gara Piri bey Gadjar, who gained the title 
"Tozgoparan" for his courage, was assigned by Ismayil as a head of forces sent 
against Aghgoyunlu Elvend in 1501 (O.Efendiyev. Establishment of Azerbaijan 
state of Sefevi..., p. 146). At the start of XVI century Garabagh was included into 
Azerbaijan Sefevi state as Garabagh beylerbeylik with its center in Gandja. 
Thus, in XV century Garabagh was inseparable part of Azerbaijan and 
stayed as a part of Azerbaijan states. Through that period the major part of 
population in Garabagh were Azerbaijani Turkic tribes belonged to dynasties of 
Garagoyunlu and Aghgoyunlu. Important information about population of 
Garabagh and its ethnic composition was given in 1593 by Ottoman finance 
official Mehmed Imamzadeh in his work "Gandja-Garabagh icmal defteri" 
(F.Kirziogly. 1593 (H.1001) Osmanli vilayet Tahrir defterinde anilan Gence-
Karabag sancaqlari "Ulus" ve "Oymaklari" - Edebiyyat fakultesi Arashtirma 
Dergisi ahmet Sfaroglu Ozel sayisi, sayi 10, Ankara, 1979). According to this 
source, there were such Turkic kin in Garabagh as Garamanly, Gadjars, Baharly, 
Hadjyly, Iyirmidordly, Otuzikili, Shamsaddinli, Gapanly and others. 
 
 
 
 
145 
 
Ulviyya Hajiyeva 
COMMEMORATIVE NOTES IN ALBAN  
GOSPELS AS SOURCE OF HISTORY OF ALBANS IN XI-XVIII 
 
In the book "Artsakh" authored by Makar Barkhudaryants and published 
in Baku in 1895 there is valuable information about New Testaments, preserved in 
Garabagh (Artshakh) at the end of XIX century. Some of them may be attributed to 
that of Albans. 
I. For the IV-XIX centuries Alban Apostle Autocephalous Church played 
a role of organizer in the life of Alban Christian population of Artsakh (Garabagh). 
All monasteries of Garabagh subjected to Alban katolikosate according to 
M.Barkhudaryants "in 1828 were inhabited and flourished. After abolishment of 
Ag-van katalikosate. i.e. after the year 1828 the monasteries gradually weakened, 
devoid of monks and being without supervision, mostly destroyed (underlined by 
author) (Barkhudaryants. I, p.5). After liquidation of Alban katalikosate by the 
decree of monarchy, Alban churches of Artsakh stopped to be the centers of 
spiritual-cult union of Alban Christian population. These monasteries being sub-
jected since 1836 to Armenian Church of Echmiadzin by the end of XIX c. did not 
have any archives and libraries, everything had mystically vanished. This was 
because the fact that monasteries were destroyed, church services was not held and 
all ecclesiastical literature was liquidated. Although notes on the walls indicated 
that for centuries monasteries were presented by lands, holy books, various 
manuscripts, testaments and they had rooms specially constructed for libraries. For 
example, the note within Gandzasar monastery says: "... this note evidences that 
me, humble servant of God, Jalal Dola, son of Vakhtang, grandchild of great Asan, 
ruler of high and great country of Artsakh, king in multiscale world; my farther 
before his death and passing to the other world made a will to me and my mother 
Khorishakh to build this church over the graves of our fathers in Gandzasar, which 
we started in 665 (1216). In our stormy life the forethought event completed in 682 
(1233), decorated by various forms, paintings and ornaments by our eagerness and 
good will... I gave with cross, books, sacred things, utensils, made from noble 
metals and beautiful decorations... This church was sanctified in 689 (1240) in 
patriarchate of ter Nerses - katalikos of Agvan" (Barkhudaryants, I, p. 155). Later it 
says: "...this amazing monastery is morally and physically destroying; gradually 
stones fall out and break, rooting is damaged, the fence in some places is destroyed 
and there are no gates, invaluable handwritings in a large amount are looted, 
handwritings which left became the victims of moisture and negligence, there are 
no services in monastery for several months, because there are no literate people, 
no schools, no monks, nor even simple readers" (underlined by author), 
(Barkhudaryants, I, p. 160). In this famous Alban monastery of XVIII century, 
according to M.Barkhudaryants, of a whole rich library only handwritten "lives of 
146 
 
saints" was preserved, which condition he described as following: "from the 
beginning and from the end the pages were lost, due to negligence it was covered 
by mould and became useless" (Barkhudaryants, I, p. 156). Except for monastery 
Targmanchats (in Gardman district), in which there was only one gospel of XVIII 
c. (Barkhudaryants, II, p.304-306), by the end of XIX c. in monasteries of Artsakh 
there were no gospels at all. 
Thus Armenian Echmiadzin Church treated with religious heritage of 
Alban Apostolic Autocephalous Church, gaining it at the start of XIX c. in 
blooming state and totally destructing it by the end of the same century, also 
liquidated rich literature and archives, probably taking part of them to Echmiadzin. 
According to studied source. Alban gospels (handwritten: parchment and 
paper) are preserved in separate churches in districts of Artsakh (Garabagh): in 
Shakashen, Varand, Khachen, Jerabert, Gardman, Parisos and Kusti. Characteristic 
feature of manuscripts is the existence of commemorative note - colophon, the note 
which indicates name of copyist, date and conditions of copying, name of client, 
etc. There is a certain canon of writing of colophon. Colophon is the documental 
source for exact dating of chapter, portion, manuscript (in which it is fixed) for 
studying of many historic problems. Although these gospels and notes on them are 
preserved by the end of XIX c. in Armenian, they reflect history of Alban ethnos, 
Alban church and its katalikosate, Alban ruling dynasty during XI-XVIII cc. and 
due to this they may be referred to Alban. II. From colophons it is possible to 
derive date (XI, XIII-XVIII cc) and places where these gospels were written. Part 
of Alban gospels were written in Artsakh during various periods with support of 
Alban rulers and Alban katalikos in its various regions: in Gandja (villages 
Artsangist, Karaat), in Varand district of Artsakh (Khachmaz settlement), Gayvush 
(Tavuz settlement), Dizak (village Tegaser), Dzegam (village Melikzate), in upper 
Dzegam (village Sultanetsik, Garamurat), in Megavuz district (village Baga-zun), 
Sunik, Nakhcb/van (village Gomer in Shabun district). For example we may 
indicate the following colophons: 
1) "this holy gospel inscribed by God is written in state of Gandja. in 
village of Artsangist. in Church of saint Malaznabert" (Barkhudaryants, I, 
p.46,47,48) 
2) "this gospel is completed in 1108 (1659) in state of Gandja. in 
village of Kara-at with favor of Holy Mother during the period of katalikos 
Agavanii of ruler Petros" (Barkhudaryants, I, p.89) 
3) "it is written in Varand district of Artsakh. in village of Khachmaz 
by the hand of bishop Aleksander in 1018 (1569); was restored in 1145 (1696)... in 
the church of St Grigoriy in village Gomer of Shabun district in state of 
Nakhchwan (Barkhudaryants, I, p. 127) 
4) "it is written in village of Pechgena Gomer fSvunikl in Church of 
St.Georgiy Conqueror" (Barkhudaryants, I, p.49). According to studies of Ziya 
147 
 
Buniyatov and Farida Mamedova the Syunik is the part of Alban kingdom, Alban 
lands and after decay of Alban kingdom Syunik was the inseparable part of all 
succeeding countries of historic Azerbaijan - states of Sadjids, Salarids, 
Shcddadids, Atabeks, Gara-goyunlu, Agh-goyunlu, Sefevi and Nakhchyvan 
khanate; 
5)"it is written in Great Syunik Tatev monastery in 1034 (1585) by hand 
of bishop xOvannes"; "...this testament... in 1120 (1671)... in state of Upper-
Dzegam, in village Sultanetsik under the favor of Holy Mother"; "in 1101 (1652) ... 
it is written in state of Dzegam in village of Melikzate, under the favor of Holy 
Mother and Saint Foma and other saint...; this gospel is copied at present time from 
good original in state of Upper Dzegam in skete Arants in Garamurat... in 1128 
(1679)" (Barkhudaryants, II, p.295, 296, 298,299); 
6) "it is written... under the favor of Saint Martyr in state Gawush in 
village of Tavuz..."; "this holy gospel is written in state of Agvan, in district of 
Dizak. in village of Tegaser.. .in third year of shah Sefi"; 
7) "this holy gospel is copied during grievous and difficult period from 
good, selected original in state of Upper Dzegam in village of Shakar-bek...in 1082 
(1633) during the rule of shah Abbas..." (Barkhudaryants, II, p.336, 337). 
8) "This is written in state of Agvan in district of Megavuz in village 
named as Bagazun. in Church of Holy Brotherhood in 1091 (1642)" (from church 
of St. xOvanes XVII c. in village of Chora-tan, in district Kusti (or Kave); 
(Barkhudaryants, II, p.332, 333). 
Other part of gospels had been brought to Artsakh from other places, but 
also was used by Alban clergy for commemorative descriptions of events taking 
place in Artsakh and adjacent countries of the same period, of simultaneous 
historic events. 
III. Colophons of Alban gospels include notes evidencing independence of Alban 
Apostolic Autocephalous Church and there is no indication on its subjection to 
Armenian Church. Makar Barkhudaryants in his work "Artsakh" gives 
chronology of all locations of Alban katalikosate. He wrote: "Agvan katalikosate 
was located in: Derbent, Chola, Gis (according to legend), Partav ("which by the 
end of XIX c. was almost as a village, devoid of glory of former splendor and 
wealth") (Barkhudaryants, I, p.31,32), Ktlikosaran, monastery of Apostle Egishe 
or Jrevishtik, Gandja, Karagerts, Khamshivank-monastery, Akhbat, Gandzasar, 
Jalet, repeatedly Gandzasar, where the Agvan katalikosate stopped its existence 
and where the last katalikos Sarkis was buried in crypt of Jalalyants" 
(Barkhudaryants, I, p.6). 
Let us now consider extractions from Alban gospels, which contain valuable 
information about Alban katalikosate, from which we learn names of Alban 
148 
 
katalikoses, which ruled Alban Apostolic Autocephalous Church in XVI-XVIII 
cc: xOvanes (1574-1586), Grigoriy (1645-1650), Petros (1653-1675), Yeremii 
Hasan-Jalal (yants) (1676-1700), Esai Hasan Jalal (yants) (1702-1728), Nerses 
(1742-1745). 
About patriarchate of katalikos xOvanes (1574-1586) there is a note in a 
gospel located in district Parisos, in church, in village Barsum, which said: "Now 
this ...gospel is written in 1028 (1579) by hand of bishop xOvanes in famous 
brotherhood of saint apostle Evstafiy, 9800 hallows are collected here under the 
shelter of Holy Mother in patriarchate of ter xOvanes of Agvan katalikos" (Bark-
hudaryants, II, p.324,325). 
Data about patriarchate of Alban katalikos Grigoriy (1645-1650) is preserved in 
two gospels, which colophons are given below: 
1) "It is written in 1094 (1645) in patriarchate of ter Grigoriy under the 
shelter of St.Martyr in state of Gayvush in village of Ta-vuz, in a year when we 
are oppressed by evil lawlessness of Persian yoke... subjecting to atrocities" (from 
cathedral church of Holy Mother in Shusha, in district of Varanda; 
Barkhudaryants, I, p. 129). 
2) "O, sons öf Sion...in 1099 (1650) khan of Gandja send katalikos of 
Gandzasar to prison until he will pay out the debt to executors, freed and went to 
collect the debts... name of Gandzasar katalikos was Grigoriy" (from private 
house in village of Talysh, in district of Jrabert; (Barkhudaryants, II, p. 238-240). 
It is important that colophons of these gospels allow to add to a list of Alban 
katalikoses the name of another katalikos - Grigoriy (1645-1650), which is absent 
in list of Alban katalikoses shown in "Orthodox encyclopedia". 
About a certain period of patriarchy of Alban katalikos Petros (1653-1675) there 
are evidences in extractions of the following gospels: 
1) "is completed by the Grace of God in 1112 (1663) in patriarchy of 
Agvan ruler Petros" (from Cathedral Church of St. John Baptist of XVII c. in 
Gandja, in district Shakashen; (Barkhudaryants, I, p.44); 
2) "it is written... the gospel in state of Gandja, in village of Artsangist, in 
Church of St. Malaznabert in patriarchate of thrice blessed arch-priest from house 
of Agvan ruler Petros - reverent katalikos..." (from Cathedral Church of St. ^ohn 
Baptist of XVII c. in Gandja; in district Shakashen; Barkhudaryants, I, p. 46) 
3) "This holy gospel is written in 1117 (1668) in patriarchy of thrice blessed 
149 
 
arch-priest from house of Agvan, ruler Petros, reverent katalikos and during the 
rule of Holy Table by ter Ovanes...in princedom of noble melik of country 
Simavon ..." (from church of St. Apostle, built in 1853-1869 in Gandja, in district 
Shakashen; Barkhudaryants, I, p.47,48); 
4) "...under the patronage of Holy Mother during the rule of... katalikos of 
Agvanii ruler Petros" (from Church of XVII c. of Holy Mother in town of 
Avetaranots, in district Varand; Barkhudaryants, I, p.89); 
5) "Now this holy gospel is written in 1118 (1669) in patriarchy of thrice 
blessed of archbishop of house Agvan of katalikos Petros in village Artskhakist in 
church of St.Mlyznabert..." (from church of St. xOvanes in village Gulali, in 
district Parisos; Barkhudaryants, II, p.328); 
6) "...this testimonial...in 1120 (1671)... during patriarchy of ter Petros 
reverent katalikos of holy Gandzasar,.. .under the shelter of Holy Mother..." (from 
Church of St.Apostle, built in 1863 in village Mets-Banants, in district Gardman; 
Barkhudaryants, II, p.296); 
About rule of other Alban katalikoses there are episodic data in some Alban 
gospels: 
Eremii Hasan-Jalal(yants) (1676-1700): "This ....gospel is written in 1129 
(1680)...in patriarchy of house of Agvən ter Eremii reverent and newly elected 
katalikos, in state of Gandja in village of Kara-at under the shelter of Holy 
Mother". "Village Kara at in Gardman district" (from Cathedral church of Holy 
Mother in city Shusha, in district of Varand; Barkhudaryants, I, p. 130); 
Esai Hasan Jalal(yants) (1702-1728): "...in patriarchy of ter 
Esai...katalikos of all agvans, is written in 1166 (1717)" (from church of St. 
Apostle, built in 1863 in village Mets-Banants, in district Gardman; 
Barkhudaryants, II, p.294); 
Nersese (1742-1745): "...it is written in 1191 (1742) to arch-priest ter 
Nerses katalikos Agvan and head of the region Melik-Tamraz" (from private house 
in village Talysh, in district Jrabert; Barkhudaryants, II, p.238-240); 
1) "In 1194 (1745) this gospel was bought by me, Melik Esai from 
Cherapert from village Mokhratag. Now, I heard voice of God and presented this 
to the monastery of St. Three infants to patriarchy of ruler Nerses katalikos of 
Agvan" (from Cathedral church of St. John Baptist of XVII c. in Gandja, in district 
Shaka-shen; Barkhudaryants, I, p.46); 
Thus, due to colophons of Alban gospels it is possible to trace continuity 
of ruling of Alban katalikoses up to XVIII c, and according to data of 
150 
 
M.Barkhudaryants, Alban katalikosate ceased its existence after the year 1828. 
IV. Historic tradition of writing of historic-literature chronicles was 
preserved by Albans-Christians along centuries until the beginning of XIX c: 
"History of Albans" by Moisey Kalankatuyskiy of VIII a, "Alban chronicles" by 
Mkhitar Gosha of XII-XIII cc, "Short history of Agvan state" by Esai Hasan 
Jalalyan of XVIII century. Alban gospels with their colophons from period of late 
Middle Ages up to start of XIX c. had continued historic chronicles. 
Commemorative notes in them represented continuation of Alban historic-literature 
traditions and were some sort of chronicles. Detailed studies of colophons of these 
gospels, indicate that Alban gospels were written not only through the periods of 
flourishing, renaissance, but also during hard years of epidemics, starvation, while 
ruling of cruel sovereigns. All historic events happened with Albans of various 
districts and Artsakh as a whole were described in gospels, dating synchronously 
with events in neighbor countries in order to make exact dating and to leave for 
descendants the history of their ethnos. Under circumstances of continuous attacks, 
wars, absence of their own Alban state, only Alban Apostle Autocephalous Church 
could keep manuscripts and gospels, since gospels were carriers of historic 
memory of their ethnos. Notes of Alban gospels indicate names of most prominent 
rulers in countries neighboring with Artsakh, both at the time when the gospel was 
written or due to description of any event. For example, some commemorative 
notes of Alban gospels evidence that they were written "during ruling of Persian 
minor shah Abbas" (Barkhudaryants, I, p.44-48) or "during the rule of Persian shah 
Suleyman" (Barkhudaryants, I,p.l30). 
Historic events of XVII c. are reflected in the following colophons of 
Alban gospels, found in: 
1) In district Jrabert, in private house in village Talysh: "This...gospel 
was brought...from Kesariya... "O, sons of Sion...in 1099 (1650) khan of Gandja 
send katalikos of Gandzasar to prison until he will pay out the debt to executors, 
freed and went to collect the debts... I went with him up to Khachen.. .name of 
Gandzasar katalikos was Grigoriy" (Barkhudaryants, II, p. 238-240). 
2) In district Parisos, in Church of St. xOvanes in village Gulali: "Now 
this holy gospel is written in 1118 (1669) during the rule of Persian shah Suleyman, 
we finished it in grievous times, when collecting of taxes were increased and men of 
Belail always treated arrogantly with Christian nation" (Barkhudaryants, II, p.328). 
3) In district Varand, in cathedral church of Holy Mother in Shusha: "It 
is written in 1094 (1645) in which we were oppressed by evil lawlessness of 
Persian yoke... subjecting to atrocities" (Barkhudaryants, I, p. 129). 
"This ...gospel is written in 1129 (1680) ...during the rule of Persian shah 
Suleyman and in patriarchy of house of Agvan ter Eremii reverent and newly 
elected katalikos, in state of Gandja in village Kara-at under the shelter of Holy 
Mother. Village Kara-at in Gardman district" (Barkhudaryants, I, p. 130). 
151 
 
4) In district Gardman, in church of St.Apostle, built in 1863 in village 
Mets-Banats: "...this testimonial...in 1120 (1671)...in this year there were a large 
number of deaths in state of Upper Dzegam, when in one day in one house 7 
people died...in patriarchy ter Petros reverent katalikos of holy Gandzasar, under 
the rule of head of this province vardapet Minase and during the rule of Persian 
shah Suleyman in a state of Upper Dzegam in village Sultanetsik under the shelter 
of Holy Mother..." (Barkhudaryants, II, p.296). 
Colophons of some Alban gospels characterize complicated historic 
situation in Garabagh as a whole and its Alban Christian population in XVIII and 
start of XIX centuries, including the period of arrival of Russian troops to 
Azerbaijan. In Varand district, in Shu-sha in Cathedral church of Saver there was 
gospel, which said: "it is written during the grievous and hard times, when lezgins 
came to Gandja, Partav, Khachen, Varand, Shaki, Shamakha, Georgia, Dzegam 
state, attacked people and looted them. Churches went busted, fall into the 
darkness and emptied. Secondly, Ottomans came repeatedly, there were large 
bloodshed, unlimited number of prisoners was taken by Ottomans, deep mourning 
had embraced our Christian nation...in 1117 (1722) in village of Artavan in Church 
of Holy Dukes" (Barkhudaryants, I, p.127,128). 
In district of Gardman in church of St.Apostle in village Mets-Banants 
there were kept several gospels, which colophons said: 
1) "Now...for sins flooding us...a large disaster came here, locusts and 
caterpillars in Dizak, Varand, Khachen, Chorabert, which continued for a long 
period in this country.. .our country suffered severe starvation..., epidemics.. .in 
patriarchy ter Esai.. .katalikos of all Agvans, written in 1166 (1717). Then by other 
clerk the following was added: "Now during the tyranny in town Gandja of Ugurlu-
khan, son of Kalbali-khan and under the rule in Voskanapat canyon of owner ter 
Melik-Ovsep, son of Melik-Yavri from village of Voskanapat. .." (Barkhudaryants, 
II, p.294). 
2) "In 1101 (1652)... this is written in state of Dezgam in village of 
Melikzate, under the shelter of Holy Mother and Saint Fo ma and other Saint 
Martyr...", "it was in 1244 (1795), when Cha-vag/eunuch Aga-Mamag/ Persian 
shah came to Tiflis on Tuesday of fast of Holy Cross, captured, busted and spread 
everything, massacred more than 12000 people, men and women, everybody was 
taken into the prison and many holy hallows and church utensils were looted and 
they went back the same year. In 1245 (1796) during the great Fast the tsar Irakliy 
of Georgia attacked Gandja together with Shamshadin troops and Ibrahim khan of 
Shusha along with lezgins, local ruler was Javad khan, who hardly slipped from 
Kala, they lead many wars, but were unable to defeat him, giving an order, he 
came to mountain village Sultan with his Shamshadin troops and false sword, 
imprisoned and killed by saber and we, which are stayed alive, we run to various 
directions and did not find a shelter for our feet. Then Georgian troops together 
152 
 
with Lezgins came and took into the prison the rest of us and burned to ashes 
village Banants. In 1246 (1797) starvation and death surrounded us: it was very 
difficult to find 18 pounds of flour for 9 abas and that is why, husband rejected his 
wife, wife rejected his husband, father rejected his son and son rejected his father, 
mother separated from daughter and daughter was separated from the mother, and 
we did not find rest for our feet, because we ate acorns and bark of acom tree, and 
we taking this holy gospel with a great care and many torments, preserved it up to 
now by a Mercy of Holy Spirit. This was in 1260 (1811) when we were struck by 
plague, which at first touched Russians, leaving many of them dead, then emerged 
among Turks and then in Kilisa-kend (district in Gandja) and Norashen (district in 
Gandja), then mercilessly destroyed villages and village Banants, many husbands 
were left without wives, wives without husbands, many without sons, many without 
daughters, most were buried without a priest and many houses were destructed. All 
this happened due to our sins. During this time vardapet David, taking with him those 
alive, went to Kichik-Banans, i.e. Dampladzor, some went to cowhouse, some to 
gardens and epidemics calmed a bit. We thought that we get rid of epidemics, but 
God's wrath reached us and some animal made destructions and damage and some 
people died by a severe death... during this time we restarted our holy gospel for the 
memory of our parents, our grandfather Melik-Mattevos... it is written in this book 
in 1263 (1814) in village Banants under the shelter of Holy Mother church". "In 
1252 (1803) the Russian came to Gandja, sat for a month and then for one hour 
captured and during an hour and a half killed 300 people" (Barkhudaryants, II, p.296-
298). Thus, colophon of this last gospel includes detailed description of historic 
events of the end of XVIII- start of XIX cc. : march of Persian shah Aga-
Mohammed Gadjar to Azerbaijan, Garabagh, struggle of Georgian tsar Irakliy II, 
Shuhsa khan Ibrahim-khan, Lezgins with Javad-khan of Gandja, capturing of 
Gandja by Russian forces, distress related to these wars and epidemics. 
The writer's words are very remarkable: "at this time we resumed this holy 
gospel for our memory and memory of our parents". Considered colophons are the 
source, which characterizes the epoch, source about Alban toponyms informing us 
about settlements of Alban Christians and their living conditions; about political 
and economic situation in these settlements and Alban eparchies. Thus, gospels 
have value not only as religious attribute, but also as historic chronicles, compiled 
by Alban priesthood and conveyed to next generations by Alban Apostolic 
Autocephalous Church, which continued its existence and unified Christian Alban 
population up to 1828 inclusively. It can be stated, that being absolutely aware 
about features of Alban gospels of Artsakh, value of their colophons, Armenian 
Echmiadzin Church started to meticulously liquidate these gospels. 
M.Barkhudaryants, while his detailed researches and descriptions, does not 
indicated any gospel dated after 1828, when Alban Apostolic Autocephalous 
Church was abolished and subordinated to Armenian Church. 
153 
 
Liquidation of Alban monastery-church institutions by Armenian 
Echmiadzin Church allowed to liquidate Alban ecclesiastical literature, Alban 
gospels, in pursue to eradicate even a thought about existence of such heritage. 
 
Zahid Orudj 
RESOLUTELY APPROACH TO NATIONAL INTERESTS 
 
Peace and safety in South Caucasus region, resolution of Armenia-
Azerbaijan dispute over Daglyg Garabagh , which seriously threatens global 
energy-communication projects, according to international law and interests of our 
nation are priority issues for official Baku. 
Based on principles defined by nation's leader Heydar Aliyev, the head of 
state Ilham Aliyev applies new political mechanisms and succeeded in leading the 
process according to national interests of Azerbaijan. At the last meeting devoted to 
problems of our compatriots forced to flee from their homeland due to aggression of 
Armenia, President Ilham Aliyev made clear some aspects of negotiation process, 
and stopped groundless speculations of some tendentious forces. Profound speech 
of head of state once again proved that negotiations process is conducted within the 
framework of national interests of Azerbaijan. 
Official Baku correctly evaluating real situation prefers the policy of 
strengthening of aspects influencing resolution of the conflict. Strengthening of 
efforts directed for conflict resolution at international level and keeping negotiations 
within the framework of Minsk group of OSCE draw attention as political-
psychological advantage of official Baku. Mr. Ilham Aliyev resolutely stressing 
that settlement of the conflict is possible only according to principles of territorial 
integrity and sovereignty and emphasizing that peace negotiations can be continued 
only under these conditions, he showed his clear and firm position. "Our demand is 
that all occupied territories have to be liberated without any conditions. It is correct 
that previously proposals consisted in liberation of 5 regions with keeping 
Kelbadjar and Lachin regions in order to make them the theme of further 
negotiations. We have never agreed with this. Because we never may allow that 
return of Kelbadjar and Lachin to Azerbaijan may be subject of any conditions. 
That is why, at the present stage of negotiations there is a general agreement that 7 
regions have to be liberated from aggressor and given back to Azerbaijan. 
Certainly, we do understand that we can do it stage-by-stage, but this stage must 
not be prolonged." - said President Ilham Aliyev and stated that if negotiations with 
Armenia will not give any results, other necessary means, namely use of armed 
operations will be discussed in order to restore territorial integrity of Azerbaijan. 
By this confident statement president Ilham Aliyev sent a harsh message to those 
who expect compromises from Azerbaijan, and once again underlined that the 
nation will never accept loss of territories. 
154 
 
As President Ilham Aliyev repeatedly stated the country-aggressor must be 
aware that Azerbaijan possesses of strong, mobile and professional army, and this 
aspect of psychological influence have to provide positive course of negotiations. 
Azerbaijan has to continue to defend its fair position at various international 
institutions, strive for unmasking of aggressor policy of Armenia at global scale, 
and undertake diplomatic efforts to gain psychological superiority in sphere of 
ideological propaganda. The essence of policy implemented by President Ilham 
Aliyev consists in proving groundless the position of Armenia from viewpoint of 
international law, isolate aggressor country from processes of dynamic 
development of South Caucasus and global energy-communication projects, and 
influence over position of other party by enhancing economic-military strength of 
Azerbaijan. 
Head of state Ilham Aliyev did not excluded use of armed operations for 
resolution of the conflict: "We are absolutely ready in military sense to liberate our 
own territories. We will continue our preparation, will strengthen our military 
power and will make our army ten times stronger than army of Armenia. This is the 
challenge and we will reach this. History of our activity shows that if we set any 
goal we reach it. When once I said that our military expenses will be one million 
dollars, some did not believe this. However, this is a reality now and this  
is not the limit. We enhance our professionalism, preparedness, widen our 
financial-technical bases and prepare." 
Process  of negotiations  entered  into  a new  stage  on the background   
of   economic   strengthening   of   Azerbaijan   and significant increase of military 
budget of the Republic. Despite traditional and populist statements of Armenian 
officials intended for public opinion, for the last 5 years visible diplomatic steps 
back are   traced  in  position  of  country-aggressor.   Due  to   serious diplomatic 
efforts through 2004-2008 official Yerevan was forced to accept negotiations for 
stage-by-stage resolution of the conflict. Continuation of participation of aggressor 
country in "Prague process", i.e. "stage-by-stage resolution" model is evaluated as 
one of important diplomatic achievements of official Baku. Azerbaijan has always 
insisted on stage-by -stage resolution of the conflict and this is supported by Minsk 
group of OSCE and negotiated parties -Armenia and Azerbaijan are participants of 
this process. Holding negotiations  within the  framework  of principles  of 
territorial integrity is fairly considered by President Ilham Aliyev as a success of 
Azerbaijan. 
Azerbaijan's President stating once again his firm position in regard to 
resolution of conflict emphasized that the claims of Daglyg Garabagh Armenians 
for "self-determination" is absolutely ridiculous and inadequate to realities. After 
collapse of USSR the separatism has turned into the leading factor of policy in 
post-soviet area and in some cases even took a form of false "national liberation 
movement". In reality in roots of this conflict it is not the desire of nation to define 
155 
 
its own destiny, but intention to occupy territories. No doubt, self-determination - 
the principle of choosing of own destiny is the exceptional right which any nation 
has according to international law and government of Azerbaijan respects this 
right. However, according to international law, the nations which do not have an 
independent country may express claims for determination of their own destiny. 
Armenians have the independent country and from   this  viewpoint,   separatist  
Armenian  regime   in  Daglyg Garabagh has no legal and political bases to make 
such claims: 
"Azerbaijan will never agree with creation of the second Armenian state. 
It is possible to give high self-regulation status to those people who live in Daglyg 
Garabagh, including Armenians and Azerbaijani who will return there. This was 
repeatedly stated by Azerbaijan government at all stages of negotiation process - in 
1990-ies and at present. If there will be such version of agreement, certainly we are 
ready for this, we will agree with this and territorial integrity of Azerbaijan will be 
restored and finally, the peace will be established in the region and relations 
between two countries may normalize in the future." 
Taking into account higher importance of economic interests at present it 
is not difficult to understand which party possesses by more influence power while 
resolution of the conflict. In addition, for the last years in Azerbaijan, which faced 
with Armenia's aggression, efforts for development of thoroughly equipped army 
are became more intensive. Successfully implemented reforms leads to strengthening 
of Republic's economy and allowed President Ilham Aliyev to take continuous 
measures and increase military expenses. Head of state always paid a special 
attention to such important problems as strengthening of military potential of the 
country and use of leading countries experience for this. The largest part of 
Azerbaijan's state budget in 2008 is intended for Azerbaijan's army and as 
President Ilham Aliyev promised the Republic's military budget only, equals to a 
whole budget of Armenia. All these are factors important for providing continuation 
of negotiation process according to interests of Azerbaijan. 
Provision of national interests and benefit of the country at a high level by 
President Ilham Aliyev, as well as speedy development of Azerbaijan create 
confidence that positive results will be achieved in resolution of Armenian -
Azerbaijan dispute over Daglyg Garabagh and the conflict will be settled on the 
bases of international law and principle of territorial integrity of Azerbaijan. 
  
156 
 
C O N T E N T S  
 
Adalat Mustafayev, candidate of historical sciences 
Armenian separatism and its supporters 
 
Akif Naghi, candidate of historical sciences 
Factor of force for resolution of the conflicts 
 
Ali Abasov, doctorate in philosophy 
Stages of Daglyg Garabagh conflict: Through local to international levels. Is 
the way back possible? 
 
Araz Aslanly 
Occupied Azerbaijan  and the right for necessary defense 
 
Arif Yunusov, candidate of historical sciences 
Statistics of losses in Armenian-Azerbaijan war 
 
Aydin Aslanov, candidate of historical sciences 
To 
200th
 anniversary of Kurekchay treaty once more about Garabagh melikhs 
 
Elchin Ahmedov, candidate of political sciences 
Historic, political  and  military-strategic  value  of Shusha 
 
Eldar Saraby 
Garabagh conflict and its roots (according to Iranian sources) 
 
Faig Ismayilov 
Armenian vandalism against monuments of Azerbaijan 
 
Fazil Gazanfarogly, candidate of philosophy, member of parliament 
Daglyg Garabagh: lost future 
 
Feliks Tsertsvadze, political observer 
Problem of "genocide of Armenians": history and fal sifications 
 
Firdovsiyya Ahmedova, candidate of historical sciences 
The problem of status of Daglyg Garabagh: history and modernity 
 
Gasym Hajiyev, doctorate in historical sciences 
Material culture of Garabagh is inseparable part of material and spiritual 
157 
 
culture of Azerbaijan 
 
Gorkhmaz Mustafayev, candidate of historical sciences 
Administrative units and population of Garabagh and Gandja khanates at the 
beginning of XIX century 
 
Guldane Najafli, candidate of historical sciences 
Factors which triggered attempts of Armenians to es tablish state in 
Garabagh in the 1 half of XVIII century 
 
Guntekin Najafli, candidate of historical sciences 
Intentions of Russia to create Armenian state on the territory of Garabagh 
khanate 
 
Gyulzade Akhundova: Crafts in Garabagh 
 
Hadjar Gasymova, candidate ofphilisophy 
Garabagh conflict as international problem 
 
Ismayil Musa, doctorate in historical sciences 
Diplomatic  confrontation  between  Azerbaijan  and Armenia (April-June 
l920) 
 
Jamil Hasanly, doctorate in historical sciences 
200 years of Garabagh tragedy 
 
Kerim Shukurov, doctorate in historical sciences 
Kurekchay agreement: basic clauses, implementation and termination of the 
agreement 
 
Kubra Aliyeva: Shusha and Shusha carpets 
 
Meshidikhanym Neymet, doctorate in historical sciences 
Epigraphic monuments of Garabagh 
 
Mubariz Khalilov, candidate of historical sciences 
About kurgans of Garabagh 
 
Musa Mardjanly, political observer,   editor-in-chief of journal "Irs-Naslediye " 
Armenian expansionism - the source of danger to stability in the region 
 
158 
 
Nigar Geozalova, candidate of historical sciences 
Studies of Garabagh and Irevan khanates history reflected in historiography 
written in English 
 
Niyazi Mehdi, doctorate in philosophy 
Resolution of Conflicts in the Caucasus according to the Principle of "Semiotic 
Anomalies" 
 
Nurani, political observer 
History of Armenian terrorism 
 
Rauf Huseynzadeh, doctorate in historical sciences 
Characteristics of Armenians by their compatriots and contemporaries 
 
Rena Bakhyshova 
Development of education in Garabagh at the end of XIX century 
 
Rena Mirzazadeh, doctorate in philosophy 
Gender history of Garabagh: social-political image, 
  
Rizvan Garabagly, candidate of architecture  
Monuments of Western Azerbaijan 
 
Sh.    FatuUayev-Figarov,    doctorate    inarchitecture, academician of Azerbaijan   
Academyof   Sciences; E.Avalov,    doctorate    in    architecture, R.Garabagly, 
candidate of architecture:  Architecture of Garabagh  
 
Tevekkul Aliyev, candidate of historical sciences 
Garabagh as a center of ancient civilization of Azerbaijan  
 
Tofig Najafly, candidate of historical sciences 
Garabagh in XV century 
 
Ulviyya Hajiyeva, candidate of historical sciences 
Commemorative notes in Alban Gospels as source of history of Albans in XI-
XVIII 
 
Zahid Orudj, candidate of historical sciences, member of 
parliament 
Resolutely approach to national interests. Due to firm position of official Baku 
aggressor Armenia set against "geopolitical side-street" 
159 
 
Organization of Liberation of Garabagh 
Proceedings of conferences held under the topic 
"Garabagh yesterday, today and tomorrow" 
 
 
 
 
II volume 
 
 
 
 
Publisher: Namig Habibov 
Technical editor: Rovshan 
Design by: Irada Akhmedova, Ceyhun Aliyev 
 
 
 
 
Signed for design: 12.01.2009 
Signed for print: 25.01.2009 
Number of copies: 400 Order JV®190 
Conventional printed paper 15 
 
 
 
 
 
Publishing House of businessman Namig Habibov 
 
 
 
 
Free distribution 
