1, 2, 3-ъц сящифя CorelDRAW , 
 
шякилляр QuarkXPRESS  
 
файлларындадыр!
 2 
 
L I F E  O F  
O U T S T A N D I N G   
P E O P L E  
 
 
 
 
A Biographical Series 
 
 
 
 
Founded in 1890 by  
F. Pavlenkov 
and continued in 1933 by  
M. Gorky 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ISSUE 
1132 
(932)
 3
Viktor Andriyanov 
 
Guseinbala Miralamov 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GEIDAR ALIEV 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MOSCOW 
MOLODAYA GVARDIA 
2005 
 4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Translated by OOO Interdialect-M 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© V.I. Andriyanov, G.F. Miralamov 
© «NURLAR», 2005 
 
 
ISBN 9952-426-01-1 
 
 
 
 
 5
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FOREWORD 
 
Chance is often described as blind. There is even a set phrase 
in Russian–a blind chance. However, it is not blind at all. Blind 
are those people who don’t notice signs of fate. 
On November 27, 1944, General De Gaulle, leader of 
“Fighting France” movement, head of the Provisional Government 
of the French Republic and future President of the country, 
stopped in Baku on his way to Moscow where he was going to 
have negotiations with Joseph Vissarionovich Stalin, Chairman of 
the Soviet of People’s Commissars. This eminent–in direct and 
figurative meanings–guest was welcomed as the leader of the 
allied state. In his two-week journey throughout the Soviet Union 
Alexei Nikolayevich Kosygin, Deputy Chairman of the 
Sovnarkom accompanied him, on Stalin’s personal instructions. 
Many years later Alexei Kosygin, Chairman of the USSR Council 
of Ministers, came to Paris on an official visit. Contrary to all 
rules of the diplomatic protocol President De Gaulle personally 
arrived at the airport to meet the Soviet Premier. But it is another 
case and another story... 
In Baku the General received all the prescribed honors. There 
were flags. Anthems. Guard of honor... Among the duty-bound 
welcoming people there was a young man by name of Geidar 
Aliev, a junior lieutenant of the State Security, in a civil coat and a 
fashionable hat. As later Geidar Alievich said, for a moment he 
met De Gaulle’s eye... That evening the famous Frenchman 
listened to opera “Keroglu”, and the very next day a train took 
him away to Stalingrad; planes didn’t fly because of bad weather. 
Political destinies of these two people have much in common. 
At one time they both found themselves out of job after many 
years of successful state service. The Paris exile was said to leave 
as a prophet who had lost his voice, who had failed to make him 
heard. 
 6 
In Gorbachyov’s Politburo of the CPSU Central Committee 
nobody wanted to listen to Geidar Aliev either. And he chose to 
leave.  
In May 1958 General De Gaulle, being summoned by France, 
came back to Paris from his seclusion at the Colombee estate.  
In July 1990 Geidar Aliev, summoned by Azerbaijan, returned 
to Homeland from his Moscow seclusion. 
They were both 67 years old. People usually take care of 
grandchildren and write memoirs at this age. But cuddly family 
cares and memoirs had to be put aside. They returned at a critical 
moment to save their Fatherland. One was to guarantee unity and 
independence of France, the other–to ensure integrity and 
sovereignty of Azerbaijan. 
As a politician Geidar Aliev was developing and moulding in 
the Soviet system of values. Words about internationalism were 
never just a standing phrase for him. At the end of the 20th 
century he opened for himself anew Charles de Gaulle’s idea 
about priority of the national factor over all other ideas, theories, 
slogans and principles. Yes, history proved that the national idea 
was more tenacious of life than many others. A realist politician 
could draw only one conclusion from it: rescuing the state was 
rescuing the nation at the same time. 
...Karlovy Vary. Quiet Sadovaya Street. A hundred metres 
away from famous Mlinskaya (Mill) Colonnade there was 
“Bristol” sanatorium, a favorite resort among the Soviet 
functionaries. An elderly gardener, sprinkling roses, says that he 
saw Kosygin, Aliev, Shcherbitsky, and Marshal Konev there... 
From the high ground you can see blue domes of the Russian 
church in the distance–its chimes might be heard from there; the 
other side offers a panorama of the popular resort with its 
numerous sanatoriums and hotels. 
A chance talk with the elderly man, his kind “agoy”, which 
means “bye”, might have been forgotten at once, but later that 
evening in a Moscow TV program there were suddenly shown 
faces of those he remembered of with such warmth. The program 
was dedicated to the memory of Alexander Bovin, a political 
correspondent with the Izvestiya and the Central television, a 
diplomat, and a former Central Committee of the CPSU 
consultant, one of the trusted assistants to the two General 
Secretaries–Brezhnev and Andropov. There were photos of 
different periods and TV newsreel... 
There’s Yuri Vladimirovich Andropov at a large festive table, 
Aliev on his right, Gromyko and Gorbachyov on his left... A nice 
joke seems to have been just told; Geidar Alievich and Yuri 
 7
Vladimirovich are laughing in a catching manner, even stern 
Gromyko, Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union, called 
Mister “No” in the West, is smiling. A smile appears for a 
moment on Gorbachyov’s face too, an “ordinary” Politburo 
member yet, not even the second person in the CPSU: after 
Brezhnev’s death Konstantin Sergeyevich Chernenko was 
destined to be the second to Gorbachyov’s envy.  
On those April days in 2004 Czech newspapers triumphantly 
wrote about Big Europe: the Czech Republic and nine more 
countries were to enter the European Union on May 1. Here we 
are 455 million people, reported the Dnes newspaper (formerly 
known as Mlada Fronta) to its readers, our territory is 3.9 million 
sq. km., there are 25 states... 
At night, sharp at twelve, a salute rattles over Karlovy Vary, 
the sky is tinted with bright, multicolored fireworks. Czechia is 
celebrating. Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia, Slovenia are celebrating 
too... Europe wipes away its borders. Or to be more accurate it 
pushes them further to the East. 
In the new political map of the world there are neither 
countries of Socialist Commonwealth, nor states of the Warsaw 
Treaty Organization or the Council for Mutual Economic 
Assistance, which accounted for a fifth of the world production by 
1980s. There are 25 countries of the European Union in this map; 
there are new states in this map, which used to make up the Soviet 
Union–including Azerbaijan. 
Two thousand years ago a prophet remarked: God let us not 
live in times of changes. This concern of a common man is 
understandable at all times. He would like to hide under the roof 
of his house (fanza, izba, saklya, hut) and wait till the tempest is 
over. 
In nature lots of signs betoken a tempest, which any a little bit 
observant person can notice. For example, before a heavy rain a 
dusty whirlwind often gets up. The same holds for big politics as 
well–but in this sphere a few are able to foresee forthcoming 
thunderclaps... 
These shots of Andropov, Gromyko, Aliev, Gorbachyov were 
taken not earlier than November 1982 and not later than 1983, 
when Yuri Vladimirovich fell ill. It is marvellous that one of us 
saw these shots exactly on April days in 2004, when we conceived 
to write this book. 
It is often said that history does not know the conjunctive 
mood. But this fact does not prevent one from reckoning upon 
various scenarios: how events might have developed. What would 
have happened to the Soviet Union, if... The range of options was 
 8 
the widest. The general conclusion–the Soviet Union was not 
doomed. Under sound reforms and provided that tendencies in the 
society development had been properly taken into account it 
could, renewing itself, evolve further. But unfortunately at the 
time the power was strongly held in the hands of dogmatists, 
whose lives’ major rule was to blindly follow mossy like sea 
boulder formulas that were nearly one hundred years old. Upon 
becoming the General Secretary, Gorbachyov promised 
renovation and acceleration to the society, to the country. Then the 
scale of his own immense and boundless state seemed insufficient 
to him. He proposed his (?) new thinking concept not only to the 
Soviet Union, the Commonwealth of Socialist States, but also to 
the whole world. While the situation within homeland was getting 
worse and worse. The leader chattered over everything he took up 
and rejected those who had courage to object to him. 
There were shrewd politicians who could see that the Union 
state was drawing near its disintegration, and Geidar Alievich 
Aliev with his extensive administration experience, political 
intuition and understanding of human soul impulses certainly was 
among them. One could already hear phrases about carriages that 
Russia had to unhook. They meant the Union Republics, the 
peoples that Russians, the citizens of Russia, had been living 
together in one state for one, two, three centuries and even longer. 
In any other country any politicians calling for the country’s 
disintegration were doomed to end up in a court, but in the Soviet 
Union muddled crowds made heroes of them. 
Separatist mood was gathering force in the republics. On the 
one hand, local elite that was striving for power and property 
roused it. On the other hand, let’s say it directly; impaired national 
interests also prompted people to action. In fact though having 
their own flags, anthems and constitutions the republics had very 
little independence. All top positions were filled from Moscow. It 
gave awards, brought to power and dismissed, put to death or 
spared. And then all of a sudden it turned out that it was possible 
to make some decisions without it. But to what extent? How far 
was Moscow going to slacken its reins? 
Various forces got involved in the struggle for power: those 
fattened by foreign benefactors, populists and a bit disguised black 
capital. In each Union Republic–Moldavia or Georgia, Ukraine or 
Azerbaijan–there was its own specific. At the same time a lot of 
other factors–historic, social and those of foreign policy–were at 
action as well. In Moldavia, for instance, activity of pro-Rumanian 
forces was quite evident. In Lithuania anti-Russian “Sayudis” 
ruled the ball. In Ukraine muddled miners were put into political 
 9
actions–they were expected to overthrow the Soviet power in a 
ram attack. In Azerbaijan under the orders from Moscow Aliev 
was got even with, though he had been away from the Republic 
for a long time. Or it’s better to say he was not there yet. Anarchy 
reigned in the Republic.  
 
 
The role of personality in history, man and power–these topics 
are of interest for people at all times. Sometimes it is just narrow-
minded interest in “anointed sovereigns”, leaders, those details of 
their private life that are concealed from public for the time being. 
But more often it is a desire to understand why some leaders can 
rule the “fate of events” and surmounting unfavorable 
circumstances raise their nations, their countries like Peter the 
Great, Franklin Roosevelt, Atatürk, Stalin, Churchill, Gandi, De 
Gaulle, while others are carried away by similar events like 
powerless flinders by the impetuous stream. Then crowns fall 
down as it was with Russian Emperor Nicholas II, Austrian 
Emperor Franz-Joseph... 
For fourteen years Geidar Aliev was the head of the Central 
Committee of the Azerbaijan Communist Party–according to the 
Soviet political system he was the leader of the Republic; for five 
years he was the second person in the Soviet Government and a 
member of the Politburo of the CPSU Central Committee; his 
name was associated with foundation and formation of 
independent Azerbaijan in the post-Soviet epoch, he headed it for 
over ten years. His return to big politics reminds of General De 
Gaulle’s return to power in crashing down France. Comparison of 
these two historical personalities, considering all the differences 
of political atmosphere and circumstances under which they acted, 
makes the essential evident: in their actions they were guided 
solely by interests of their countries. By the way, it was on Aliev’s 
direction that in March 1999 a memorial plaque was placed on the 
house where De Gaulle stayed in 1944. The inhabitants of Baku 
are well aware of this massive building in Oilmen’s Prospect with 
the Maiden Tower, an architectural monument of the 12th century 
just behind it. The epochs come together in this way. 
Talent and will are key features of Aliev’s personality, as well 
as supreme self-discipline and exactingness–first of all towards 
himself–and ability to listen and hear an individual and to 
understand aspirations of all men who are united in a capacious 
notion of the “people”, the “nation”. A sage’s foresight of a great 
politician was combined in him with bravery of a military leader. 
His other qualities were deep knowledge and natural aesthetic 
 10 
sense. Being magnanimous and indulgent he could forgive those 
who made occasional mistakes, but ignoramuses, weak-willed, 
profit-seeking people could not expect leniency from him… 
At birth he was given the name of Geidar. It means a forward-
going person, a leader. We are going to tell you, how he was 
growing, how the world was opening to him first in his native 
Nakhichevan and then throughout Azerbaijan–from the Caspian 
sea to the mountains– in a big country that was called the Soviet 
Union, how he became a politician and a statesman, a national 
leader. The leader of his people. 
 11
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 1 
“I WAS BORN IN NAKHICHEVAN…” 
 
 
May 10, 1923, Nakhichevan 
 
“I, Geidar Ali Rza ogly Aliev, –he wrote in his autobiography, 
–was born in Nakhichevan on May 10, 1923...” Whenever he 
carefully wrote these lines–in Baku, Leningrad, Moscow–an 
image of a quiet and nice town over the Araks River always 
recurred to his memory. The days of May in this town of hundreds 
and thousands years long history are clear and bright like a spring 
sky over a mosque, and radiant like a hope that a newborn child 
brings to parents. 
On one of such spring days a fourth child appeared in the 
family of Ali and Izzet Alievs. The boy was named Geidar in 
memory of Izzet-khanum’s brother who perished during the 
exodus of Azerbaijanians from Zangezur. That Geidar will always 
remain twenty-three... Years later the novel Zangezur by Ayub 
Abasov passed from hand to hand in the Aliev family. After 
reading two thick volumes Shafiga told her elder brothers that 
their mother had told just the same.  
– You are not mistaken, Shafiga, –Gasan responded, –The 
man, who had written this book, conveyed the pain of exile very 
truthfully.  
“Andronik Uzunyan’s soldiers entered the village from the 
lower side. At the foot of the slope a few houses were set on fire. 
Djomard demanded all the people to leave for the mountain taking 
as much of their possessions as possible.  
Cries of horror, women are weeping, children’s wailing filled 
the village. Even rocks seemed unable to remain calm in the face 
of the tragedy that was spreading on the land of Zangezur. 
Horsemen, loaded mules, bulls and cows bellowing with fright–
everything got confused. The only people left in the village were 
some old men distraught with grief who could not conceive a life 
without their homes.” 
Those tragic events left a bitter trace in Izzet-khanum’s soul. 
Though she tried to conceal her sorrow from the children, her 
 12 
daughters (they are usually more sensitive than sons) noticed more 
than once that their mother was crying stealthily. 
If they had held beauty contests in Nakhichevan of that time, 
Izzet might have been a winner. But strict rules of female piety 
customary in that region did not allow such liberties. Izzet-
khanum like her parents Djafargulu and Sarabeim as well as their 
parents’ parents lived under the rules of the Coran. Even her sons 
never saw her bareheaded.  
Once Shafiga was brushing her mother’s hair in the room. 
There was a knock on the door. “It must be Geidar coming back,” 
–Izzet said and covered her head hurriedly with her favorite scarf, 
kelagai.  
At home as is usual in a large family, be it in Azerbaijan, 
Russia or Ukraine, the mother did most of household chores. The 
father, upon his return from Baku oil fields, worked at the railway. 
On the occasion of Geidar’s birth one of Alirza Aliev’s old 
friends, a steam locomotive driver, let a deafening whistle out of 
his iron machine. Innocent sheep grazing on the slopes in fear 
nearly plummeted into the Araks. Following long-standing 
tradition the relations were invited to pilaw and sherbet. 
The tiny squealer, whose voice resounded throughout the yard, 
had two elder brothers–Gasan and Gusein–and sister Sura. Then 
of Allah’s will four more were born–Agil, Djalal, Shafiga and 
Rafiga. Five boys and three girls all in all. 
 
 
A Day in History 
 
May 10, 1923... What was that seemingly far away from us 
day like in the world, in the Soviet Union, in Azerbaijan? Let’s 
look through Baku and Nakhichevan newspapers and see what 
they said about that day. 
In Germany there were workers demonstrations. Americans 
protested against immigration of the Russian White Guards into 
the USA. In Moscow “late Professor Timiryazev was 
commemorated”. Throughout the Union money was collected “for 
strengthening the Air Forces”. In Baku workers of private sewing 
workshops handed over 22 million 280 thousand roubles in 
banknotes (there were millions, “lemons” current at that time. 16 
billion roubles in banknotes were stolen from the pocket of a 
citizen Alexei Markovich, and household items for 45 billion 
roubles from the flat of a Zeiba Mamed kyzy.) And again about 
the Air Forces–thanks to comrades Tsybelman, Eidelstein and 
Oganezov for three five-rouble bonds; one more similar bond was 
 13
handed over by a party group of the Azizbekov hospital. By the 
end of the year Azerbaijan handed over to the aviators two planes 
constructed with the funds collected throughout the Republic. One 
was called “Red Baku”, the other one–“26” in memory of the 
Baku commissars shot by Englishmen. 
One hundred and ten students of Baku Soviet party school 
studied basics of Marxism; their goal was to “advance into the 
masses of proletariat and peasantry and bring thousands and 
thousands of working people to class conscience and 
enlightenment.” 
Mill-plant district party committee (of the Azerbaijan 
Communist Party, there were no others by the time) published a 
list of comrades it was going to accept to its ranks and asked 
everyone who had any objections in reference to the foregoing to 
send their communications to the district committee. The list is 
short and is worth citing: 
“The following people are going to be accepted as party 
candidates: comrade G.P. Kazakov, the Schmidt Plant group, 
L.G. Krasnoyarskaya, the Fur Workshop group, I.O. Zakharov, 
the Azneft Construction Department, M.F. Fedotov, S.I. Fafonov, 
V.T. Zalin, the “Proletariy” group, A.A. Akopov, D.T. Filatov, 
S.G. Khachiyants, K.I. Stepin, the Azneft Chernogorodsky 
Department group, I.G. Kasparov, A.A. Muratov, Rope Factory 
No. 2, Djafar Gazanfar Abulfaz, the group of Akhmedly village...” 
The Azerbaijan People’s Commissar of Education, the Deputy 
People’s Commissar of Internal Affairs and the People’s 
Commissar of Justice signed the instructions, prepared on the 
basis of a resolution of the Soviet of People’s Commissars of 
April 22, 1923: “No work of art can be allowed for public 
performance or demonstration without the Azlit repertoire 
committee’s permission.” 
Posters invited residents of Baku to the Navy (former Pel-
Myule) Theatre to see “Love of Hussars”; to “Satir-Agit” State 
Freedom Theatre, where Rostov group of Armenian actors was 
giving “Silva”; to the concert of I.V. Yershov, an actor of the 
Petersburg Academic Theatre (former Mariinsky theatre)... 
The newspapers also invited to the grand opening of the 
market in the village of Surakhanakh–“no payment will be 
charged for sale and for a place in the market”, to the reopened 
first-class restaurant “Teatral”, informed about auctions and “a 
tender for lease of a buffet, a billiards hall, a hairdresser’s...” 
The Baku representative office of the Ural Mining Syndicate 
was closed and the Regional office was opened instead, which 
 14 
was going “to operate throughout Caucasia, Transcaucasia, 
Turkestan, area of the former Bukeev Horde and Persia.” 
The Azerbaijan Division of the representative for the 
Transcaucasian People’s Commissar of Labor started publishing 
“local market prices of a basket of goods and necessities”. Reports 
were published four times in a month–on the 1st, 8th, 15th, and 
22nd day of each month...  
Ali Rza (or Alirza) Aliev used to bring these newspapers from 
the depot after they had changed many hands and told his wife, 
“Well Miss, let’s compare”. 
 
 
Parents’ House 
 
Alirza Aliev as an udarnik (a good worker) of the railways was 
granted a land plot. The work in the garden and the kitchen garden 
went on rapidly and merrily. Everyone did their best on the 
vegetable beds and tending sheep. Everyone earned their daily 
bread by their own sweat and blood since early childhood. 
Nakhichevan did not like idlers. 
Izzet-khanum seemed to know everything about flowers, trees, 
herb. Her neighbors used to come to her for her jam recipes. 
In the yard lovely almost ten-meter-high mirabalan looked 
graciously down at cherry and apple-trees. It broke into blossom 
in March and in July-early August it tempted with its greenish-
pink and light-red fruit, which look like cherry plums, but were 
not so sour. Gasan engrafted a plum twig on it. For many years the 
Nakhichevan mirabalan brought joy to local kids. 
The first owner of the Alievs’ house brought a pear graft from 
Persia at the beginning of the past century. 
– It brought marvellous fruit, –remembers Shafiga-khanum. –
Until first snow we did not touch them. Then we tore them off and 
hung in the house. Each pear was 300-500 grams and could 
remain fresh throughout the winter. 
One more childhood memory Shafiga recalls with warmth is 
their Nakhichevan yard.  
…It is early morning, or chesht, as aksakals, zealots of local 
customs, call it. Izzet with scissors and a sieve goes to the rose 
bushes that border the yard. It is not easy to reach them because of 
the thorns! But their petals are most delicate. Having put her sieve 
down, Izzet cuts them off. Then she spreads the petals in the 
baking tray, where sugar syrup is poured to prevent them from 
withering. Then Izzet adds cinnamon and white ginger to the 
petals mixed up with sugar powder. This broth was considered 
 15
indispensable potion for curing colds and stomachaches, which no 
family can avoid.  
Some part of petals the mistress of the house dried in the shade 
and then spread them among dresses, skirts and veils. Shafiga 
remembers her mother’s white skirt and a blouse of the same 
white-snow color with pink shining flowers.  
– When Mother washed this pair and pressed them with the 
iron heated with coals, I was standing nearby staring. After 
pressing every single crease she would put the skirt together with 
the blouse into the trunk and intersperse them with rose petals. 
When putting on a veil she would always sprinkle it with rose 
water. In autumn Mother would put some quinces into the trunk 
and their delicate aroma would saturate our clothes like kindness 
permeated her nature. You would never hear a sharp word from 
her: she just stopped talking to a market-woman, who uttered a 
curse: “Seni gerum ochagyn sensun” (that means, “Let your hearth 
die out!”) on her partner. 
Of course the girls were the first to take over their mother’s 
rituals. But the boys also took note of some things. Elegance of 
Geidar Alievich’s clothes, taste and neatness–they all came from 
his parents’ house. 
On the third year of the Soviet power–it came to Azerbaijan 
later than to the other Republics of the Union–some signs of a new 
way of life turned up in Nakhichevan. Next to the mausoleum of 
Momine-khatun (“High-ranking lady”) a kindergarten appeared, 
where Gasan used to take Geidar and later Geidar in his turn 
accompanied Djalal and his sisters. Seven and a half centuries 
passed since the great architect Adjemi Nakhichevani erected his 
work over the burial-vault of Atabeck Muhammed Djakhan 
Pekhlivan’s wife. Its wall had seen and remembered so much that 
nothing could surprise them. 
Getting older Geidar and his classmates liked to come to the 
old mausoleum to draw its contors turned to the skies. The whole 
Nakhichevan is like a live history book: its other famous 
mausoleum of Yusuf ibn Kuseyir designed by Adjemi; its bridges 
over the Araks beyond which was Iran; the remnants of 
caravanserais and the Thälmann club–the leader of the German 
proletariat could not imagine that a plaque with his name would 
appear at the entrance to the rebuilt chapel. (So far reached the 
echo of demonstrations in Munich and Hamburg and such was a 
response to the wellknown “Rot front” call and gesture!) In 
Nakhichevan a House of Pioneers was opened as well–even now 
Geidar Aliev’s brother, Agil Alievich, a prominent scientist-
 16 
economist, a Corresponding Member of the National Academy of 
Sciences, remembers it with warmth: 
– Everything was organized perfectly there. We would come 
home after school, eat something and make for the House of 
Pioneers–everyone could find an interesting occupation there. 
It is beyond doubt that Geidar Aliev’s deep interest in the 
national culture, architecture; theatre was born under the 
wholesome influence of the environment he grew in. 
The eldest of the Aliev brothers and sisters, Gasan, loved the 
nature since childhood; he would wander about the picturesque 
surroundings for hours. He might be called “a charmed wanderer”. 
But romantic soul of the eldest Aliev was in harmony with a strict 
muse of science as well. Later he graduated from the Agricultural 
Academy, became a scientist, a party worker–the Central 
Committee Secretary for agriculture. He is remembered with great 
warmth in Azerbaijan. 
In the Aliev family humanitarians and technicians spread 
equally. Gusein was involved in brushes, paints, and pencils since 
childhood. His childish dream brought him to the Leningrad 
Academy of Painting. He did not part with the easel till the end of 
his days. Sura preferred journalism, Agil chose economics–he 
became eminent both in scientific sphere and in business circles. 
Djalal is a well-known biologist, an Academician of the 
Azerbaijan Academy of Sciences. He grew some new varieties of 
wheat. Shafiga and Rafiga became teachers. 
Geidar like Gusein dreamt of arts. According to his 
contemporaries’ recollections he painted a lot and well, made 
decorations for school performances and loved theatre. 
The whole native place–Nakhichevan–opened up to Geidar 
and his brothers like a huge museum under the open sky. Childish 
curiosity pulled them to magary–so the old caves were called–and 
to hills, where one could find pieces of ancient pottery that 
survived many centuries. A spearhead reminded of brave warriors, 
who protected the native land from foreigners. Somewhere far 
away in the dark depth of times there was hiding Midia-
Atropatena, the oldest name of Azerbaijan known to science. 
Later at the college, their history teacher explained to them how it 
had been changing: ancient Persians had a set phrase “Ader-
badagan”, Arabs said “Azerbaijan” and “Azerbaijan”, which 
means “a country of fire”. 
But about the fire Azerbaijanian boys knew well without the 
teacher’s stories, as there was such a fire in every house: oil was 
burning in every hearth. Frozen oil, kir, was used to cover roofs. 
 17
Kerosene was poured in lamps and those paunchy glass bulbs 
were treated with extreme caution.  
…Dim light of the kerosene lamp snatched from the dark 
figures of the children busy with something. Shafiga was playing 
with her doll, Gusein and Geidar were drawing. The elder brother 
was more interested in landscapes and liked to depict nearby 
mountains covered with bluish mist... While Geidar’s imagination 
drew him to far-away times, where brave warriors blocked the 
strangers’ advancement. Images of heroes revived under his 
pencil: Babeck, a leader of the 9th century liberation war, who 
bequeathed his son: “it is better to live a single day as a free man 
than forty years as a slave”; Keroglu, a leader of rebels, who 
opposed the Ottoman invaders at the beginning of the 17th 
century; legendary characters from “Shakhname”–Rustam-Zal 
hero, Siyavush... At the school drama group Geidar mostly 
performed roles of his favorite heroes. The pupils and students 
staged plays of national and world classics–Mamedkulizadeh, 
Shakespeare, Griboyedov... At the Thälmann club films were 
shown. The most important art was silent yet, but this fact did not 
prevent the boys from watching their favorite films for three-four 
times. Then they rode their bicycles that were very popular in 
Nakhichevan. Geidar, Agil and Djalal also had one such fast self-
made “machine” on bearings. 
Geidar Aliev’s generation entered life in the epoch of historical 
calamities. First the Tsarist Empire crashed down. It was soon 
followed by the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic, which had just 
enough time to proclaim its existence. Azerbaijan became a Soviet 
Socialist Republic and in the structure of the Transcaucasian 
Federation (Azerbaijan, Armenia and Georgia) together with 
Ukraine, Byelorussia and Russia formed a new state–the Soviet 
Union. Dreamers and history-makers that believed in a better 
destiny and were going to make the whole world happy created it. 
Why is it so that some encounters are remembered for the 
whole life, while others are washed away like water out of melted 
snow in spring? 
– It depends on whom you meet, –answers wise Dovlat 
Geidarovich, as his Russian fellow-soldiers, veterans of the Great 
Patriotic War, call him. Dovlat Geidar ogly Mamedov, an 
honorary teacher of Azerbaijan, gave all his life to children. There 
was only one long “break” in his life–the four-year-long Great 
Patriotic War that took lives of his three hundred thousand 
compatriots.  
Once in the hot August of 1936 Dovlat went to the neighboring 
village of Geidere to his father’s friend Zeinalabdin. There 
 18 
chanced to be a guest from Nakhichevan–a young good-looking 
fellow. 
– Geidar, –he said, holding out his hand. 
The host explained: 
– It is my nephew, a son of Alirza, and my brother from 
Nakhichevan. 
So they got acquainted and soon became friends, when they 
both entered Nakhichevan Teacher’s College that very August.  
A bit later we were lucky to meet one more person, whose 
memory kept alive those far-away years. It was an old teacher 
Lyatif Guseinzadeh. He taught the native language to Geidar, 
Dovlat and children of the same age. This meeting seemed 
unbelievable until the very moment when we rang the doorbell of 
his flat in an ordinary five-storey building without a lift with 
rather dirty entrance and split ajar post-boxes. But behind the door 
there was a neat hall and in the study there were books to the 
ceiling–in Azerbaijani, Russian, Farsi, Turkish–and a computer. 
Our interlocutor has a wonderful memory, only hearing 
sometimes lets him down and then his son Rufat, a professor, 
comes to help.  
By centenary of his teacher, which was in 2003, Geidar 
Alievich sent Lyatif-muallim, the country’s oldest teacher, a warm 
letter of congratulation and awarded him, the first among the 
teachers, with the Order of Independence (“Istiglal”). 
– His father then, brought Geidar, who was thirteen,, and it’s 
necessary to note that only the fourteen-year-old or older were 
allowed to enter the pedagogical school. My son longs to be a 
teacher, –remembers Lyatif Guseinzadeh. –I was Director of 
Studies at that time. “Well, let’s have a talk,” –I said to the youth. 
Geidar answered all questions with confidence and the 
Director of Studies took him to the School Director Kazym 
Talybly. “This lad knows Azerbaijan literature and history well, 
speaks and reads well and I suppose he will make an excellent 
teacher”. The Director suggested having an additional interview in 
mathematics. The mathematics teacher Tofik Bektashi, by the 
way, a graduate of the Moscow State Lomonosov University (after 
Nakhichevan he taught theoretical mechanics in Baku), was also 
satisfied with the applicant. 
– Geidar became one of our best students from the first days of 
studies, –continues Lyatif Guseinzadeh. –Even our self-assured 
graduates treated him with respect calling him “General” openly 
and behind his back as if they foresaw his future position.  
At school, as many graduates remember, there were well-
equipped classrooms and laboratories, a military-sports complex 
 19
and a film-projector. The students spent all their spare time going 
in for sports–jumping, running, exercising on the horizontal bar, 
playing volleyball, shooting in the shooting gallery. The youths 
were proud to receive the “Voroshilov marksman” badge in front 
of the line. Geidar Aliev also got the first award in his life then. 
He managed to find time for military training, and sports, and 
drawing in Shamil Kaziev’s group. The young artists’ works were 
displayed at the town exhibitions.  
The army was one of the most favorite topics. “All of us were 
getting ready to defend the USSR, –remembers Dovlat Mamedov. 
–In our pictures you could see flying planes with red stars and 
advancing Soviet tanks.” 
The remote area of the country shared concerns with the whole 
big country. In the Nakhichevan Republic, in Djulfa, a mining and 
smelting plant was being constructed. The youth considered it as 
important for the Soviet country as Dneproges, Magnitka or 
Uralmash. They were proud of the achievements of the Republic’s 
cotton-growers and Baku oilmen. They looked forward to 
electricity coming to Nakhichevan, where no electric bulbs had 
been seen and there were only a dozen of telephones for the whole 
town. 
But the Thälmann club applauded ardently to Ibragim and 
Zarosh Gamzaevs, future people’s artists of Azerbaijan. The film 
projector widened their horizon and they saw Baku and Moscow, 
and Leningrad and far-away Komsomolsk-on-Amur... Frontier 
guards–Russians, Azerbaijanians, Ukrainians, and Armenians... 
frequently visited the college. The boys envied them and saw 
them off to the frontier post. It was then that Geidar felt and kept 
for his whole life special respect for frontier guards. The state 
frontier of the Union of the Soviet Socialist Republics was quite 
near–at a distance of a stone’s throw as it is said in such cases. 
The bridges over the Araks did not unite but separated 
different riverbanks at that time. But people started pondering 
over the fact–both on the one and on the other bank–only many-
many years later. First the entire surrounding world had to change. 
Or being more accurate–the people had to change it.  
Decades would pass; epochs would change–and Geidar Aliev 
would tell some zealous “renovators” of the history, “It won’t do 
to cross out the years lived for the sake of somebody or something. 
 
 20 
 
 21
AzSSR 
PEOPLE’S COMMISSARIAT OF EDUCATION 
 
CERTIFICATE 
 
This certificate is issued to Geidar Alirza ogly Aliev born in 1923 
to certify that he has finished the complete course of the School 
Department of the Nakhichevan International Pedagogical School 
and with excellent behavior demonstrated the following knowledge: 
 Native language....................................................excellent 
 Native language teaching methodology ...............excellent 
 Azerbaijanian literature .......................................excellent 
 Russian language and literature ..........................excellent 
 Russian language teaching methodology .............excellent 
 Arithmetic.............................................................excellent 
 Arithmetic teaching methodology.........................excellent 
 Algebra.................................................................excellent 
 Geometry ..............................................................excellent 
 Trigonometry........................................................excellent 
 Natural science.....................................................excellent 
 Natural science teaching methodology ................excellent 
 History..................................................................excellent 
 History teaching methodology..............................excellent 
 Geography............................................................excellent 
 Geography teaching methodology........................excellent 
 Physics..................................................................excellent 
 Chemistry .............................................................excellent 
 Pedagogics ...........................................................excellent 
 School hygiene......................................................excellent 
 USSR Constitution................................................excellent 
 Foreign language (French) ..................................excellent 
 Drawing................................................................excellent 
 Drawing teaching methodology ...........................excellent 
 Calligraphy ..........................................................excellent 
 Physical culture....................................................excellent 
 Physical culture teaching methodology................excellent 
 Singing and music ................................................excellent 
 Military training...................................................excellent 
 School practice.....................................................excellent 
Citizen Geidar Alirza ogly Aliev upon meeting all the 
requirements set forth in the academic plan for the year 1938/39 is 
entitled to teach in a primary school, 1-4 forms of incomplete 
secondary and secondary schools. 
Teachers: (signatures) 
 22 
As they, whether good or bad, make up history, and nobody is 
entitled to cross out history.” It was his response to his opponents 
and a piece of advice from the man who grew wise with 
experience. Neither he nor his generation has to be ashamed of 
their youth–student, komsomol, wartime one. 
In 1939 he graduated from the Pedagogical School, as it was 
called then, with honors. “Citizen Geidar Alirza ogly Aliev upon 
fulfilling all the requirements set forth in the academic plan for the 
year 1938/39, –the certificate said, –is entitled to teach at a 
primary school, at 1-4 forms of an incomplete secondary and 
secondary school.” The document was issued in two languages–
Azerbaijani and Russian–and now it is kept with solicitude in 
Geidar Aliev’s Nakhichevan museum. 
On the stand next to it there is a group photograph: students 
and their teachers. Certainly first there are Lenin and Stalin’s 
profiles, then the teachers in traditional ovals–Imanov, Guseinov, 
Zemanov, Abbasov, Israfilov, Bektashi, Iskender (died in the 
Great Patriotic War), Akhundov, Grigoriev, Mikrtychyan, 
Gaziev... The surnames under the dim photos show that people of 
different nationalities taught the students, but certainly most of 
them were Azerbaijanians. 
The 1930s, both glorious and bitter, were coming to the end. 
There were top-priority construction projects and “Black Marias” 
at nights... Gusein Djavid’s lines disappeared from newspaper 
pages. Entire columns were occupied with reports of frenzy 
rallies: “Baku workers unanimously approve of the USSR 
Supreme Court Military Panel’s verdict to the fascist gang of 
Trotskist bastards. The marchers are carrying over their heads 
thousands of portraits of Stalin and his comrades-in-arms, banners 
and transparencies. Ugly mugs of Trotsky and the convicted men 
are looking from caricatures, where these foul dogs are pictured 
together with their fascist bosses” (Molodoy rabochy, a 
newspaper of the Central Committee and the Baku City 
Committee of the Azerbaijan Leninist League of Communist 
Youth. February 2, 1937). Samed Vurgun wrote first chapters of 
his Komsomol Poem, introducing an attractive image of Gerai-
beck, though according to ideological standards he was a 
representative of the “hostile class”. Only years later such novels 
as We by Zamyatin, Foundation pit and Chevengur by Platonov 
would reach the reader. It goes without saying that our hero could 
not realize all subtleties of the total levelling of ideas. But young 
Geidar Aliev could not fail to know about the campaign against 
the tar, a national musical instrument (in Russia there were 
attempts to reject even the violin); but he recited inspired lines of 
 23
“Twangle my tar!” by Mushfik. The black year of 1937 broke 
these strings too.  
Decades later Geidar Aliev, First Secretary of the Central 
Committee of the Azerbaijan Communist Party, would defend 
Bakhtiyar Vagabzadeh and his poem “Gyulistan”, which despite 
all bans contained lines about Azerbaijan’s dismemberment.  
At the same time Khalil Rza wrote “seditious” lines: 
 
I don’t want freedom 
Gram by gram, 
I want to break fetters 
Tying my legs and arms! 
 
When Azerbaijan gained its independence, President Geidar 
Aliev decorated Bakhtiyar Vagabzadeh, Khalil Rza Ulutyurk, and 
Mamed Azra, a poet of penetrating talent, with one of the highest 
awards of the country.  
But back in the 1930s Geidar Aliev graduated from the 
Pedagogical School with honors, received a deed of praise and a 
schoolteacher’s qualification. However, he did not get a chance to 
work at school...  
Dovlat Mamedov was drafted to the army. He returned to the 
eight-year school of Bananiyar village of Djulfinsky District after 
demobilization clinking with his battle awards. Geidar Aliev’s 
younger brother Djalal started teaching at this school. 
But Geidar had his own frontline. And he had to keep silent 
about it for the time being. 
 
 24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 2 
HERE IS A FRONTLINE TOO 
 
 
June 22, 1941, Nakhichevan 
 
The frontier-guards of Nakhichevan detachment hummed a 
song about the Far-Eastern border over which storm-clouds were 
gathering, which was popular before the Great Patriotic War, in 
their own manner: 
  
Over the Araks storm clouds are gathering, 
The severe land is filled with silence… 
 
In this sunny land storm clouds were certainly mentioned in 
the figurative meaning. Because every day, every night along this 
thousand-kilometer-long river, most of which was a state border, 
an alarm was expected. From the contiguous side gangs cut their 
way and robbed peasants and drove the cattle away. Smugglers 
were engaged in their business. Iranian (it was called Persian at 
that time) and Turkish frontier-guards fired at Soviet duty details. 
“At 10.30 on July 27, 1931, in the area of the Karaguluk frontier 
post of the Nakhichevan frontier detachment, –reported the 
Deputy Head of the Main Department of the OGPU Frontier-
Guards and Troops Bobryshev, –a Persian airplane violated the 
border and flew over it to our territory. Flying over our territory 
the airplane headed for south-east (along the border) and in the 
area of the Bezbashi frontier post returned back to Persia.” 
Well before the fascist Germany’s attack on a USSR the map 
“The New Administrative and Territorial Division of the State of 
Iran” was issued in Teheran. “The borders of Iran, –the 
commentaries to the map issued pursuant to the Mejlis resolution 
read, –are not officially settled, except those with Turkey.” In fact 
our neighbors made claims for the Soviet–in their formulation–
Caucasian Azerbaijan, for the Republic’s capital Baku, which 
even in their official correspondence appeared under its ancient 
Persian name of Bad Kube. And according to plan Iran itself was 
being converted into an anti-Soviet base. The “German Legion” 
was becoming a kind of Werhmacht detachment in the territory of 
 25
that country – says History of the Second World War. –In the 
northern regions of Iran bordering the USSR, Hitlerites made 
warehouses for weapons and explosives; subversive and terrorist 
details were formed to be transferred into the Soviet Union, first 
of all into the areas of Baku oil-fields and Turkmenistan.” 
In other words at the southern border as well as at the western 
one there was a smell of gunpowder in the air. 
In Nakhichevan railway workers were the first from civilians 
to learn about the war. They were put on martial law and were told 
that they were equal to soldiers since then. So Alirza Aliev got the 
words of the depot’s party leader, who mixing Russian and 
Azerbaijanian words, shouted at the rally that there was a frontline 
there too and it went along the Araks, the border river. The party 
leader, a recent steam engine stoker, was not far from the truth. He 
threw words, which were furious and burning like coals in the 
furnace of his hot machine. 
– Remember, comrades, Hitlerite armies are getting ready for 
an attack on the opposite bank of the Araks; they are out to get our 
oil fields. 
In that summer as usual the pioneer camps were opened 
throughout the Nakhichevan Republic. They were to be evacuated 
urgently; the children were to be sent home immediately. A few 
groups of strong lads were sent from Nakhichevan to assist the 
camp workers and pioneer leaders. According to the veterans’ 
recollections eighteen-year-old Geidar Aliev was in one of such 
groups. It was then that he got a chance to get acquainted with 
future eminent geologist Farman Salmanov.  
Farman was gaining strength in a pioneer camp in the 
mountains. On the twenty-second of June the pioneer leaders 
promised to take the children hiking. But on that tragic day at the 
camp parade the dismayed camp chief suddenly substituted their 
energetic and cheerful physical trainer. She announced in a 
trembling voice that a war broke out, the Hitlerite Germany 
treacherously attacked the Soviet Union, and so the camp was to 
be closed. Everyone had to return home at once. 
But how to do that? The only bus was broken. The road down 
the slope was about twenty kilometers long and very steep. Such 
way was beyond most of the children’s strength. “I was carried on 
the shoulders by a strong Armenian youth, –Farman Kurbanovich 
remembers. –Now I do not even remember what he did in the 
camp, but he carried children in turn all along that very long and 
hard way.” 
In the memoirs of Farman Salmanov, a prominent scientist, the 
Lenin prizewinner, the Hero of Socialist Labor, one of the 
 26 
discoverers of the Tyumen oil, such expressive episodes are 
scattered in abundance. He can notice details and estimate a 
person’s true worth. On the pages of the book his grandfather 
Suleiman, who was sent for insubordination to authorities to 
Siberia for twenty years, is described as alive, his wife Olga, a 
Siberian woman, was named Firyuza in Azerbaijan, where she 
returned with her husband. Farman’s younger sister–was given her 
name Amura after the Far Eastern River Amur in memory of this 
remote land... 
Nobody chooses either Motherland or parents. Caucasia is a 
joint home for Azerbaijanians and Armenians, Georgians and 
Ossets, Daghestans, Chechens, Ingush, Abkhazians... Is it possible 
for children to meet such a pioneer leader as that Armenian youth 
in this multinational house now? Or are there other instructors in 
demand nowadays, those whose eyes are full of hatred? But it is a 
separate topic. 
...After the start of the war, there was a significant increase in 
the number of servicemen and military equipment in the streets of 
Nakhichevan. Even people far from army matters could 
understand something serious was going to happen.  
In the early hours of August 26, 1941, the Soviet troops 
entered Iran. This was done pursuant to the Soviet-Iranian Treaty 
of 1921. The Shah’s army did not resist for long: in some sectors 
just till 1 p.m. of August 26. At the same time southern areas of 
Iran were occupied by the troops of Great Britain. At the 
beginning of September English and Soviet detachments entered 
Teheran. In the south of Iran about 30 thousand American soldiers 
took their stand... 
Until recently those events in Iranian Azerbaijan* have been 
described in a remote and vague way. As if kind of liberation 
movement headed by the Azerbaijan Democratic Party was 
spreading there. The name of this party’s leader, the head of the 
Azerbaijan Democratic Republic, Djafar Pishevari, was often 
“forgotten” even by academic editions. 
The national government of South Azerbaijan, established at 
the end of 1945, lasted for a year only. There worked thousands of 
Soviet engineers, geologists, builders, teachers and workers in the 
                                                 
* In modern Azerbaijan this region of Iran is called South Azerbaijan. 
After Soviet and English troops entered Teheran on January 29, 1942, the 
English-Soviet-Iranian Treaty was signed. The USSR and Great Britain’s 
actions, as historians write, prevented the involvement of Iran in the war 
against the countries of the anti-Hitler Coalition and ensured its 
cooperation with them in the war period. 
 27
field of culture in the territory under its control. Doctor of 
Sciences (History) one of the most profound explorers of this 
topic Djamil Gasanly describes their assistance as unselfish and 
self-sacrificing. South Azerbaijan–Beginning of the Cold War is 
the title of his book, covering events of 1941-1946. Events 
developing around South Azerbaijan immediately influenced 
Geidar Aliev’s life. 
...On May 10, 1941, his friends congratulated him on his 
birthday. The session was ahead, then summer holidays and 
somewhere in the distance there was September and the third year 
at the Institute. But on September 1, the Institute found many of 
its students missing. Some of them went to work, replacing their 
fathers drafted to the army, others were assigned to military 
schools, still others like Aliev, were called to local military 
registration and enlistment offices. It was already on June 23 that 
Geidar registered the documents in the secret division of the 
NKVD archives department of the Nakhichevan ASSR.  
He returned home late at night frequently. Steps resounded 
loudly in deserted streets of Nakhichevan. Sometimes out of 
darkness a military patrol emerged, “Your documents!” 
In the yard some trestle-beds were scattered spaciously–people 
of Nakhichevan following a long-held custom slept in the open air 
in summer, as it was rather stuffy inside. Beds, plates and dishes 
were taken outside. Izzet-khanum bent over kerosene stove, and 
then laid the table for Geidar. He was the eldest at home by the 
time: Father spent almost all his time in business trips, Gasan was 
in the army, Gusein was in Baku... It was to him, Geidar; Djalal 
came to get advice when he had learned that it was necessary to 
pay for studies–150 roubles a year. This was a great amount of 
money for the Aliev family. At the family council Djalal was 
advised to go to the preparatory department of the Pedagogical 
Institute. Education was free there and what is more 50 grams of 
bread were given every day. 
– Today Djalal has brought his bread home, –Izzet told Geidar 
with quiet pride. 
– Thank you, Mother, –responded the latter. –I’ll have only 
tea. 
Izzet-khanum poured some water from the jug on his hands, 
held out a piece of washing clay “gyul-abi”, which substituted 
both toilet and laundry soap for Azerbaijan families in the war 
years. 
Once at dawn when the sky was just tearing off from the earth, 
weeping from the neighboring yard waked the Alievs. Khurshid-
khanum’s family lived there. The husband was at the front and she 
 28 
lived with five children–one younger the other. Izzet-khanum 
hailed her neighbor:  
– What can I do for you? 
– The children cannot get asleep because they are hungry! 
Izzet called Geidar: 
– Help me, Son... 
They collected some bread, cheese, sugar, and preserves and 
gave everything to Khurshid. Both mothers burst out crying.  
Falling asleep Geidar saw Mother sitting on the edge of the 
sofa clutching her head in despair. Evidently she did not have a 
moment’s sleep that night pondering over her bitter thoughts. On 
waking up by the birds’ singing he saw her sitting on the same 
sofa. Izzet-khanum roused herself: 
– Son, I’ll cook breakfast for you right away! 
The same day he decided to try his luck again at the military 
registration and enlistment office, maybe this time he would be 
able to get permission to go to the front. Similar scenes took place 
all over the country at that time. Military commissars, who wrote 
applications to their chiefs themselves with request to send them 
to the Army in the Field, fought off applicants tiredly.  
– You are needed here (variants: on the border, in militia, at 
college, in the mine) too. 
Practically the same happened to Geidar Aliev at the 
Nakhichevan military registration and enlistment office that time 
again, when an officer on duty said to him:  
– It is a frontline here too. The Transcaucasian front. When it 
gets necessary we will draft you too. 
 
 
Soviet Mission in South Azerbaijan 
 
By that time 3,816 civilians were mobilized in Azerbaijan to 
be sent to Iran. (Djamil Gasanly has collected Statistics.) 
According to his findings there were 82 party workers, 100 
employees of different Soviet organizations, 200 chekists, 400 
militiamen, 245 railway workers, 42 oilmen-geologists. Aziz 
Mamed Kerim ogly Aliev, Secretary of the Central Committee of 
the Azerbaijan Communist Party, headed the «Soviet Mission in 
South Azerbaijan».  
The decision on the Mission and its head was made in the 
Kremlin. Aziz Mamedovich was approved as a member of the 
Military Council of the 47th Army; it was dislocated in ancient 
Tebriz, the capital of South Azerbaijan. The Mission worked from 
July-August of 1941 to the summer of 1942, when the events at 
 29
the Soviet-German front overshadowed all others. In addition the 
Soviet Union received military strategic aid from its allies through 
Iran at that time. The supplies were transported from the Persian 
Gulf throughout Iran to the Caspian Sea and further along the 
Volga or by railway.  
The First Secretary of the Central Committee of the Azerbaijan 
Communist Party Mir Djafar Bagirov was one of the most active 
organizers of the campaign to South Azerbaijan. He was said to 
draw an analogy with the Red Army liberation campaign to 
Western Ukraine and Western Byelorussia in 1939, when Ukraine 
and Byelorussia enlarged their territories due to restitution of the 
areas previously seized by Austria-Hungary and Poland. 
In order to get better knowledge of the situation in South 
Azerbaijan, Bagirov went secretly to Tebriz through Nakhichevan. 
The border with Iran was transparent for people like him. Djamil 
Gasanly cites his recollection about this trip. “While in 
Nakhichevan I went to Tebriz for 3-4 hours... In Tebriz I came 
across groups of boys and girls several times. When I wanted to 
have a talk with them and asked the driver to stop the car they 
took to their heels. Then I told them in Azerbaijani: “Come here.” 
Hearing my words, they came up to me... The land of South 
Azerbaijan is our true Motherland. People living along our 
Republic’s border were separated from their relatives for a long 
time... –Then he stopped near the map on the wall and said: –
When the Iranian Government divided the country into regions, it 
set aside a territory for Azerbaijan like that (he showed it in the 
map). But it is a lie. Azerbaijan is located from here to there (he 
showed in the map again). Frankly speaking, Teheran should also 
be included in Azerbaijan’s territory.” 
At one of the meetings at the Central Committee, a comrade, 
who came back from a business trip, said that they were passing 
the village of Turkmenchai. Bagirov remarked: 
– In this village the big Azerbaijanian people was divided into 
two parts... 
In the hot summer of 1827 during the war between Russia and 
Persia, General Paskevich’s troops besieged Erivan (Yerevan), 
and then took by storm Abbas-Abad fortress ten versts away from 
Nakhichevan. The peace negotiations started. On the instruction of 
the Russian Army Commander in Transcaucasia Alexander 
Sergeyevich Griboyedov, Court Counsellor of the Russian 
Empire’s Foreign Collegium and a famous poet led them. 
From Griboyedov’s report to Paskevich on the negotiations 
with the Persian Shah Abbas-Mirza: 
 30 
“…I had to say that I was not authorized to analyze what had 
preceded the war, it was not my affair.” 
– All of you say: It’s not my affair. –But is there not justice in 
this world! 
– Your Highness, you appointed yourself as judge to your own 
affairs and chose to solve them with arms. Without 
underestimating either your prudence, or your bravery or strength, 
I have to underline just one thing–the one who unleashes a war 
can never tell what it will end up with. 
– That’s true, –he said. 
– Last year Persian troops suddenly and rather far penetrated 
into our domains on this side of the Caucasus. Now after seizing 
Erivan and Nakhichevan regions we are standing on the Araks and 
took hold of Abbas-Abad, where I came from right now. 
– You took hold! You seized! My son-in-law, a coward, 
surrendered Abbas-Abad to you and he is a woman, worse than a 
woman. 
– Do what we did against any fortress and it will surrender to 
Your Highness. 
– No, you will die on the wall, there will be no one left alive. 
My people were not able to do that; otherwise you would have 
never taken hold of Abbas-Abad. 
– Anyway, in present state of affairs the General received a 
proposal of peace from you three times by now, but neither of 
your three communications contained the conditions our party is 
ready to start peace negotiations on. Such is the sovereign’s will... 
At the end of each war that is treacherously unleashed against us 
we remove our bounds and the enemy as well who might dare to 
step over them. That’s why in this situation it is required to yield 
Erivan and Nakhichevan regions. Money is also a kind of weapon; 
nobody can wage a war without it. It is not bargaining, Your 
Highness. It is not even compensation for the incurred losses: 
Demanding money we deprive our enemy of the opportunity to 
harm us for a long time.” 
Under the Turkmenchai Treaty the border between Russia and 
Persia was drawn along the Araks. The Shah yielded two regions 
to Russia and agreed to pay great money contribution convincing 
the Tsar’s ambassador in eternal friendship with his state. On 
passing these words Griboyedov remarked: “Later, however, the 
observations made not only by me proved to be true, that there 
was a constant discord between the Persians’ words and deeds.” 
Although it is necessary to note that these territories always 
attracted rapt attention of the English, and various conflicts and 
unpleasant incidents might have been provoked by them as well.  
 31
In Nakhichevan there is still preserved the governor-general’s 
house (now it houses the wonderful Carpet Museum), where the 
great Russian poet and diplomat stayed in July 1827. It opened a 
gorgeous sight at the valley from here. “…I often looked up from 
my papers and directed my spyglasses towards the battlefield. I 
saw the enemy’s cavalry galloping in all directions and swimming 
across the Araks in order to separate Muravyov and two hundreds 
of his cossacks. He perfectly got out of this scrape. There were no 
serious encounters and he came safe and sound back to us, though 
he was not able to see what he wanted.” 
A little over a year later the enraged crowd smashed the 
Russian Emperor’s Mission in Teheran. 37 people were killed, 
Alexander Griboyedov among them. He was carried to the place 
he was going to rest in peace in Tiflis, where his young pregnant 
wife Nina Tchavchavadze was staying, along the road he just 
recently rushed along southwards with a very important state 
mission. They passed Nakhichevan, the governor-general’s house; 
on June 11 (Old Style) near the fortress of Gergery Pushkin came 
across the squeaky bullock cart. You certainly remember the lines 
from his “Journey to Arzrum”: 
“I crossed the river. Two bullocks, harnessed in a bullock cart, 
were going up a steep hill. A few Georgians accompanied the 
bullock cart. 
– Where are you coming from? –I asked. –“From Teheran.” –
What are you carrying? –“Griboyed.” –It was a body of the dead 
Griboyedov that was transported to Tiflis.” 
One more century flew over the Araks. There was a red flag 
over the governor-general’s house, from where the Russian poet 
looked through the spyglasses at the unknown distance and 
grieved over “scarcity of knowledge about this land”. At the local 
theatre his characters–Chatsky, Molchalin, Skalozub...–talked in 
Russian and Azerbaijani to the world. At his friends’ request 
Geidar Aliev, a student of the Pedagogical School, painted the 
posters for the performance. 
Geidar knew by sight Aziz Aliev, the man bearing the same 
surname, a short man with orders on his soldier’s blouse. But 
could he imagine how the fate would bring them together? 
 
 
By the end of 1942 the Soviet Mission in Iran was practically 
wound up; only railway workers were on permanent watch day 
and night... On May 10, 1943, Father managed to get home to 
congratulate Geidar on his twentieth birthday, and a week later he 
fell ill–it was emaciation. On May 20 they buried Alirza Aliev. It 
 32 
was the first loss in the Aliev family. It can be rightfully described 
as a war loss.  
Moscow got busy again with South Azerbaijan in spring 1944. 
On March 6 the Council of People’s Commissars considered the 
issue “On Measures to Strengthen Cultural and Economic 
Assistance to the Population of South Azerbaijan”. The outcome 
of the Great Patriotic War was already evident, though the victory 
was thousands of versts away, the Crimea and Sevastopol, which 
had been repulsing fascists’ attacks for 250 days, a large part of 
Ukraine, Byelorussia, Baltic states, Europe had to be liberated, 
destroyed cities and villages to be restored. In the mad whirl of 
affairs, wartime and peaceful, Stalin did not forget about South 
Azerbaijan. It may be that Stalin’s interest in this problem was 
triggered by his youthful impressions of Baku and his personal 
treatment of the problem of Caucasia in general? It may be that 
the Teheran Conference brought on new solutions? We leave 
these questions without answers, since looking for them could 
take us far away from the major subject of the book. 
The program approved by the Union’s Council of People’s 
Commissars provided for a ten-year Azerbaijan school to be 
opened, a model agrotechnical station to be set up and a knitting 
factory to be built in Tebriz... On June 10, 1945, Stalin signed a 
secret resolution “On Establishing Soviet Industrial Enterprises in 
North Iran”. Soviet specialists participated in setting up 
subsidiaries of Azerbaijan mills and plants there. “The USSR 
Sovnarkom Resolution of June 10” –notes D. Gasanly, –betoken 
of uniting Iranian Azerbaijan with the Soviet Azerbaijan in the 
near future.” On June 21 of the same 1945, I.V. Stalin signed 
GKO Resolution No. 9168 “On Oil Exploration in North Iran”. 
Oilmen went as employees of hydrogeological party, attached to 
the headquarters of the Soviet troops in Iran. In other regions of 
Iran the English were also looking for oil and ore under the pretext 
of search for water. 
The Azerbaijan Democratic Party (ADP) was also formed on 
coordination with Moscow. Bagirov suggested that Mir Djafar 
Pishevari, the editor-in-chief of the Teheran newspaper Azhir, be 
appointed as head of the ADP. (In some documents he is also 
referred to as Seid Djafar.) 
Here is the characteristic of this outstanding person from 
Bagirov’s letter of July 6, 1945, addressed to Molotov, Beria and 
Malenkov:  
“Pishevari, native of South Azerbaijan, a former member of 
the Communist Party, held high party and state positions in the 
Soviet Azerbaijan for many years. In 1927 Komintern sent him to 
 33
Iran, where he was arrested by Shah Reza’s government and spent 
10 years in prison, he was set free in 1941 after the Soviet troops 
came to Iran. His two brothers live in the Soviet Union. One of 
them serves in the Soviet Army as a captain of medical service.” 
Pishevari, as D. Gasanly reasonably reported, saw no political 
prospects in gaining national independence by Azerbaijan within 
the state of Iran. He was hoping to establish the Azerbaijan 
People’s Democratic Republic like that of Mongolia under the 
aegis of the USSR and later reunite it with Azerbaijan. It was not 
his fault that the international situation spoiled his game.  
...An endless stream of cars, machines, books–in Azerbaijani 
and Farsi–and records with Azerbaijanian songs made for South 
Azerbaijan. And weapons as well–not have the Soviet 
manufacture but of many other brands, including Italian and 
Czech.  
On October 21, 1945, the Commander of Baku military 
district, the Army General I.I. Maslennikov and M.Dj. Bagirov 
reported to Beria: 
“In order to execute the Central Committee of the VKP (b)’s 
Resolution of October 8, 1945, on Iranian Azerbaijan and North 
Kurdistan we have undertaken the following: 
“21 experienced operation officers of NKVD and NKGB of 
the Azerbaijan SSR have been assigned to organize liquidation of 
persons and organizations preventing the development of the 
movement for autonomy in Iranian Azerbaijan. The same 
comrades are to organize armed partisan groups from the local 
population.” 
On October 2, 1945, at the first Constituent Congress of the 
ADP, Mir Djafar Pishevari was elected Chairman of the Party 
Presidium. On December 12, 1945, the first session of the 
Azerbaijan Milli Mejlis (the National Assembly) formed the 
national government. Pishevari became the Prime Minister.  
At the same time 80 operation officers-chekists, after 
completing a special course of training, were transferred to South 
Azerbaijan.  
In Washington a new issue of Time magazine was devoted to 
the events in Iran. Shah Mohammed Reza’s portrait was on the 
cover. There was a caption: “Iran’s Shah. His influential friends 
want his oil.” On the map published in the magazine South 
Azerbaijan was encircled by a sickle with a handle pointing at 
Baku. 
The National Government of South Azerbaijan suggested an 
extensive program of political and social reforms. Azerbaijani 
became the state language. The State University was opened in 
 34 
Tebriz. Teachers were sent from Baku. Children’s homes–two for 
boys and two for girls–were opened for orphans and homeless 
children. 
However, all these plans could succeed only under conditions 
of support from Moscow. But Moscow could not ignore 
Washington and London’s will. The post-war world was actually 
multipolar. The Soviet Union started withdrawal of its military 
forces from Iran.  
The soldiers were leaving. There were many Azerbaijanians 
among them. 
– We will be near, just on the other bank of the Araks! 
– Let the Araks dry out to the bottom! –was the response.  
But the Araks carried its fast waters like centuries ago and it 
was its fate to divide one people into two countries again. 
Moscow made attempts to protect its allies, but to no avail: 
Iran was bringing its troops into the northern areas of its country. 
The detachments of the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic had “4 
guns without shells and 2 mortars without mortar bombs” left. 
Azerbaijan was ready to fight, but Moscow promised only moral 
support.  
On December 11, 1946, Pishevari and his colleagues received 
a cipher message from Stalin. 
“Kavam as Prime Minister is legally entitled to send troops to 
any part of Iran and Azerbaijan in particular, so any further 
resistance is inexpedient, unnecessary and useless. Declare that 
you have no objections against the entry of government troops to 
Azerbaijan to keep order during the elections. Motivate your 
actions with interests of Iranian people’s integrity, its freedom and 
independence.” 
It was done so. And so was it motivated. 
...Over three thousand people were shot in seized Tebriz within 
a few days. Azerbaijan textbooks and books were burnt on fires. 
The Azerbaijan University, the National Theatre, the 
Philharmonic Society and museums were closed. The monuments 
to national heroes were demolished. The authorities put the region 
to Constitutional order. 
After intense requests from Bagirov the Kremlin allowed to 
open frontier points at Djulfa, Khudaferin, Bilasufar and Astar. 
Within two days 5,295 people crossed the Soviet border.  
A group of party leaders headed by Pishevari remained in 
Nakhichevan for a while. Then Pishevari settled in Baku. He 
wrote to Moscow, sent new proposals to Bagirov. “In May 1947 
to calm him down a special secret committee was set up allegedly 
to arrange groups of fedais to be sent to South Azerbaijan, –writes 
 35
D. Gasanly. –But there was no need to send anybody. On July 3, 
1946, Pishevari’s car had an accident on the 14th km of Yevlakh–
Gandzha motorway. A few hours later he died in a district 
hospital.” 
The indefatigable political expatriate was buried near his 
country house in Buzovny in the suburbs of Baku. Flowers were 
planted over his tomb to conceal his burial place. Only in March 
1960 Pishevari’s remains were transferred to the Alley of 
Honorary Burials, set up before the war in the 1930s. The Azer 21 
Movement led by Pishevari (December 12,1945) purposed to 
achieve democratic reforms. A National Government in South 
Azerbaijan was established under his leadership. The movement 
targeted to free the Azerbaijan Turks from the yoke of serfdom 
and feudal oppression, and groaning under the weight of the then 
unjust regime in Iran. Right a year later – on December 12, 1946 
the Shah army mercilessly punished and suppressed democratic 
forces; thousands of patriots were killed, sent into exile, emigrated 
from the country. Pishevari is the great son of the Azerbaijan 
people. Here on this holly soil lays his body.  
All – what he lived on, what troubled him, what racked his 
thoughts and soul – now have become things of the past, the 
common property of the people through making history. 
The wind from the sea is driving fallen leaves. A bit lower 
there are monuments to heroes of the Karabakh war. On the first, 
second, third–there are red ribbons. In that way citizens of Baku 
marked out the tombs of the Republic’s leaders, who perished in 
1991. The Secretary of State, Academician Tofik Ismailov, the 
Minister of Internal Affairs, General Magomed Asadov, the 
Prosecutor General Ismat Gaibov, the Deputy Chairman of the 
Council of Ministers Zulfi Gadjiev... They died in the helicopter 
brought down by Armenian separatists. 
“We will never be able to dissolve our military forces, –
insisted Pishevari. –We have to preserve all our military strength 
and take care of it.” 
“In my opinion your evaluation of the situation inside the 
country and in the international arena is incorrect, –answered 
Stalin. –First. You want to see all demands of the revolutionary 
Azerbaijan met immediately. However, the present situation 
makes realization of this program impossible... 
“Second. It goes without saying that if the Soviet forces were 
still in Iran; you could hope to achieve success in your struggle for 
revolutionary demands of the Azerbaijan people. But we cannot 
keep them in Iran, as, first of all, dislocation of the Soviet troops 
in Iran undermines our liberation policy in Europe and Asia. The 
 36 
English and the Americans tell us: If the Soviet troops can remain 
in Iran, why cannot the British troops remain in Egypt, Syria, 
Indonesia and Greece, and the Americans in China, Iceland and 
Denmark. We have made a decision to withdraw our troops from 
Iran and China in order to deprive the English and the Americans 
of this weapon and fostering the expansion of liberation 
movement in colonies make our liberation policy better grounded 
and more useful. As a revolutionary you certainly understand that 
we cannot do otherwise.” 
There was also third–concerning political situation in Iran–and 
fourth... 
“As it has transpired you said that at first we had raised you to 
the skies and then dragged you to the precipice and discredited 
you in that way. If it is true it makes us wonder. What happened in 
reality? We used a common revolutionary device, known to every 
revolutionary. Under the conditions which exist in Iran in order to 
ensure realization of fixed minimum demands of the movement it 
is necessary to encourage this movement proceeding from 
minimum demands and pose a threat to the government, creating 
circumstances under which the government will be glad to grab at 
the opportunity to make concessions. Without forestalling events, 
in the present situation in Iran you would not be able to get an 
opportunity to achieve satisfaction of the demands, the Kavam 
Government has to agree to now. This is a law of revolutionary 
movements. Of course there is not a shade of disgrace for you in 
this situation. It is rather strange if you think that we would let you 
be disgraced. On the contrary, if you behave reasonably and 
manage with our moral support to achieve satisfaction of your 
demands, which will actually legalize the current status of 
Azerbaijan, then you as a pioneer of progressive-democratic 
movement in the Middle East will be blessed by both the 
Azerbaijanians and Iran.” 
Alas, moral support for “satisfaction of demands, which will 
actually legalize the current status of Azerbaijan”, that is 
autonomy within the boundaries of the single state, was obviously 
insufficient. Stalin could not fail seeing it.  
Defeat of the National Government, break-up of the 
Azerbaijan Democratic Republic echoed in the Soviet Azerbaijan 
as well. Thousands of people helped their brothers across the 
Araks–teachers and doctors, oilmen and builders, geologists and 
actors, party workers and servicemen...  
 
 
 37
It was Covered with Silence 
 
Closeness to these events greatly influenced young Geidar 
Aliev’s sensitive soul. One of his foreign biographers, Alexander 
Adler, editor-in-chief of French magazine Courrier 
Internationale, wrote about “regular reconnaissance operations in 
Turkish territory”, carried out by Soviet chekists. “A young 
lieutenant Geidar Aliev by name considerably stood out” among 
them.  
“Then Geidar Aliev served in Tebriz, –goes on Adler, –where 
he witnessed tragic events, the essence of which he realized very 
well,–in rather difficult conditions the Shah’s troops seized South 
Azerbaijan. He was greatly impressed by... communist ideas 
defeat in Azerbaijan, defeat of the ideas the Azerbaijan people 
pinned their hopes on at that time.” 
National enthusiasm–such were the feelings, which people 
experienced in the Soviet Azerbaijan, especially in the areas near 
the border. Then the pendulum swung in the opposite direction–a 
tragedy in South Azerbaijan, which all Azerbaijanians perceived 
as a national calamity. Nobody wrote openly about it at that time, 
but it was said and it was considered as such by many people. 
There is Geidar Aliev’s testimony to this effect as well, which 
Djamil Gasanly, deputy of the Milli Mejlis, told us about: 
– When my book was published, Geidar Alievich called to 
congratulate me and said, “I am glad there is such a scientist in 
Azerbaijan. You wrote about the things that were covered with 
silence in the Soviet period.” Then he asked about my age. I 
answered that I was 50. “I am surprised. You described the events 
that I witnessed myself. I thought you were 70-75 and you had 
witnessed these events yourself too... Among other historical facts 
you say about Bagirov and Pishevari’s meeting. I served in 
Nakhichevan at that time and this meeting took place before my 
eyes as we stood guard during that meeting...” At the end of our 
conversation he thanked me again and said that, in his opinion, 
history should be treated in this way–without prejudice, sincerely 
and objectively. 
We should note to complete the picture that the scientist 
represents the People’s Front of Azerbaijan, the opposition, in the 
Parliament. He started our talk with these words, as he might have 
thought that we used to meet only with Geidar Aliev’s followers. 
But no, we listened to everyone–his friends and his opponents. 
The more valuable were those evidences, where the people 
appraising Aliev could put aside their political predilections: 
 38 
– He was a great politician of Azerbaijan and of the whole 
modern world. He was building an independent state and brought 
Azerbaijan in line with the countries of developed democracy. He 
opted for balanced development of Azerbaijan’s international 
relations–with Russia, the USA, countries of the West and the 
East. I was pleased that he read my monograph–regardless of 
being very busy and of old age–and considered it necessary to 
make a call. 
The first edition of the monograph by Doctor of Sciences 
Gasanly was published in Azerbaijani. The second one–on his 
initiative–was in Russian. 
– I did it as a token of respect to Russia, –he said. 
We asked him if he came across the surname of Aliev in the 
lists of people sent on business to South Azerbaijan in those years. 
– No, –answered the scientist. –I didn’t. 
Yes, in those lists you won’t find the name of our hero. Then 
where? We are looking for an answer in vague expanse of time, 
comparing known facts and adding new data to them. 
...In May 1945 State Security Colonel Volkov, working under 
cover of the vice-consul position in Istanbul, decided to leave for 
the West. He got in touch with the British intelligence and 
promised to hand over some secret documents and names of the 
Soviet secret agents in Turkey in exchange for political asylum. 
But not only in Turkey–in Great Britain as well as earlier he 
worked in the English department. The report of the English from 
Kabul got into hands of Kim Philby, Head of the Secret 
Intelligence Service Department in London... Kim Philby, whose 
contribution into the work of the Soviet Intelligence Service 
cannot be estimated in ordinary measurements. The same day 
Philby informed a staff member of the NKGB station in London 
about the development of events–as a prelude to the future 
catastrophe. Philby was sent by British Intelligence to Istanbul to 
look into the matter on the spot. But the traitor was already 
transported to Moscow. Kim Philby had to wash off–in the literal 
meaning of this word–British secret agents working in Turkey in 
the eyes of the command. In his report he “wrote off” this failure 
to the fact that Volkov “must have given himself away by his 
behavior or by drinking and chattering too much”. 
At that time Mikhail Matveyevich Baturin worked as the Chief 
of Soviet Intelligence Service in Turkey. His son, a cosmonaut 
and a scientist Yuri Mikhailovich Baturin, wrote a book about his 
father. Here is what he told a journalist from the Tribune 
newspaper about those events: 
 39
– So, who saved whom in the end–did Mikhail Baturin save 
Kim Philby or did Kim Philby save Mikhail Baturin? –The 
correspondent of the Tribune newspaper Sergei Maslov asked 
him. 
– It is a common knowledge–our world is interconnected in a 
marvellous way, –answered Yuri Baturin. –But we know very 
little about it. We see only superficial interdependencies. And 
when deeper ties are revealed we are ready to get excited and 
surprised. You see, secret ties between two intelligence officers–
neither was able to see it clearly–could paralyze if not kill both of 
them like electric shock. But could save them as well. Everything 
depended on circumstances as well as on efficiency of the one and 
the other. If Mikhail Matveyevich acted a bit less efficiently, Kim 
Philby would be exposed. And blame for exposure of the entire 
“Cambridge five” might have been laid on the Soviet intelligence 
officers. Then a significant part of Intelligence Service history and 
some part of International Relations history would have been 
written otherwise. 
But it is quite possible that Philby saved my father. As he also 
acted very efficiently. Intelligence officers–regardless of the place 
of their work–see themselves as a part of the system. A secret 
agent is aware of his responsibility not only for himself and his 
contacts. He is also responsible for people he does not know and 
will never know. Both intelligence officers who knew nothing or 
at least nothing specific about each other tried to act as swiftly and 
accurately as possible. And they did everything perfectly. 
And in conclusion Yuri Mikhailovich gave one more–quite 
small–example of unnoticeable interrelations, which have an 
effect many years afterwards. 
– If Konstantin Volkov managed to leave for the West, Geidar 
Aliev’s life and career would have developed in quite another way 
as he was one of Volkov’s subordinates, and consequently history 
of one of the contemporary states would have been a bit different 
as well. 
 
 
Geidar Aliev continued his service and judging by his first 
awards it was rather successful–he was decorated with “Labor 
Valour” medal, “For Service in Battle” medals and “Red Star” 
order for “success achieved in the sphere of the USSR State 
Security”. 
“According to his abilities he was more apt for international 
work, –Igor Sinitsyn, assistant Chairman of the USSR KGB, 
wrote about Geidar Aliev in his book Andropov at Close Scrutiny, 
 40 
–he worked in the KGB stations in Iran, Turkey, Pakistan and 
Afghanistan. He reached a high position of the Chief of the 
Station in one of these countries. This modest, serious and delicate 
intelligence officer was sent to strengthen security bodies in 
Azerbaijan...” 
 
 41
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 3 
GEIDAR AND ZARIFA 
 
Through centuries Oriental poetry has brought legends about 
gentle, pure and faithful love. Takhir and Zukhra... Khosrov and 
Shirin... Leily and Medjnun... Everything–intrigues, threats, envy–
gave up under force of their fidelity to each other. 
 
And however restrained they may be,– 
Idle gossip and idle talk will never stop. 
As if the wind blowing in the morn 
By the edge slightly lifted yashmak 
From the face of love. They were patient– 
As only two of them knew the secret. 
But why suffer and keep silent 
When the veil of secrecy is taken away? 
 
These are lines–in a key translation–from the poem written by 
great Nizami. Geidar Aliev knew them in Azerbaijani since his 
youth and more than once recited them to his Zarifa. 
In the middle of the enlightened 20th century the fate had in 
stock a few tests for the love of Geidar Aliev and Zarifa Alieva’s–
who were not a husband and a wife yet, but just a pair of lovers 
sharing one surname by chance. We are sure their story is worth 
of a description as talented as that devoted to Leily and Medjnun’s 
feelings. One day it may be told on the big screen or the big stage.  
Though thanks to the talented director Vagif Mustafaev, who 
gave a memorable description of Geidar Aliev’s confession with 
sincere tact, we have the documentary film “Story of Great Love”. 
With the author’s gracious permission we will refer to Geidar 
Aliev’s recollections of his meeting with Zarifa-khanum, his 
destiny, how they fought for the right to build their family by 
themselves, which were recorded by Vagif Mustafaev. 
In his youth Geidar Aliev was a handsome boy and an 
attractive man at a mature age and even later–who is seen from his 
photos; beauties in Baku and also in Leningrad and Moscow did 
 42 
not try to conceal their admiration of him. But he, as many people 
who knew him well say, never gave grounds for flirting with him.  
– And I’ve realized why, –remarks an old teacher Lyatif 
Guseinzadeh. –He was a man of one love. He loved his wife very 
much. It must have been that rare case when two halves found 
each other.  
Great, sincere feelings are not usually displayed. They are 
often concealed from the eyes of strangers. But what will two old 
friends–now married women with children–ask each other about 
when they meet? 
– Are you happy Zarifa? 
Zinochka, so she was called at home, Azizbekova remembered 
how they shared their sacred thoughts after they had read Stephan 
Zweig’s story “A Letter from an Unknown Woman”. 
– Could you love like that? –asked Zinochka her friend. –
Would you be able to devote yourself and give everything to your 
beloved one? 
– If I fall in love, I will carry this feeling through my whole 
life, be it hard or joyful. 
Geidar Aliev could have said the same. 
“I will never forget anything from what she told me about her 
happiness, her big, deep, faithful reciprocal love, fine qualities of 
her partner in life. It is typical that after this meeting, years later, 
more than once she said in the same invariably warm and 
particularly enthusiastic way about her female, family happiness 
and found wonderful words that unfortunately cannot be confided 
to paper.” 
Each of us might have chanced to see a blind man. Here he 
goes clattering with his stick against the edge of the pavement and 
stops at a crossing... In most cases there is usually a 
compassionate person who will take him across the street and rush 
to mind his own urgent business. And for someone such a meeting 
may become the greatest emotional shock for the whole life. That 
happened to Zarifa Alieva. 
During the Great Patriotic War dozens of military hospitals 
were located in Baku. Over 500 thousand people went through 
them. One of such hospitals was situated in the University 
building. Schoolgirls and female students looked after the 
wounded, cleansed their wounds, gave water and spoon-fed those 
who could not move. Zina recited poems, Zarifa played the 
accordion. 
“I remember there was a pilot, who had very bad burns and 
numerous compression fractures, lying immovably on his back. 
He refused to take food, practically did not open his eyes and was 
 43
utterly indifferent to everything that was going on in the ward. 
Zarifa stayed at his bedside for a long time, asked him about his 
family and told him news from the front. It turned out that he had 
daughters like us at home and he did not want to become a burden 
for his family and so he had not informed them of his condition. 
Some time later he dictated his first letter to his wife to Zarifa and 
we took it to the post-box together. So she received one more 
“speciality” in the ward–she wrote letters dictated to her by the 
wounded and sent them to their relatives.” 
Her acute sense of responsibility, her readiness to come to 
rescue immediately must have come from that time. 
Once, after a shift at the hospital she and Zinochka ran home. 
They saw a beautiful young woman going in the opposite 
direction. Her back was unnaturally straight and her head was 
raised high. She tried to walk close to the wall. 
“Zarifa gripped my hand convulsively, put a finger to her lips 
and following the doleful retreating figure with her gaze asked 
me, ‘Did you see? She is blind. You know, long ago I decided to 
become a doctor. Everyone is a doctor in our family–Father and 
Mother, elder sister and Tamerlan. I want to be an oculist and try 
to give people back the eyesight–this great and priceless gift.” 
Years went by. Zarifa Alieva became a well-known 
ophthalmologist, a specialist recognized in medical circles and 
what is more important among patients. At one of large 
congresses she met Azizbekova, an academician, a prominent 
historian. 
– Do you remember that blind woman from 1944, Zarifa? 
– Yes, I remember everything, –answered Zarifa Azizovna. –
And all my operations... And our meeting on the Day of Victory... 
From early morning on that day all citizens of Baku went to 
Primorsky Boulevard. The entire city seemed to be gathered there. 
Later Academician Azizbekova, a granddaughter of one of the 26 
Baku commissars, remembered that day: 
“It was like the whole Baku came to the sea at that time. 
Strangers hugged and congratulated each other, cried together and 
remembered their relatives and friends. We made our way to our 
favorite tree; it is still there opposite the Puppet Theatre. And 
there Zarifa came to an abrupt stop near a woman in a black dress 
and a black kelagai–Azerbaijanian women’s mourning headgear–
covering almost all her grey head. Zarifa, usually very shy with 
strangers, came resolutely to her and embracing her said softly, 
“Ana-djan, take this mourning scarf off, it is a holiday today.” The 
woman started crying. Zarifa, cuddling her closer, asked: 
“Husband?” – “No, sons... three my dear sons.” 
 44 
A tall young man stopped near them. 
“Don’t cry, Mother,” –he said quietly and tenderly.” 
In Baku people told us the story of Zarifa and Geidar’s first 
meeting like a legend. We would like to believe in this beautiful 
story, but alas, our heroes just could not meet on that day. Geidar 
Aliev met Zarifa only in 1947, it was in Kislovodsk. Here is his 
own recollection of this meeting: 
– My elder brother was going to Kislovodsk for rest and 
invited me to join him... I did not know anyone and my brother 
had a lot of acquaintances there. Once I set my eyes on a girl, later 
I get acquainted with her. And it turned out that my elder brother 
knew her family and knew her father rather well. Though our 
acquaintance was short, in a way this girl won my heart... 
Soon after this meeting senior lieutenant Aliev as a promising 
officer was sent to Leningrad to study at the School for Executive 
Staff of the USSR Ministry of State Security. In letters to his elder 
brother he asked as if by chance about their Kislovodsk 
acquaintance, how she was and what she did. Gasan did not keep 
him in suspense, especially as he knew from Tamerlan, Zarifa’s 
brother, about first steps of doctor Alieva. 
After completing the course of intelligence science with honors 
Geidar Aliev was assigned to the Ministry of State Security of the 
Azerbaijan SSR as Head of Branch of the Second Department. Let 
make it clear for outsiders–it is counter reconnaissance. And let us 
remind you that the Head of the Branch was only 27 then. His 
relatives pressed him: It is time to have a family. 
– I was thinking of starting a family myself, –remembered 
Geidar Alievich. –It is natural. And according to Azerbaijanian 
customs Mother and relatives arrange some kind of bride-show. 
There were nice, pretty girls among those I was offered to marry. 
But my feelings for Zarifa must have been so strong that I wanted 
to see her again. 
Fortunately Geidar met Tamerlan whom he called from time to 
time. Once they wandered along the embankment of the Caspian 
Sea and Tamerlan invited his friend to drop in at their house. 
– I’ll introduce you to my father. He has been in your parts 
more than once. 
The name of Aziz Mamed Kerim ogly Aliev will tell nothing 
to a contemporary reader in Russia and even in Azerbaijan. 
However, he, a medical practitioner, Doctor of Medicine, even in 
his lifetime, was respectfully called the Healer of the society. In 
the 1930s he was the People’s Commissar of Healthcare in 
Azerbaijan, then at the beginning of the Great Patriotic War he 
headed the Soviet Mission in Iran, we had already talked about, 
 45
and was Secretary of the Daghestan Regional Party Committee... 
By the time when Tamerlan introduced his friend to his father 
Aziz Mamedovich, the recent Deputy Chairman of the Council of 
Ministers of the Republic, was out of job. He welcomed the guest 
heartily, as it was customary in this house. He offered some tea 
saying with a smile that Zarifa would come soon... 
Aziz Aliev was one of the most educated people in the 
Republic. He had professional knowledge of medicine, culture and 
music... It was not just esteem of high positions that made many 
people favor him with their affection, including composers Uzeir 
Gadjibekov and Muslim Magomayev, by the way a grandfather 
and a namesake of the singer Muslim Magomayev, who was very 
popular throughout the Soviet Union, Abulfaz Karayev, Rector of 
the Azerbaijan University, legendary Samed Vurgun, Mirasadul 
Mirkasumov, a prominent scientist, the first President of the 
Republic’s Academy of Sciences. Narkom Aziz Aliev, contrary to 
some of his colleagues, was not frequently seen on the rostrum. 
He did not like “making speeches”. He did concrete things like 
establishing new medical services, writing textbooks for medical 
educational institutions in Azerbaijani, looking for talented youths 
and sending them to the leading higher educational institutions of 
the Union. 
Rasul Gamzatov remembered as Aziz Mamedovich Aliev 
suggested him going to Moscow to study at the Gorky Literature 
Institute. “You should necessarily continue your education.” Rasul 
Gamzatov’s great talent flourished in Moscow even more. 
Years later this story, heard at Aziz-mualim’s house, might 
give Geidar Aliev the idea to send talented young people from 
remote places of the republic to Moscow institutes, or he might 
arrive at this idea by himself. Anyway they both had common 
strategy. Nowadays in some countries Soviet and Russian degrees 
are declared invalid. But such situation will not last for long... The 
essentials remain intact–schools in their large and deep meaning 
such as Academician Landau’s school, who by the way was also 
from Baku, or Academician Ioffe's or Academician Alferov’s 
schools. In the Soviet Union the best higher educational 
institutions were open–free of charge–for a boy from a miners’ 
settlement in Donbass, for his coevals from a mountain village in 
Azerbaijan or from a god-forsaken kishlak in Uzbekistan... 
The Father’s, Aziz Mamedovich’s, life was the best example 
for his children. Three of them–Lyazifa, Tamerlan and Zarifa 
became Doctors of Medicine. Zarifa Azizovna, one of the most 
competent ophthalmologists of the Union, was elected as 
Academician of the Azerbaijan Academy of Sciences.  
 46 
Some of you, reading these lines, may remark: Why don’t 
become an academician having such a father and such a husband?! 
We know how these thing are done... 
We won’t argue. In disputes like this, facts, not emotional 
outbursts, have effect. So did Zarifa-khanum use her father or 
husband’s authority? 
Just imagine a scene. Two Deputy Ministers of the Ministry of 
Internal Affairs of Poland with their families come to Baku for 
rest. Filipp Denisovich Bobkov, the KGB Deputy Chairman, 
accompanies them. Under the protocol the First Secretary of the 
Central Committee of the Republic’s Communist Party Aliev 
should welcome eminent guests. But he is on a business trip 
abroad. Zarifa Azizovna shows the city to the guests. According to 
the program they should visit one of the district party committees. 
She takes the guests to the place and remains sitting in the car. 
– I’ll wait for you here. I am neither a party worker nor the 
Central Committee representative. 
It is a very didactic example of human ethics. In her relations 
Zarifa-khanum was guided by medical ethics, which she gave a lot 
of thought to. 
“Devotees are needed like the sun” –was the title Zarifa Alieva 
gave to one of the chapters in the book dedicated to medical 
ethics. “Use of one of Chekhov’s phrases,” –writes Fatima 
Abdullazadeh, –was predetermined by her attitude towards 
Russian culture in general. She carried love for Chekhov and 
Rakhmaninov through her whole life.” 
But we put the cart before the horse. 
Geidar and Zarifa’s meeting came on the period when Aziz 
Aliev was out of favor. “What these young people–a daughter of a 
politician in disgrace and a youth, one of the most promising 
officers of the State Security System–had to suffer in order to be 
forever together will remain their private secret,” pointed out 
Fatima Abdullazadeh. 
Fortunately, Geidar Aliev did not take this secret with him. 
And we have to thank Vagif Mustafaev again for recording these 
moving evidences in the summer of 2001. 
– My feelings for Zarifa were getting stronger and stronger. 
And I felt love on her part as well. So I made up my mind to 
connect my fate with her. 
At work it was of course known that Geidar Aliev was seeing a 
daughter of a politician out of favor. At the urgent request of 
almighty Bagirov, First Secretary of the Central Committee of the 
Azerbaijan Communist Party, Aziz Mamedov was dismissed from 
the Council of Ministers. Dark clouds were gathering over his 
 47
family too. Leily Gadji Djabbar kyzy, Aziz Mamedovich’s wife, 
was elected a delegate to the 13th Congress of the Republic’s 
Communist Party. In the morning smartly dressed she went to the 
Congress and suddenly came back soon. At home they wondered: 
– What’s happened? Can the Congress be over so soon? 
– No, the Congress is going on, but Bagirov drove me away, –
Leily-khanum found strength to smile. –He told me to hand in my 
mandate and leave.” 
Rumors about of this incident adorned with fantastic details 
spread throughout Baku. Acquaintances, friends and even 
relatives tried to keep as far away from Aziz Aliev’s family as 
possible. The phone in the house rang rarer and rarer. 
Geidar Aliev remembered: 
– A few days later I met Zarifa-khanum. She told me that we 
could not see each other any more. I asked her: “Why?” She 
replied: “You know well that my father was dismissed from his 
post. And you work in security organs and may suffer. I think we 
should break up.” I objected: “Our relations cannot depend on 
where someone may be working. They depend neither on your 
father nor on my place of work... 
“Our relations were deep and sincere. She loved me very 
much. And I loved her dearly. So I told her not to worry. She 
answered that her concerns were not about herself, besides her 
father had already lost his job. ‘I worry about you. It may so 
happen that it will have negative effect on your service’.” 
Geidar Aliev knew about the situation better than Zarifa did. 
Her father was being followed. Their telephone was tapped day 
and night. It was clear that Geidar’s calls and his talks with Zarifa 
were recorded. So it did not come as a surprise when Geidar was 
summoned to the Minister of the State Security of the Republic 
Yemelyanov. 
– We had a short conversation about work. Then he asked me: 
“Do you see such a girl?” “Yes”, –I answered. “And are you 
aware that her father Aziz Aliev was dismissed from his post?” –
“Yes, I am.” –“Comrade Bagirov thinks badly of him.” –“I don’t 
have such information.” 
The boss recommended the young officer to break up with 
Zarifa Alieva as it could spoil his career. At the end of the meeting 
he threatened, “Otherwise you may forget about a job in the 
security bodies.” 
Discharge from the state security bodies was similar to being 
blacklisted. A person with such a note in his workbook or service 
card will be given no job. Geidar Aliev could lose more than just 
the job he liked; as he was a breadwinner in the family–he had to 
 48 
provide his mother and his younger brothers and sisters who did 
not earn their living yet. 
– But I still adhered to my opinion. I did not break up with 
Zarifa. At that time in Baku there was not much outdoor lighting 
so we were able to find some secluded nooks, which were away 
from strangers’ eyes. –Geidar Alievich smiled archly 
remembering about it. It was obvious that he was glad to return to 
his youth. 
They mostly met in the Governor’s Garden, which was 
previously called the English Garden. In this old park, which was 
laid out in the 19th century, there were lots of dark alleys, where 
young lovers could hide from curious stares. 
– At the entrance to the park there was a trolley-bus stop. I 
arranged to meet at this stop. I was young and brave and afraid of 
nothing. I had a pistol on me as it was prescribed by my service. 
Zarifa was a young and very attractive girl. And you know how 
beautiful girls attract attention; some guys might even make 
passes... I came to the trolley-bus stop and waited for her. Then 
we went to the garden. 
However no tricks of the young chekist saved him from 
another summons to General Yemelyanov. 
– Why don’t you fulfil our demands? –asked the owner of the 
office, where Aliev would be working only a dozen years later. 
– You see, –replied Geidar after a long pause, –there is a job 
and there is a private life. I like my job. And as I know you 
consider me to be a good worker. There is no reason for concerns 
here. But the second part of my life, which may be of greater 
importance for me, includes my family, my feelings, my 
affections. I love this girl. And she loves me. How can I part with 
her? I told her that it is beyond my understanding. I have to 
explain the reason to her or should say that I don’t love her or that 
she has some defects I can’t put up with and that’s why I should 
break up with her. I just cannot say that I have to split with a 
person I love in order to keep my job in security organs. 
Yemelyanov was a smart person and as it seemed to Aliev 
understood his position. But one thing was a senior comrade 
Yemelyanov who had children of Geidar’s age and the Minister of 
the State Security was quite another thing. His voice got firmer: 
– We’ll have to make a decision on your job. Most probably 
you’ll lose it... 
It would have happened so. Aziz Aliev could have been sent to 
the cold parts, later followed by all his relatives, his sons and 
daughters’ friends... But in the early hours of March 1, 1953, 
invisible forces turned over that page of history. In Moscow at the 
 49
Blizhnyaya mansion the person who ruled the Soviet Union and 
half of the world lost conscience. When his guardsmen dared to 
enter his private room he hardly breathed. On March 5 it was 
announced that Joseph Vissarionovich Stalin died. Four months 
later Beria was arrested and convicted, and then his protégés from 
the republics followed him. In Azerbaijan Bagirov was convicted, 
then the Minister of the State Security Yemelyanov and his 
deputies. 
Geidar and Zarifa did not have to conceal their relations any 
more. 
– Our meetings got legalized, –Geidar Alievich remembered 
with obvious pleasure the word from the intelligence officers’ 
professional jargon. –We were both happy... And now when know 
you all this, tell me if I need to prove how deep the roots of my 
love are?! 
Our love lived through hard times. They wanted to separate us. 
But we did not give up. Neither she nor I... My belief in strength 
of true love was confirmed. And we had thirty years of happy life 
together afterwards. I have two nice children–daughter Sevil and 
son Ilkham... But unfortunately Zarifa-khanum died too early. 
Later we will return to that tragic April day of 1985 in 
Moscow drenched in cold rain, but let us stay in Baku for a while, 
where Geidar and Zarifa invited friends to the wedding tea-party. 
They treated their guests with “Mishka na Severe” (“Bears in the 
North”), the most delicious and most expensive candies of that 
time. They bought a kilogram of them to saleswomen’s great 
surprise. 
 
 
Once meeting Zinochka Azizbekova, Zarifa inquired after her 
mother’s health. 
“I answered that because of diabetes she was losing her 
eyesight very rapidly. It was a kind of non-committal answer. A 
couple of days later answering the doorbell I did not believe my 
eyes. It was Zarifa standing at the threshold. ‘On my way to work 
I remembered your words about your mother’s eyes. You should 
excuse me, as I have very little time, yet I’d like to have a look at 
Izzet-khanum’s eyes’. (She had the same name as Geidar 
Alievich’s mother. –Auth.) It is surprising that her mother, who 
did not see Zarifa for years, recognized her by her voice: “Fancy 
meeting you, sweetheart?” Zarifa-khanum did everything in her 
power for the old woman just by the call of her kind heart. 
In 1977 Zarifa Alieva defended her thesis for a Doctor’s 
degree “State of Workers’ Organs of Vision at Some Enterprises 
 50 
of Chemical Industry in Azerbaijan” at the Helmgolts Moscow 
Scientific Research Institute of Eye Diseases. She thoroughly 
studied occupational eye pathology. The industry opened new 
enterprises but how do they affect the workers’ health? 
Mikhail Krasnov, Academician of the Russian Academy of 
Medical Sciences, Director of the Scientific Research Institute of 
Eye Diseases, defined this problem with utter accuracy. Here are 
his words:  
– In the sphere of our science that attracted Zarifa Azizovna 
most of all the situation was developing a bit paradoxically. Work 
made Man but it also created special life conditions at work where 
Man spends a third of his conscious life. All of this seems to be 
self-evident, concerning eyes and vision in particular. Nowadays 
the eyesight state is not only of great importance for efficient 
work, in modern society requirements for it grow each year. 
However there are no generalizing scientific works on this topic 
so far. One should possess Zarifa Azizovna’s social flair to put 
one’s talent at the service of this extremely hard, difficult, noble 
and not always gratifying task. Due to Zarifa Azizovna’s efforts 
there was organized a scientific research laboratory for looking 
into occupational eye pathology. 
It is possible to gather a few pages on professional part of the 
issue from specialists’ reviews. They stress not only medical 
aspect of the research but also huge social significance of Zarifa-
khanum’s works as well as her personal human qualities. 
“I’m happy with an opportunity to meet Zarifa Azizovna for 
many years in business, family and friendly surroundings,” wrote 
K.V. Trutneva, Director of the Helmgolts Moscow Scientific 
Research Institute of Eye Diseases. “My late husband, Professor 
Ivan Ivanovich Shcherbatov got acquainted with the Aliev family 
before me. And from him I heard warm words about Zarifa 
Azizovna, Geidar Alievich and their small children–Ili and Seva.” 
Professor O. Dobromyslova remembered a lot of such small 
but characteristic details. 
...Her husband, also a professor, and she had a rest at a 
sanatorium near Baku. They were invited to Aliev’s house. 
“At the agreed time we came to the house and I saw Zarifa 
Azizovna for the first time. Not tall, very active she immediately 
aroused liking for her. Her slim figure was wrapped in a simple 
silk dress, her small feet in open-toe sandals. Her large black 
Oriental eyes glittered with kindness.” 
This friendly meeting lasted for long, Dobromyslova’s 
husband played Rakhmaninov and then they talked about their 
grown-up children...  
 51
“It was rather late when after dinner we were going to leave. 
At this moment Zarifa Azizovna’s husband came from work. Tall 
and slender, he resolutely strode into the room. His face betrayed 
his exhaustion. We bustled to take our leave. But Zarifa Azizovna 
went towards him with a lovely smile. On coming to him she 
stood on her tiptoes, as her husband was much taller than she, 
kissed him tenderly on the cheek and whispered something in his 
ear. She must have informed him who their guests were. After 
greeting us graciously, the host persuaded us to stay a bit longer 
for a talk with him and a cup of Azerbaijanian tea. This time the 
entire family gathered around the table and the role of the small 
hostess skillfully conducting the whole family became especially 
evident.” 
A couple of days later Zarifa Azizovna went with her family to 
Bulgaria. Then the Dobromyslovs’ holidays came also to the end. 
Older people remember how difficult it was to get air and railway 
tickets. In sanatoriums and holiday homes they were sold 
according to the lists and “dikari” (non-organized holidaymakers–
Translator’s note) had to queue up at ticket-offices at night. Zarifa 
Azizovna made a call to her acquaintances in Baku from Bulgaria 
to make sure the tickets for the Dobromyslovs would be booked 
and they would be seen off. 
 
Academician N. Puchkovskaya remembered a purely female 
detail. At the Congress of Ophthalmologists one of its participants 
sprained a leg. He was taken to one of the best Baku hospitals, of 
course, and most competent doctors were invited for 
consultations, in addition Zarifa Azizovna brought “some things 
from home to the man who fell ill far from home to make his long 
stay away from his relatives less uncomfortable for him”.  
Zarifa Azizovna is kindly remembered by everyone who knew 
her. “I saw her when I visited the Aliev family in Baku and 
Zagulba, –tells Alexander Sergeyevich Dzasokhov. –Zarifa-
khanum was known for her great kindness. She actually lived in 
full conformity with her scientific degree–Doctor of Medicine. 
They made a happy married couple. Unfortunately Geidar 
Alievich lost his spouse in April 1985 in Moscow. I saw how this 
tragedy shocked him. I can say assuredly that Zarifa-khanum 
played a huge role in the Aliev family, in bringing up their 
wonderful children–daughter Sevil, a scientist-orientalist and son 
Ilkham who is well worth of his father and who now continues 
Geidar Aliev’s cause as the Head of sovereign Azerbaijan, which 
has friendly relations with Russia.” 
 52 
...She treated her mother-in-law Izzet-khanum like her mother. 
And she worried sincerely when in spring 1956 Geidar Alievich’s 
mother fell seriously ill. In the next ward there was Samed 
Vurgun. It was mostly Rafiga who stayed near Izzet-khanum. But 
Geidar and Zarifa and her brother Tamerlan came to visit her 
almost every day.  
Once they saw the door to the ward where Izzet-khanum was 
lying, which was usually slightly ajar, closed tightly. It turned out 
that Samed Vurgun died at night and the doctors did not want 
Izzet-khanum to know about it. 
Shafiga worked as a teacher in Lenkoran at that time. She was 
sent a massage: “Mother longs to see you.” With a three-year-old 
daughter in her arms Shafiga hurried to the bus... But she did not 
take her daughter to hospital, left her at the friends’ house. Geidar, 
Djalal, Agil and Rafiga were already in the ward. 
– Where is the child? –Her mother asked. 
When she learned where the granddaughter was she got 
anxious: 
– Take her, Shafiga! Be quick. They have flu and the child 
may get the infection... Go, Shafiga, hurry up. 
They did not see each other any more. 
“I saw her every night in my dreams for a month, –
remembered Shafiga later, –she was lively and healthy... She 
wiped my tears...” 
 53
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 4 
“I CHOSE THIS PROFESSION IN MY YOUTH” 
 
 
December 21, 1980, Baku 
 
On this day there were no dances at Dzerzhinsky Club, which 
female students from the Pedagogical Institute used to visit to see 
a film or to dance, escaping from a gloomy building on the 
opposite side of the street. In the monumental building with 
columns known to the entire Baku the 60th anniversary of the 
Republican ChK-KGB services was celebrated. Black Volga cars 
pulled up to the entrance bringing the authorities. Learned people 
said comrade Andropov’s greeting had been delivered from 
Moscow and Geidar Alievich Aliev was going to make a report 
himself. 
And so it happened. The greeting of the Politburo Member of 
the CPSU Central Committee, Chairman of the USSR KGB, the 
Army General Yu.V. Andropov was read aloud. Yuri 
Vladimirovich wished “to steadfastly increase political vigilance 
in relation to enemy intelligence services and other alien 
elements’ subversive activities”. Then the floor was given to the 
Candidate Member of the Politburo of the CPSU Central 
Committee, the First Secretary of the Central Committee of the 
Azerbaijan Communist Party G.A. Aliev. 
Geidar Alievich visited this building with a ceremonial portico 
of the Corinthian order many times and was very proud when he 
first received an invitation–it was printed on a thick quarter of the 
paper with Dzerzhinsky’s profile on it... How much water has 
flowed under the bridges since then, how many changes have 
happened even in the names: ChK-OGPU-NKVD-MGB-KGB... 
He went to the rostrum, looked habitually round the large 
conference room seating one thousand and two hundred people 
and said: 
– Dear comrades! In this April workers of our Republic 
together with fraternal peoples of the country celebrated the 60th 
anniversary of the Azerbaijan SSR and formation of the 
Azerbaijan Communist Party. Recently on December 20 we 
 54 
celebrated the 63rd anniversary of the USSR VChK-KGB organs. 
And today we have gathered at the grand meeting dedicated to the 
60th anniversary of the ChK-KGB organs of our Republic, which 
were established on the very next day after the victory of the 
Soviet power in Azerbaijan. 
He habitually “shaped up” his speeches almost until the last 
moment. This time again he was looking through the pages 
prepared by his assistants, added something, made some phrases 
more accurate, trying to choose the only suitable words.  
– The VChK organs were set up on the initiative of our leader 
and teacher V.I. Lenin, who paid great attention to their role in 
defending the achievements of the Great October Socialist 
Revolution. On Ilyich’s proposal, F.E. Dzerzhinsky, one of his 
faithful companions-in-arms, was appointed Head of the VChK. 
At that unforgettable time under V.I. Lenin’s guidance the 
glorious chekist traditions were born... And today with a sense of 
great satisfaction one may say that these wonderful, genuinely 
Leninist traditions of “Iron Felix” live on and are used in practical 
activities of the state security organs of the country.  
The year of 1980 and the tenth five-year plan were coming to 
an end. It was not the best five-year plan in the history of the 
country. The economy was going to pieces. But it was not just the 
economy. On the same day, December 23, Moscow buried Alexei 
Nikolayevich Kosygin, the man who was at the head of the 
country’s Council of Ministers for 16 years and whose name was 
associated in the society with the so much promising reform. That 
autumn he was dismissed from his post.  
In big politics it was common to play under established rules. 
Which meant to express feelings of “sincere gratitude to our great 
party, its Leninist Central Committee headed by the prominent 
political and state leader of the present day comrade L.I. Brezhnev 
for the wise Leninist internal and external policy.” 
These words and phrases as well as entire turns–like 
monolithic cohesion of the party and the people, the party as 
driving and leading force of the Soviet people, its leaders, each of 
them a faithful successor of Lenin’s cause–were perceived as an 
inevitable ritual and they usually flew by without touching 
anybody’s mind. But they had to be said. The honorary Presidium 
headed by the faithful Leninist, the true leader had to be elected... 
And then you had to stand up and applaud loudly. 
Behind the walls of meetings, plenary sessions and congresses 
another life was going on–with queues, anecdotes, everyday cares 
and common talks... In them “Iron Felix” was applied to a safe–
 55
but such a wag would have been thrown out of this conference 
room. 
– In this room today I see representatives of almost every 
generation of Azerbaijanian chekists. –Aliev did not look into the 
pages lying in front of him.–People who began their work in the 
state security organs in the fiery 1920s, who actively worked in 
the 1930s, who took part in the Great Patriotic War, who provided 
security at the internal front. Here are also those who came to the 
security organs in the post-war period and a young generation of 
chekists. And I would like to give all of you both my personal 
congratulations and the best wishes. 
In the conference room there were also some people Geidar 
Aliev worked with in his time in NKVD-MGB-KGB–he spent a 
quarter of the century in intelligence and counter-espionage 
agencies and was at the head of the Republican State Security 
Committee for five years–as the first Deputy Chairman and then 
as the Chairman. These people took the baton from the hands of 
the first chekists of Azerbaijan and passed it further to new 
generations. Geidar Aliev with his keen interest in history 
suggested publishing a collection of documents and materials 
dedicated to the 60th anniversary of the Republic’s ChK-KGB 
organs. The book also included a unique historical document 
“Brief information report on the activity of the Azerbaijan 
Emergency Committee (May 1921-May 1922)”. This document 
was handed over to the delegates of the Second All-Azerbaijan 
Congress of Soviets. Let us at least cast a glance at its pages. 
“On the very first month of the Soviet power, the enemies of 
the Revolution provoked illiterate masses for protest actions in a 
number of areas of the AzSSR. Revolt in Gandzhinsky, 
Karabakhsky, Zakatalsky, Nukhinsky and other districts of 
Azerbaijan Province are examples of foul White-guard-khan 
reaction that used backwardness, timidity and ignorance of people 
for their wicked goals of exploitation.” 
As you can understand from the further narration, the new 
power set free all its defeated enemies. Incidentally in the same 
way the leaders of the Great October set free all tsarist generals 
after the Revolution. The latter pledged their word of honor that 
they would not fight against the working people. Their word of a 
gentleman turned out to be very cheap. The generals went to the 
Don region where they started forming the White Army. The same 
happened in Azerbaijan. “The counterrevolutionaries that were 
left free, –says the brochure further, –used our kindness to fight 
against us.” The Red Army detachments had to be summoned in 
order to put down a rising.  
 56 
But as soon as one calamity was over, the next one was at the 
door. “The united counterrevolutionary forces settled firmly in 
Menshevik Tiflis did not want to give in and continued to 
organize and sent across the borders of the AzSSR and other 
Soviet Republics a lot of its emissaries, weapons, money and the 
like in order to foment the fire of a bloody civil war and to 
completely ruin the much-suffered population.” 
Does the present day reader know what “uchtro” stood for? It 
was a district emergency committee consisting of three people. 
They were formed to fight with bandits, robbers (they are called 
“kochi” in Azerbaijan), who robbed people on the roads. Severe 
punishment of bandits helped to change the situation dramatically. 
In August 1921 the troikas were liquidated. It became quieter on 
the roads. But fright settled in Baku. “There was no night without 
a few robberies in flats in different districts of the city. Peaceful 
citizens were in terror and were scared to leave their houses at 
nightfall.” Chekists arranged a round up. “Only after 52 bandit 
chieftains were shot, peace came to Baku and its surroundings.” 
Not only bandits threatened the Republic. Former Turkish 
officer Khalil Shakir-zadeh settled down in Baku set up a party 
called “Ittikhad-Islam”. This pan-Islamic party, as it is 
characterized in the book, formed its groups in every corner of the 
Republic and was involved in preparation of a new rising. It’s 
been intended “to kill prominent leaders of the Soviet Azerbaijan–
Turks, spreading general panic and provoking a rising all over the 
Republic. The plan of the rising was ready as well as a list of the 
comrades doomed to death.” Fortunately the conspiracy was 
revealed. In the early hours of July 2, 1921, the chekists arrested 
the conspiracy leaders. 
Aliev is a surname rather common in Azerbaijan. And there 
was a worker-Bolshevik Baba Ali Yeldash ogly Aliev among first 
chekists. His baptism of fire he got during the Baku strike of 1907. 
The tsarist police set some hired bandits at workers. The city 
RSDRP Committee sent its Muslim comrades to help the workers. 
Baba Aliev was among them. After the revolution he became a 
chekist. 
A lot of nice people who believed in the workers’ cause went 
to the ChK–Azerbaijanians and Russians, Armenians and 
Georgians, Ukrainians–as people of all nationalities lived in Baku. 
Years later in Azerbaijan people still remembered the Deputy 
Chairman and the Operative Department Chief of the Azerbaijan 
ChK comrade Gaberkorn. 
Sergei Mironovich Kirov, while working in Leningrad, wrote 
in one of his notebooks the following characteristic of his 
 57
comrade, German by nationality: “The person submitting this 
document, comrade Gaberkorn, is an old party member, a good 
worker, worked in the Office of Public Prosecutor, etc., in 
Caucasia–Baku, Tiflis... I repeat that he is a very good worker.” 
There is a “House on the Embankment” in Baku as well as in 
Moscow. In Moscow it is a gloomy building described by Yuri 
Trifonov in his story of the same title. Most of those who lived in 
that once prestigious house with a view to the Kremlin became 
victims of repressions in the 1930s-1940s.  
Baku citizens called the KGB building, where Geidar Aliev 
worked for nearly a quarter of a century, “House on the 
Embankment”. But even before he came there, ill repute 
enveloped the house. The State Security system necessary for any 
country, severely suppressing dissidence more than once slid 
down to repressions. Numerous publications, declassified 
documents and memoirs tell about it. Azerbaijan was not an 
exception, of course. 
In 1956 in Baku open court proceedings were arranged. The 
people who were guilty of repressions in Azerbaijan in 1937-1938 
were tried. The proceedings were called open but entrance to the 
court was only by “special permits”, as Geidar Aliev remembered. 
He, Chief of the Counter-espionage Department at that time 
(appointed at the end of 1953), had such a permit. In court 
confessions, frightful in their frankness, were heard and the 
documents concealed until then in the archives were disclosed. 
Then they were concealed again, under pretext that “how long can 
one and the same be told and retold?” But people wanted to know 
the truth, to restore the names of all the illegally convicted, 
tormented to death relatives and friends. Given enough courage and 
wisdom to settle all the cases right, now there would have been no 
myths about dozens of millions of people perished in the camps. 
 
 
At the memorable December meeting in late 1980 Geidar 
Aliev could not tell everything he had in his heart of hearts either. 
Years had to pass...  
 
 
July 15, 1997, Baku 
 
– At that time as a young specialist studying archives 
documents, in particular the materials of 1937-1938 and later 
periods, –I asked myself: who were in those anti-Soviet, 
nationalist groups, that attempted to throw down the Soviet 
 58 
power? Some of them were arrested or shot or perished in the 
distant Siberia. However, the other part was not arrested. But in 
the archives materials their names were among those listed as 
members of anti-Soviet nationalist groups, detachments and 
organizations. I thought at that moment: why were they left at 
large if they were members of anti-Soviet, anti-revolutionary 
organizations? And if they were not members of such 
organizations, why were their names in these lists?” There were so 
many fabricated unjust cases that to make it out was very difficult. 
These words look like diary notes, a bitter confession of a 
person who encountered great injustice and tried to look into the 
mass of contradictions, causes and consequences. It was so in 
fact... As the President Geidar Aliev tried to set everything right–
only not alone but together with listeners–officers of the 
Azerbaijan National Security organs. In 1997 by his decree he 
declared March 28 as a Day of professional holiday of employees 
of the National Security organs of the Azerbaijan Republic. It was 
on that day in 1919 that the state security organs of the 
independent AzDR were formed. And now on the day of their 
professional holiday he addressed his colleagues, workers of the 
National Security organs, “the people of the profession which has 
been very dear and interesting for me from the very young age”. 
He thought aloud, opened his heart and called for joint 
consideration and action. 
– One of the greatest mistakes of the former NKVD was 
limited thinking of most people working there. Nothing except 
discipline interested them. Most of them were far from culture, 
literature. Without good knowledge of literature, culture, music, 
history people cannot be professional security workers. You see a 
security worker is not just a member of some investigation group. 
He has to possess high culture, be able to communicate with a 
poet, composer, writer, scientist or a common citizen. Otherwise 
he won’t be able to tell white from black, bad from good, mistake 
from crime. 
 
 
...In 1950 young chekist Geidar Aliev tried to find materials 
concerning the case of the prominent Azerbaijanian writer and 
scientist Salman Mumtaz. One of the old NKVD workers told him 
that he saw how the guardsmen burnt books from the libraries of 
Salman Mumtaz and Gusein Djavid in the inner yard, where there 
was a prison at that time, by the way. He could not stop that 
barbarity. 
 
 59
– Of course, –went on Geidar Alievich, –how could these 
people know what was the value of these rare books from Salman 
Mumtaz’s collection... Could those who carried out investigation 
of the cases of Gusein Djavid, Akhmed Djavad, and Mikail 
Mushvig rise to their level? No! Because most of them were 
illiterate... 
You know, there is one more reason why I remember this, 
because nowadays there are some people, our contemporaries with 
very limited thinking ability, they might be rude and far from 
culture. They think that their high office gives them everything. 
However position gives nothing to a person besides power. 
Everything else depends on his intelligence, knowledge and 
culture. If he possesses all this he will be able to fulfil his official 
powers in the interests of the state. If he doesn’t he won’t and he 
will simply maim the people. 
Such citizens “with very limited thinking ability” once and 
again suggested the Chairman of the Republican KGB to bring 
pressure on dissidents, to arrest a poet, and send some others to 
faraway places... Aliev didn’t allow doing that. He saved many 
talented people from persecution and now Azerbaijan is proud of 
them. 
Let us remember what zeal was shown at that time in 
persecution of dissidents in Moscow and Leningrad and in 
persecution of “nationalists” in Kiev... We can only regret that 
unlike his Azerbaijan colleagues no protector or friend could be 
found for talented poet Vasil Simonenko, for example. There men 
of arts, including even Oles Gonchar, were made to march in step, 
here–attempts were made to understand their ideas, to suggest 
something in a friendly way, to give some advice... 
In 1969 on Geidar Aliev’s proposal Azad Sharifov, a 
correspondent of the Izvestiya newspaper in Turkey, Iran and 
Afghanistan, was appointed Chief of the Culture Department of 
the Central Committee of the Azerbaijan Communist Party.  
– Azad, you were not called to Baku by chance, –Geidar 
Alievich told him at their first meeting. –Culture Departments are 
being organized at the Republican Central Committees, and we 
considered candidatures for a long time before we made our 
choice in your favor. You were raised in a theatrical family; you 
have two degrees in music and literature. Moreover, I know you 
have good relationships with Mirza Ibragimov, Rasul Rza, 
Suleiman Rustam, and Imran Kasumov. You are close with Kara 
Karaev, Fikret Amirov, Niyazi and Tofik Kuliev, Tair Salakhov. 
All of them, thanks God, are at the height of their fame and 
 60 
adequately represent our people on a global scale. Your task will 
be to encourage development of our young gifted creative youth... 
A wonderful generation of writers, composers, artists and 
theatrical agents is coming to the fore. For example, the 
Ibragimbekov brothers, Anar, Elchin Yusif Samedoglu, Fikret 
Godja, among composers–Arif Melikov, Khayam Mirzazadeh, the 
conductor Rauf Abdullaev, director Eldar Kuliev, movie and theatre 
actors. They are the people who need our help, which means that 
books of writers and poets should be published, the playwrights’ 
plays staged, young artists’ works displayed at the exhibitions, 
young actors promoted to play leading parts in films and at the 
theatres. This is your task and we have confidence in you. 
For ten years Azad Kerimovich worked in the Central 
Committee of the Republican Communist Party, then at Aliev’s 
urgent request he became the Head of Azerbaijan Goskino. In his 
memoirs Sharifov, Professor at Higher Diplomatic College, writes 
about those memorable years in detail. We will quote only one but 
very typical episode from them. 
The well-known Azerbaijan playwright Anar wrote the 
comedy entitled “Summer in Town”. He made fun of bribe-takers 
from higher educational institutions of the Republic in it. 
“The Glavlit (Major Literature Agency–Translator’s note), 
Soviet censors were against its staging, –remembers Azad 
Kerimovich. –They demanded to soften criticism. However 
neither the author nor the director agreed to that. The day of the 
first night came, tickets had been sold out, but there was no 
permission from the Glavlit. To make the situation worse the 
Chief of this organization, we had always managed to come to 
mutual understanding, was away from the city then. What were 
we going to do? Then Kheirulla Aliev, Chief of Literature Section 
at our Department, and I made a decision to take responsibility on 
ourselves and give permission for the first night without Glavlit’s 
consent. The performance was a success. A few days later Geidar 
Alievich asked me in a telephone conversation: “What happened 
at the Azerbaijan Drama Theatre?” I explained the situation and 
invited him to the next performance.  
“Geidar Alievich and his wife came to the theatre. After the 
performance he went to the backstage as was his habit, where 
actors were waiting. Anar and I followed a minute later and 
suddenly saw that the actors smiled and started applauding. It 
turned out that Geidar Alievich had smiled at them. He 
congratulated warmly the author, the producer and the entire 
collective on the success of the performance, which criticized 
shortcomings of our life. Then he turned to me and said that the 
 61
play should be translated into Russian for Russian-speaking Baku 
citizens to be able to see it too.” 
Azad Sharifov is at a loss even now when he is asked what 
Aliev liked most of all–literature, theatre, cinema, music or 
painting. Perhaps literature, as a word was a primary element. 
However, he was a keen theatregoer, Zarifa-khanum and he 
visited all premiers at Baku theatres. After the performances he 
talked to actors and producers. 
Within that period the Ballet and Opera Theatre and the Drama 
Theatre were reconstructed, and the Musical Comedy Theatre and 
the Theatre for Young Spectators were built anew, theatres in 
Sheki, Sumgait and Agdam were also restored...  
“In addition I’d like to say what importance Geidar Alievich 
attached to development of Azerbaijan film industry, –continues 
Azad. –It was with his support that such films as “In a Southern 
City” and “Interrogation” made their way to the screens all over 
the Soviet Union, though some people in Baku and in Moscow put 
obstacles in their way. Under his support and assistance the film 
studio “Azerbaijan-film” made popular historical films “Babek”, 
“Nasimi” and “Long Life Accords” about Uzeir Gadjibekov. Even 
now these films are very popular.” 
– Nowadays I can say with pride that when I held leading 
positions in the State Security organs and was the Head of the 
Azerbaijan Republic no measures were taken that were 
contradictory to national interests of the Azerbaijan people. 
So said Geidar Aliev at a memorable meeting in Baku, when 
the professional holiday of the National Security workers of the 
Republic was celebrated for the first time.  
There are many legends about his work in the NKVD-MGB-
KGB. We heard that Aliev was in Hungary during the notorious 
events of 1956 and allegedly got acquainted with Yuri 
Vladimirovich Andropov there. It is a myth, we explain. Their 
first meeting took place in 1967. At that time Aliev acted as the 
Chairman of the Republican KGB succeeding Semyon Tsvigun 
who got a new appointment as a Deputy to Andropov. Aliev was 
approved to take up his post. By that time he was well known in 
chekist circles as a strong-willed leader, who had organized some 
brilliant intelligence and counter-espionage operations. Among 
them: an agent’s counter-recruiting (“Duel”), exposure of 
American pilots who baled out of “Douglas” aircraft over 
Azerbaijan and a few missions in some foreign countries... 
These are established facts. And here is another story we heard 
from Aliev’s “chroniclers”, which is also a myth. In brief retelling 
it is as follows: 
 62 
– Once an order came from Moscow. Young captain Geidar 
Aliev was assigned to carry out this order. In this verdict there 
were names of five thousand Azerbaijanians who allegedly 
deserted the army or left their positions at the frontline. They had 
to be found. The young captain faced a difficult choice–between 
duty and conscience... He put a lot at stake, when he risked 
introducing some alterations into the obviously biassed and in 
essence anti-Azerbaijan resolution. Many names were crossed out 
from the list, substituted with other names; a part of the listed 
people was defined as “missing” and thus hundreds of people 
were saved from repressions...  
Army General Filipp Denisovich Bobkov, former First Deputy 
Chairman of the USSR KGB, who we asked to comment on this 
story, laughed heartily: 
– Can you imagine this? There are five thousand deserters and 
an officer who is going to make them out. It looks more like 
Khlestakov’s hundred thousand couriers. If there were actually so 
many of them, which I greatly doubt, as I heard a lot of good 
words about Azerbaijan soldiers at the front, then the Narkomat of 
Internal Affairs should have dealt with them. I am sure that senior 
lieutenant Aliev; he became captain later, honestly carried out his 
soldier’s duty. A deserter was a traitor in his opinion. And what 
should be called a person who according to the author of this story 
faked the document? –asks the General. –The only possible 
answer: traitors and betrayers’ accomplice. Such actions were 
punished severely under the martial law. 
It is true that many actions, which he couldn’t have done, were 
ascribed to young officer Aliev. Although he was able to dissuade 
a person from the erroneous step, try to make him change his 
mind. It means the activity which then and later chekists called 
preventive job and which was aimed at helping people who had 
taken a false step to put the thing right and not to commit a crime. 
In the 1960s-1970s such activities saved lots of our citizens from 
criminal prosecution. 
Among those young scientists, men of arts, literature, whom 
Aliev, Chairman of the Republican KGB, saved from criminal 
punishment was Abulfaz Elchibei, future President of Azerbaijan. 
He was famous for his radical nationalism in the Soviet times. 
Years later heading the sovereign republic he got entangled in a 
complicated and contradictory world of big politics.  
But it would all happen later. It was late 1950s then. Aliev was 
the Head of the Second Department (counter-espionage) of the 
Republican State Security Committee. It is obvious that decisions 
on such appointments were made in Moscow.  
 63
Around this time Geidar Aliev got acquainted with Filipp 
Bobkov, who was the Deputy Head of the Second Chief 
Administration of the USSR KGB. Filipp Denisovich was only 
two years younger than Aliev; the difference quite immaterial at a 
mature age. He went to the front as a volunteer like his father, a 
private, an anti-tank rifleman; they fought together in Siberian 
volunteer division. Denis Bobkov perished in battle before his 
son’s eyes near a village of Bolshiye Grivny in Pskov region. 
Sergeant-major Bobkov saw the Victory at the age of nineteen in 
Kurland decorated with the 3rd degree Order of Glory on his 
soldier’s blouse. The same year of 1945 he was assigned to the 
Leningrad School of Counter-espionage “SMERCH”. The name 
was invented by Stalin; it is easy to decode, “Death to spies”. He 
spent forty-five years in the State Security organs!  
Geidar Aliev and General Bobkov established good, kind 
relation at once. 
– First meeting quickly turned into real fellowship, –recalls 
Filipp Denisovich. –I’d like to admit frankly that our relationships 
were far from familiarity. But we got along quite well until his last 
days. 
Bobkov was the Deputy Head of the Union Counter-
espionage; Aliev was the Head of the Second Department of the 
Republican KGB, he often went on business to Moscow. Together 
they planned operations. 
– What operations exactly, Filipp Denisovich? 
Our interlocutor does not give an immediate answer to that 
direct question. 
– Could there be anything relevant to this matter in your home 
archives? –we try to come from the other side. This question is 
answered instantly like a rapier strike.  
– All business papers are kept in the KGB. I can only tell you 
from my memory.  
The window of the study, where the Counsellor to the Board 
Chairman of the Russian Information Agency Novosti Bobkov 
works, looks on Sadovoye Koltso. There is such uproar outside 
that we have to close the window, otherwise the dictaphone will 
record nothing but noise. And there are loads to be recorded. 
– In late 1950s-early 1960s we had to deal with absolutely new 
problems, –says Filipp Denisovich. –At Soviet higher educational 
institutions, including those in Baku, students from many 
countries of the world got their education. Of course, American 
Intelligence immediately tried to use this opportunity. At the very 
first stage we found out some people who were specially sent to 
our institutes. They studied the environment and gathered 
 64 
information which intelligence service might be generally 
interested in. Besides, they had a task to organize excesses, 
disorders that would create an outward appearance of danger for 
those who came to study in the Soviet Union. The matter was 
serious so our interest in Azerbaijan increased along this line as 
well. Aliev and I met frequently, discussed how to deal with this 
situation in a better way, how to create an atmosphere that would 
make studies in our country popular. To make the long story short, 
counter-espionage played not the last part in this matter.  
By the way, Lumumba Peoples’ Friendship University had 
been already opened by that time. Practically immediately we 
detected three agents who worked directly with the embassies’ 
residents in Moscow and prepared provocations among the 
students.  
Naturally we were responsible for security of the strategic 
units, security in industry, on transport, protection of secrets in 
economics, prevention of emergencies.  
I’d like to point out at once that I saw an experienced 
professional in Aliev. Geidar had authority in our circle–many 
other colleagues share this opinion of mine. Among them I can 
name Oleg Mikhailovich Gribanov, a serious member of counter-
espionage, Head of the Soviet intelligence service, a respected 
chekist, who highly valued Aliev as a professional and the Head 
of the Republican Counter-espionage Apparatus; Fyodor 
Alexeyevich Shcherbak, First Deputy Head of Counter-espionage 
Service, first-class member of counter-espionage with a long work 
record and huge professional knowledge, who treated Aliev with 
great respect. I can give other names as well, but it is clear from 
what I said–Aliev was a highly respected man at the State Security 
Committee. This respect was displayed when his candidature was 
approved for the post of the First Deputy Chairman of the 
Republican KGB. It happened in 1964. And Geidar Aliev showed 
himself from the best side at this very important post. Our 
relationships strengthened even more as Aliev was responsible for 
the very matters I dealt with in the Centre. They were national 
relationships, religion and foreign tourism.  
He was one of a few leaders of the republican level who treated 
international matters delicately and tactfully. I appreciated that. 
Bobkov and Aliev conceived and carried out extensive 
sociological research concerning the complex of international 
relationships. At the Institute of Socio-Political Research, which 
was being set up at that time, the Secret Department for 
Sociological Research was organized with Yuri Vladimirovich 
Andropov’s support.  
 65
– Were such studies printed in one copy? 
– Of course, not, –Bobkov appreciated the joke. –We 
submitted them to the Central Committee of the CPSU, but 
unfortunately not all of our proposals gained support. 
 
 
...In one of the documents submitted by the USSR KGB to the 
Party Central Committee, “hostile activity of nationalist elements” 
was analyzed. Note S. Bannikov, Deputy Chairman of the USSR 
State Security Committee, signed No. 2/9-299 of January 17, 
1966.  
“In some areas of the country, especially in Ukraine, 
Transcaucasia, in Baltic republics and some republics of the 
Central Asia we can observe stirring up of hostile activity of 
bourgeois nationalists,” the report said. “Bourgeois nationalists 
focus on recruitment and retention of people, ideological 
indoctrination of politically unstable people, especially among 
intelligentsia and youth, spreading nationalist literature and 
slanderous concoctions concerning our party’s national policy. 
Nationalist elements started extensive use of so-called “legal 
opportunities”, for example, meetings with young poets and 
writers, readings, jubilees of national writers, poets and 
composers, circles for amateur art activities with the aim of 
indoctrinating politically unstable people in the spirit of anti-
Soviet nationalism, ideological training of accomplices and 
attracting new people to their side.” 
Then followed the entire load of examples–Ukraine, Estonia, 
Armenia, Azerbaijan... 
“In 1965 anti-Soviet nationalist group, which called itself 
‘Committee for Protection of the Azerbaijani Language’ was 
discovered in Baku as well. About 70 people at the age of 20-27 
were involved in the group activity; there were 6 CPSU members 
and over 20 Komsomol members among them. Under pretence of 
the Azerbaijani language protection, the group leaders expressed 
the idea of creating independent state, which provided for 
withdrawal from the USSR and expulsion of Russians and 
Armenians from the territory of the Republic. 
“The group members considered it necessary to seize the radio 
station and the television centre with the aim of broadcasting an 
appeal to the Azerbaijanian people to support their demands. They 
also intended to go on a demonstration on November 7, 1965, or 
on May 1, 1966, with the relevant slogans and in case of 
derangement of their demonstration they planned to start armed 
struggle against the existing social order. 
 66 
“It is only natural that the organized hostile activity of the most 
active nationalists, who conscientiously chose the path of struggle 
against the Soviet power, was stopped by the KGB organs by 
arresting them. As for majority of the people who expressed 
nationalist ideas under the influence of bourgeois propaganda and 
anti-Soviet elements due to the lack of political maturity and 
misconception of the essence of the Soviet State’s national policy, 
preventive measures were taken in their respect” (The Russian State 
Archives of National History. F. 5. Оp. 33. C. 235. Pp. 62-65). 
– When Aliev was appointed the Chairman of the Azerbaijan 
KGB, he asked for Vitaly Krasilnikov to be appointed his deputy, –
Bobkov says. –The latter was under my command. He was a 
reliable and very good person. I agreed. I was the Head of the Fifth 
Administration by that time, but our relation remained very good. 
When Geidar Alievich came to Moscow he always visited me. 
Chekists were obliged to protect the constitutional order, stop 
activities of those who chose the path of armed struggle and strove 
to seize the power. But quite often it was they, the chekists, who 
had to correct what party committees; the entire enormous 
ideological apparatus had failed to do. Geidar Aliev spoke about 
this anxiously. 
“In 1967-1968 a considerable increase in the activities of 
foreign Armenian nationalist organizations, especially 
“Dashnaktsutyun” was evident in the republic. Magazine and 
newspaper articles with different demands and appeals of 
nationalist nature were sent to the address of some Soviet 
organizations and the editorial offices of some republican 
newspapers from a number of capitalist countries. Dashnak circles 
abroad exposed certain facts from the life of the republic in a 
distorted way” (an excerpt from the speech at the Plenary Meeting 
of the Central Committee of the Azerbaijan Communist Party on 
August 28, 1968).  
Day after day mass media reiterated over and over again unity 
of the party and the people, inviolable friendship of peoples, but 
latently problems accumulated in the society, they became more 
and more numerous. What was going on in the society? What was 
the cause for mass unrest in a number of cities–Murom, Temirtau, 
Novocherkassk? What political processes were brooding in the 
country? What part did ideological adversaries of the Soviet 
power play in them? The new Directorate for Struggle against 
Subversive Ideological Activity, which was called the Fifth, was 
specially set up to find answers to all these questions. 
 67
Wishing Bobkov success in “the Fifth”, Yuri Vladimirovich 
Andropov said there was a real ideological war and the stake in it 
was–who would defeat whom. 
– We are set to strengthen the Soviet State and our ideological 
adversaries do their best to destroy it, –reasoned Andropov that 
late evening in his large study in Lubyanka. The meeting began at 
22:00; the clock hands were approaching 23:00 at the moment. 
Yuri Vladimirovich showed with all his appearance that the 
meeting was informal: he was without a jacket and from time to 
time thoughtfully pulled at his braces. –We have to know their 
plans and work methods, see the processes going on in the country 
and be aware of public sentiments. It is crucial. We need to use 
different sources–legal institutions, sociological institutes and 
information from the press as well as our security services data. 
Besides phenomena that are on the surface there are secret 
springs... It is essential to learn to identify and understand 
thoroughly inner, deep-laid processes... 
Decade and a half later Andropov, then the General Secretary 
of the Central Committee of the CPSU, would say that it was high 
time to answer the question: “What kind of society we live in?” 
The same words may be found in one of the letters, addressed 
to the Central Committee: “First, it is necessary to find out what 
country we live in...” It’s an amazing coincidence, isn’t it? 
 
  
What Country We Live In 
 
At the very end of 1965, the Party Central Committee–a new 
one, post-Khrushchev–commissioned the editorial offices of 
Pravda, Komsomolskaya pravda and Literaturnaya gazeta to send 
summary reports of letters of “specific character” to the Central 
Committee. 
On January 7, 1966, the editor-in-chief of Literaturnaya gazeta 
A. Chakovsky and the editor-in-chief of Komsomolskaya pravda 
B. Pankin sent excerpts from the letters that “contained wrong 
ideas concerning our state and public life” to the Central 
Committee. On January 11, Pravda sent its report. On first pages 
there were similar notes: “The facts described in the information 
have been studied. The material has been used during preparation 
of the CPSU Central Committee’s document on increasing Soviet 
people’s political vigilance.” Below follow signatures of the 
instructor, the Head of the Sector, the Deputy Head of the 
Propaganda and Agitation Department of the CPSU Central 
Committee… The directive: “To the archives” and the stamp: 
 68 
“Confidential. Special file.” We greatly doubt that anyone else 
read these piercing lines in the Central Committee–at the top! 
 
 
FROM LETTERS TO PRAVDA 
Moscow. Anonymous. 
“Since Lenin’s death the Communist Party has gone too far to 
the right and it cannot get out of this quagmire.  
We have neither justice nor criticism. Stalin’s rule is still in 
effect. Swindlers hold administrative positions. All the party 
members enjoy privileges while common people are in the 
position of Johns who should only work like serfs.  
Trade unions have lost their significance; they don’t protect 
working people.  
The Supreme Soviet has also lost its importance. The Supreme 
Soviet Presidium has the right to confer decorations only upon 
those indicated by the Party. The entire Party has become one big 
cult. The Party allowed huge injustice in the Pension Law. Why is 
it so that some people receive enormous pensions while others 
don’t have enough to live on? Isn’t it high time we resumed the 
Lenin’s path? Trade unions and the USSR Supreme Soviet should 
perform their functions. 
Public control should be on guard then crooks won’t sneak in 
leading positions.” 
 
 
Kaluga. Anonymous. 
“It is a shame to write on the newspaper pages about culture 
and about lofty matters... Give people least normal conditions for 
life. “Man is a friend to man”, but in reality people are beaten and 
killed... One is willing to curse anyone who approves the laws that 
defend bandits. I am writing from Kaluga, where just within one 
week from December 10 to December 17 there were so many foul 
barbarous robberies, Soviet youth’s violence manifested itself in 
open expressions of their ideas concerning everything in an 
absolutely unrestrained manner, while people are made to re-
educate these brutes.  
Look, what the “city of Cosmos” has been turned into; it is a 
disgrace to everyone. Who will help people to walk in the streets 
freely, without fear?” 
 
 
 69
Leningrad. Anonymous. 
“I guess that I express the opinion of majority. Who needs this 
comedy with election of Judges for People’s Courts? And our 
entire election system is all lie and deceit. Who doesn’t feel 
repulsed with electing those who have been already selected? 
That’s why at the sessions they always sit like dummies and 
approve everything they are suggested. Nowadays there are no 
pure, lucid people infinitely devoted to the cause of the working 
class any more like those that were annihilated by thousands in the 
Stalin epoch with tacit consent of those living now.  
Our situation on the eve of the fiftieth anniversary (of the 
Soviet power–Auth.) is not brilliant at all. The people know, see it 
and nothing can be done with it.” 
 
 
Voronezh. P.I. Zamkov. 
“Why do our scientists and writers silence Lenin’s historical 
decree on the NEP (New Economic Policy–translator’s note)? It 
gave a great boost to the country’s industry in the post-
revolutionary period, especially in agriculture. At the time of NEP 
a live hog-bull cost just 12-13 roubles in private markets and 
presently (in old rouble nomination) you won’t buy even a cock 
for this money.  
It is beyond my understanding why the Stalin collective farm 
system is being praised now. It has not proved to be correct. If all 
this modern machinery were in hands of grain-growers of old 
training we would leave all capitalist countries behind. It is no 
point praising and embroidering the collective farm system that 
has proved to be a poor success.” 
 
 
Chimkent, the Kazakh SSR. M.F. Vubov. 
“I have read the article Law and Justice by Doctor of Law 
R. Rakhunov in the Pravda. It is the first such publication after 
Lenin’s death, yet it also contains some dark spots–some ends are 
concealed under water. The author didn’t mention bad work of 
justice. Speaking about infringers of the law it is necessary to 
reveal causes that engender crime in the USSR.  
From the 1930s the slogan “All Power to the Soviets” has lost 
its significance. The Stalin dictatorship has substituted it. All 
power has turned up in the hands of the Communist Party. It rules 
the country though it is not accountable to the people. All 
democratic liberties have fallen. 
 70 
The Constitution of 1936 legalized such situation and it also 
destroyed the system of elections, which was set up by Lenin. 
V.I. Lenin set the party maximum payment of 225 roubles. He got 
215 roubles himself. 
In 1930 Stalin cancelled the maximum set by the leader and 
high salaries emerged. At present the maximum is 700 roubles and 
the minimum is 40 roubles. What is it called in the language of 
Marx, Engels and Lenin–an inside-out revolution?  
Let me ask, “Where are fraternity and equality? What has 
happened to those who discharge grab-alls and robbed the state, 
those that are infected with greed and haughtiness? Where is civil 
conscience and high communist morale? Lenin said that we did 
not have specialists, we did not hire them but bought them and 
paid them much, but they had to work honestly and if they caused 
any damage they would be punished. Stalin bought communists 
with public money and they (communists) made God of Stalin. 
Stalin’s rule caused complete decline to the agriculture. The 
peasantry worked for sticks and lived like serfs for 20 years. What 
justice could there be under such circumstances? At that time 
some really Draconian laws appeared–those of August 7, 1932 
and June 4, 1947 (10-15 years of imprisonment or camps were 
adjudged for a single spikelet brought from the field or for a 
kilogram of bread). From 1930 to 1953 millions of such verdicts 
were passed–majority of them without guilt. They, not heritage of 
the past, are the actual causes that gave and still give rise to crime. 
It is impossible to be born under the new order and then to 
degenerate into the old. 
The CPSU does everything it wants in the country and never 
asks the people. The people are debarred from the country’s rule. 
The people that produce all the values of the state have nothing. 
The subsistence minimum is very low. What did our learned 
men take account of when they set this minimum of 40 roubles? I 
wonder if they had no conscience at all. 
The socialist revolution brought nothing to these people and 
this is another cause of crime. 
The 23rd CPSU Congress has to demonstrate if there are 
enough healthy forces, wise and sound minds to clear up this bog 
and return to genuine Marxist-Leninist positions.” 
 
 
Donetsk Region. Anonymous. 
“We came across the issue of the Pravda newspaper of 1919, 
where Lenin wrote that this newspaper would help people to gain 
understanding of what was going on in our country. The average 
 71
wage of most workers is 60-70 roubles. Is it possible to support a 
family with this money? That’s why we have theft and bribery all 
around. People suffer from hunger and the country has launched 
100 satellites into space–it is millions of roubles. We ask to cut 
food prices and leave wages at their present level. We ask you to 
create a better life on the land not in space. Workers and peasants 
are forced to steal. 80% of people are thieves and swindlers. 
Everyone takes bribes.” 
 
 
Krivoy Rog. Anonymous. 
“Yes, the political system has been changed in the USSR but 
exploitation has remained. Who should I give my voice to? To 
Party functionaries? What do they do? 
They pay 7 roubles instead of 5. They steal from workers, get 
bonuses themselves, and drive in Volgas and the workers get a 
fig’s end. Isn’t it exploitation? And if you dare complain you will 
be sacked at once or even sent to prison. Where is it, freedom of 
speech? This intelligentsia–our exploiters–is Soviet bourgeoisie. 
We are driven towards communism like calves to the 
slaughterhouse; and it is being built on workers’ bones.  
In the USSR workers spend 65% of their wages on food, while 
in the FRG–only 34% and in the USA–only 18%, that is why you 
jam foreign radio broadcasts (the BBC and Radio Liberty) for the 
workers not to hear the truth. I graduated from the Institute of 
Foreign Languages. But I went to work in the mine to earn more. I 
need much money, as I like restaurants, bars. I am only 25 and I 
want to live. I want to run away as a tourist to the USA.” 
 
 
Samarkand Region, Uzbekistan. I.S. Gulyaev. 
“We have bais, shamans and mullahs’ descendants in power. 
There are robbers, saboteurs. That’s why every year in Uzbekistan 
cotton is let rot, public property is destroyed on purpose and 
nobody cares. Who steals and destroys more gets awards. In 1963 
over half cattle and poultry were destroyed, all cotton was spoiled 
and the region received the order of Lenin. They reported the plan 
fulfilled, gross out put and so on. Paper figures and hurrah! 
We don’t have the Soviet power any more, there are capitalists 
on the top, and their chieftains sit in the Kremlin.” 
 72 
FROM LETTERS TO KOMSOMOLSKAYA PRAVDA 
Anonymous. No address. 
“In the issue of the Trud newspaper of June 20, 1965, I read 
the article “For whom the Sun Shines” with title “For Elite”, 
which says: “In the bourgeois West people also have a rest, the 
sun shines there too. But for whom?” 
In the picture there are a few private yachts, whose owners are 
sunbathing, having fun on private beaches, where working people 
are not admitted. They, the rich, don’t worry how and where 
millions of their countrymen would spend their holidays.  
And I wondered what the difference was like between the West 
and the USSR. My conclusion: no difference at all.” 
 
 
Leningrad. Anonymous. 
“Ordinary people of the country have been severely exploited 
for decades. Judge yourselves, what living can be provided with 
50-150 roubles, considering crushing prices... And how “happy” 
are members of collective farms in their servile life deprived of 
rights? They are all even deprived of the Yuryev Day... They 
cannot leave their collective farm to work on production, they 
don’t have passports, they cannot receive any references and 
nobody will hire them anywhere.” 
 
 
Moscow. Anonymous. 
“The principle of socialism–one, who doesn’t work, doesn’t 
eat”. However we have lots of people who just rob and they live 
better than those who work honestly. That means that our 
principle is only on paper... The situation is so bad that even in the 
capital of the state striving to build communism it is dangerous to 
leave home at night and even late in the evening, while we point 
out to America. The question arises. If the problem cannot be 
solved at the top, forming self-defence squads will solve it from 
below. We will eliminate everything that impedes our 
construction work and life. We are workers–the ruling class. It’s 
enough, our Soviet State is nearly 50... It is time to call to order 
‘gilded youth’, they are turning into parasites.” 
 
 
FROM LETTERS TO LITERATURNAYA GAZETA 
Novosibirsk Region. V. Babin. 
“...Here we all think together, jointly discuss our party’s 
policy. I undertook to write. If managers have salaries higher than 
 73
those of workers, there inevitably will be bureaucratism and 
careerism, moral degradation, degeneration, prostitution and 
exploitation. Consequently, salaries of all managers, junior and 
senior, all officials, all representatives should not be higher than 
salaries of workers... 
…Under Stalin there was not only the personality cult created. 
Stalin created an entirely new class–socialist bourgeoisie. He 
created a dictatorship of socialist bourgeoisie. Our people are 
against egalitarianism, they are against bourgeoisie too. 
...There are honest forces in our party and they tried to fight. It 
had effect partially after Stalin’s death. However it turned out to 
be just a forced concession on the part of bourgeois forces. It is 
obvious now that cult of Khrushchev’s personality emerged in an 
artificial way through the fault of the entire Central Committee. It 
is clear that shortcomings were not just Khrushchev’s guilt, but 
also the entire Central Committee. It was beneficial for our 
bourgeoisie to implement its policy through one person’s 
authority. And collective wisdom of this bourgeoisie was realized 
through this single personality. At present there is danger that our 
country will become even more bourgeois that a new period of 
repressions will start, Stalin and Beria times. Why didn’t honest 
forces in our party achieve their complete and final victory? 
Because Stalin’s denunciation was weak, bourgeois salaries were 
only slightly cut. Because these matters were decided in secret 
without involving the party or the people; no support was sought 
from the party and the people.  
...Presently the Party Central Committee’s concern to improve 
people’s life is carried out as follows: directors’ salary will be 
increased from 300 to 600 roubles a month and rank-and-file 
members of collective farms will get from 30 to 40 roubles a 
month. Nowadays our people don’t have any communist 
enthusiasm. Our people have a longing for genuine socialism. 
Unfortunately, no fresh air is felt after the 20th Congress yet. 
There is no democracy yet. Highly paid representatives of our 
authorities–in fact they are representatives of rich class, 
bourgeoisie, not of the entire people. And decisions that they 
make are in interests of their class–bourgeoisie... 
...how many mistakes the present Central Committee made? 
And all of them were scientifically proved. There were lots of 
mistakes, but it is not a major problem. The problem is that the 
people see that there is no conscience in the Party Central 
Committee. No need to subtilize how to keep and justify 
bourgeois dishonest policy. It is necessary to change the whole 
policy. Now you see that the Central Committee has nothing 
 74 
sacred, nothing communist. We used to consider the Central 
Committee members to be the best communists, the most pious 
people, but then we found out that they were the richest people of 
the country... The people think that a communist should be a very 
honest person without a grain of selfishness, a person that loves 
his people and strives to give them happiness, a person that is 
close to the people. And what about the first, leading communist? 
Should he be like Lenin, Dzerzhinsky...? Lies and repressions will 
disappear only when there is no socialist bourgeoisie, when there 
are no the rich and the poor, superiors and inferiors.” 
 
 
Dnepropetrovsk. V. Prikhodko. 
“I have an opinion that either there is a new political crisis in 
the country or a new policy which is near our gates will bring 
back some methods of Stalin’s rule. Neither of these is good for 
the Soviet people. We need a brand-new approach towards reality 
analysis; we need to reconsider some truths that have become 
dogmas. 
First, we have to find out what country we live in, we should 
never forget our Constitution that is the basis of our state. 
Freedom of conscience protects my views, freedom of speech first 
of all means publication in the press, giving publicity to all events 
that take place in our country rather than idle talk. It is clear we 
must not savor mishaps in the country, but concealing them is just 
the other side of the medal: it causes rumors resulting in distrust to 
information in the newspapers, to the government, to the party. 
And this is bad. But little attention is paid to such trifles. The 
crowd remains the crowd. But we use the abstract word “people” 
too frequently, both appropriately and inappropriately.  
...A few words about the CPSU. At present it has 10 million 
people in its ranks. Once Lenin warned against an excessive 
growth of the party and even after the victory of October 
Revolution the doors to the party had never been opened wide, 
except on a few occasions. When the Red Army could not hold up 
the White Guards’ onset and the ring was getting tighter around 
the Soviet power a special enlistment in the party was declared. At 
that time to sign a party membership card was equal to signing the 
death sentence to one. At such times only true communists joined 
the party. It was hardly a luring prospect for rogues. 
...There are 10 million people in the Party now, not 600 
thousand. This figure is so high that I will believe in its content 
only in case one zero disappears. We have forgotten about the 
requirements that V.I. Lenin made for a communist. Present day 
 75
could hardly slacken these requirements. Many people join the 
Party because of benefits but not their views. It may be good that 
increasing the party will involve the majority of the country’s 
population and it will lose its original significance after having 
fulfilled its role. But quantitative growth not accompanied by 
qualitative has never been considered appropriate. 
...Very many miscalculations and mistakes have been made 
both in external and internal life. The CPSU has lost its authority 
as the vanguard of the world communist movement. Its constant 
arguments with China show vain efforts of the two parties to 
impose their slogans on each other. The party leaders were not 
able to find that common core which should exist, but savored 
each other’s shortcomings instead with a satisfaction of two 
quarrelsome neighbors. It is getting frightful. If representatives 
one and the same world cannot understand each other how can 
two diametrically opposite systems coexist? Doesn’t our party 
have more or less strong theoreticians of Marxism-Leninism who 
would be able to find the only correct Leninist path for our further 
development, the only correct Leninist view on the present day? 
Moreover, mere adjusting of Lenin’s formulas to suit the present 
day won’t do, a much more difficult way of further development 
of Leninist principles should be taken.  
...Nowadays various groupings in communist, working and 
liberation movements play with Lenin’s name and each one 
considers itself right. And what does a worker, an ordinary Soviet 
worker (be it a party member or not–which does not matter in 
fact) think? The worker says, “Existence determines 
consciousness”. So give me what I need for life, provide such 
conditions as will set my mind free of those urgent concerns for 
the next day, as will remove the necessity for our wives and 
mothers to spend most part of their “free” time rushing from one 
store to another... It is then and only then my consciousness will 
rise to the level when I will start pondering on the matters like 
whether I was right eating a piece of white bread and butter, when 
children die of hunger on the other side of the planet. Here is what 
the worker says. And he is not happy with our excessive 
“kindness”. We worry so much about our “friends” that often 
forgets about ourselves. We build hundreds of enterprises in other 
countries, grant very favorable loans, and sign all trade 
agreements that we are offered. At the same time we don’t refuse 
the loans borrowed from the Bank of England, working for 
capitalists in a way. The standard of living is low in our country as 
compared to other countries and we cannot put the blame only on 
to bombs and rockets. 
 76 
...Our Soviet people are able to understand all the 
responsibility for the mission laid upon their shoulders. But if an 
ordinary citizen of the USSR has to possess such high morale how 
much higher the requirements should be for people who have 
power over us in their hands... 
...If everything remains, as it is the danger of repeating our old 
mistakes will be a permanent threat as well. We should be a bit 
more modest, we should be less loud crying about our merits. We 
should not conceal our shortcomings so much and should not pay 
so much attention to our leaders.  
I am not a communist, not even a komsomol member. But I 
want neither our words to conflict with our deeds, nor 
disappearance of “personalities” amidst us, nor coup d'etats. We 
have perfect collective organs of management that can rule the 
country, don’t we?” 
 
 
Kiev. N. Kiselyova. 
“I think with fear what to say to my children when they ask 
me, –Are you a communist, tell me? What shall I answer? Take 
tram 30 in Kiev and go to the stop “Kopylenko”. You will see the 
“Grocer’s shop”. It is not an ordinary “Grocer’s shop”. “Ordinary 
people”, as it is customary to say in our country, call it 
“Leftovers”. The leftover foodstuffs that have been sold to party 
functionaries are sold there. The Central Committee members buy 
them at other prices, for next to nothing. There are special 
hospitals and chemists’, and even hotels. This is appalling!” 
 
 
Moscow. Gromov. 
“All our existence and privileged state according to various 
aspects–social, party and other–in fact have caused our society’s 
division. We haven’t been able to take people from cellars even 
here in Moscow for 47 years whereas “leading figures” live in 
such spacious flats that create a rather high average housing 
standard of about 10 square metres for a person... “People” are 
offered to join cooperative societies whereas “leading figures” get 
flats free in mansions... People push their way with their sides and 
arms from Medvedkovo-Mazilovo on a public transport to work 
places, whereas “leading figures” drive in state cars from one 
street to another in the city centre... 95% of our people spend their 
holidays in an unorganized way without any medical treatment (as 
the All-Union Central Trade Union Council provides only 5-7 % 
of workers with vouchers), whereas “leading figures” get 
 77
vouchers free and relax on empty beaches, where they are taken 
by lifts (Upper and Lower Oreanda, sanatorium “Ukraine” and 
others).” 
 
 
These letters to the editorial offices of the three popular 
newspapers were sent to the Party Central Committee at the 
beginning of 1965. It was the very start of Brezhnev’s epoch, 
Kosygin reforms. People still believed in changes. And they 
demanded–mind it! –“To make clear what country we live in”. 
Years later this idea was repeated almost word for word by 
Yuri Vladimirovich Andropov, when he became General 
Secretary, “First, we have to make clear what country we live 
in...” He didn’t have enough time to do that, and his successors–
Chernenko, Gorbachyov–were busy with other things.  
 
 
...Every twentieth day of a month the people received salaries 
in the Azerbaijan KGB. Some wags called this long-awaited day 
the Day of Chekists. On the same day communists paid their dues 
at the party committee. The secretary of the party committee 
Bystrov decided to come to the new Chairman of the KGB Geidar 
Aliev himself.  
– Comrade Bystrov, –Aliev told him, when he found out the 
purpose of his visit, –communists have to bring their dues 
themselves to you. Go to your office, I will come to you.” 
 78 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 5 
AT THE HEAD OF THE REPUBLIC 
 
 
July 14, 1969, Baku 
 
Minutes No. 16 of the Plenary Meeting of the Central 
Committee of the Azerbaijan Communist Party (in the original 
document all the words are written with a capital letter) of July 14, 
1969. There are seven typewritten pages with the stamp “Top 
Secret”. The agenda: “Organizational issue. About the First 
Secretary of the Central Committee of the Azerbaijan Communist 
Party”. 
It is obvious that such an organizational issue couldn’t be 
discussed without an eminent guest from Moscow. Ivan 
Vasilyevich Kapitonov, Secretary of the CPSU Central Committee 
arrived in Baku. He was the first to be given the floor. 
– You know, –Kapitonov addressed the audience, –that for the 
last ten years comrade Veli Yusufovich Akhundov has been 
working as First Secretary of the Central Committee of the 
Azerbaijan Communist Party. Comrade Akhundov did his best 
and gave a lot of effort to develop the republic’s economy and 
culture, to improve party-organizational and ideological work. 
Lately the condition of comrade Akhundov’s health has got worse 
and he understands that it has become hard for him to carry out an 
important and difficult job of the First Secretary of the Central 
Committee of the Azerbaijan Communist Party. On this account 
he applied the CPSU Central Committee with a request to transfer 
him to a scientific work. 
The request of the Doctor of Medicine and the Academician of 
late was satisfied. The same day, on the eve of the Plenary 
Meeting, he was elected Vice-President of the Republican 
Academy of Sciences... 
– Naturally, –continues Kapitonov, –releasing comrade 
Akhundov from the duties of Secretary and Bureau Member of the 
Central Committee of the Azerbaijan Communist Party gives rise 
to another issue. –We have to name his successor now. –A lot of 
candidatures have been considered for the post of First Secretary 
 79
of the Central Committee of the Azerbaijan Communist Party and 
it is quite understandable, quite natural, as there are many 
competent people in the republic and of course there is a wide 
choice if we may say so.  
After thorough “and comprehensive studies and consideration 
of this issue we made our choice in favor of comrade G.A. Aliev, 
who presently works as Chairman of the State Security Committee 
of your republic...” 
This information was hardly a surprise for anyone present. 
Veli Akhundov has really been ill; he has been getting treatment 
in Moscow for about three months. During his meeting with 
Brezhnev, when he asked to be transferred to a scientific work, he 
even produced a medical certificate; spoke about “pangs of 
remorse” for inability to pay proper attention to the problems of 
the republic. Of course, Akhundov mentioned names of his 
potential successors. But this time the choice was not his.  
At the beginning of 1969, as Geidar Alievich remembered 
later, he received a call from his old friend from Moscow. He was 
one of those who are said to know everything. He told Aliev: 
“Geidar, you are the only candidate for the post of First Secretary 
of the Central Committee of the Azerbaijan Communist Party!” It 
was unexpected news for Aliev: “It is impossible. I don’t think I 
may be offered such a position. Why am I unaware of this?” –
“The time will come and you’ll know. And now, Geidar, get ready 
for a new job!” 
In about three months time after this conversation Geidar Aliev 
was invited to Moscow for a meeting with the General Secretary 
of the CPSU Central Committee. Here are his recollections of 
these turn-point events in his life: 
“I went to the Kremlin to Brezhnev’s working office. Leonid 
Ilyich welcomed me with an open smile. The following 
conversation took place between us: 
– Comrade Aliev, we have come to a decision to offer your 
candidature for the post of First Secretary of the Central 
Committee of the Azerbaijan Communist Party. 
– I consider it to be a great honor to me, comrade Brezhnev. 
But I don’t want this position. 
– How can it be that you don’t want?! –Brezhnev was 
surprised, switching from official to a friendly form of address. –
We entrust such an important post to you. 
– It is not easy to be First Secretary of the Central Committee 
of the Republic’s Communist Party. That is why I don’t want it. 
But Leonid Ilyich didn’t pay heed to my objections. It was 
obvious that he had made up his mind. And having discussed my 
 80 
candidature the Politburo came to an agreement that only Aliev 
would be suitable in the present state of the Republic.” 
These lines were written many years after the memorable 
conversation in the Kremlin. Recollecting it Aliev noted that 
among his advantages were “work in the KGB, clear personal 
records, trust gained by me, and love on the part of the 
Azerbaijanians. To be more exact I supposed so...” 
Moscow made its choice. It was clear that Baku would approve 
it. But what reservations would be made? It is interesting to read a 
farewell speech of the leaving first secretary to his successor: 
“Comrade Aliev has all the qualities–political and business–to 
become a good first secretary of the Central Committee of the 
Azerbaijan Communist Party. He is well-educated and has enough 
overall training to cope with a considerable volume of work in a 
short period, he is true to the party spirit and is unbiased to all 
party cadres, and the cadre issue is a crucial one in Azerbaijan, 
taking into account the past and the present; we know him as on 
honest, trustworthy communist” (The Central State Archives of 
Political Parties and Movements. AR.F.1.Op.56.D.4.L.5). 
And here is what Geidar Aliev said right after being elected as 
First Secretary: 
“I am aware of the responsibility in connection with assuming 
this office, I understand complexity and difficulty of the task that 
are ahead and I would like to assure that I will do everything in 
my power to justify this great and high trust. Moreover, I rely and 
hope to receive support and assistance of the entire Central 
Committee of the Azerbaijan Communist Party, Members of the 
Central Committee Bureau, all leading party, Soviet and executive 
personnel of our Republic. I suppose that active joint friendly 
work may be the guarantee of our future success” (Ibid. 
F.1.Op.56.D.4.L.16). 
Aliev’s election aroused a great response in Azerbaijan, 
throughout the Soviet Union, and abroad as well. It was not a year 
yet since the notorious events in Prague, when Soviet tanks put an 
end to the short history of “Prague spring”. The Kremlin 
ideologists turned screws tight in all directions. And transfer of 
Chairman of the KGB of a large republic to the party hierarchy 
(everyone saw how and why it was done) was a clear signal both 
to the party cadres and to the liberals.  
Since then Geidar Aliev has more than once repeated as a joke 
that in his biography, in his personal calendar there is his own 
Bastille Day. Of course the analogy with Paris events of 1789 is 
conventional. The hero of our narration did not storm bulwark of 
power. The new position (and new large-scale responsibility) 
 81
always came to him as a deserved recognition of what he had 
already done, as confidence in the fact that this person of inborn 
talent was able to cope with greater deeds. 
Summing up his recollections of the meeting with Leonid 
Ilyich Brezhnev and subsequent election to the post of First 
Secretary, Geidar Aliev said that this change in his destiny gave 
him “opportunity to serve better to his own people, his nation”. 
Filipp Denisovich Bobkov was the first whom Aliev met after 
the visit to Brezhnev. The Army General remembers that bygone 
meeting in all details until now. 
“All of a sudden, without a call, Aliev comes to me. It is quite 
evident that he is embarrassed with something. 
– Filipp, can I ask you for a private talk without anybody’s 
interference? 
– Of course, –I answered and disconnected all telephones.  
Geidar said that he was just from Brezhnev. There was a 
proposal to elect him, Aliev, as First Secretary of the Party Central 
Committee of the Republic.  
– I came just to have a talk, to get advice. I don’t want to go 
anywhere else. Though I have already agreed to it. 
At this moment Semyon Kuzmich Tsvigun, Deputy Chairman 
of the USSR KGB, got connected on the direct line. Before his 
transfer to Moscow he headed the State Security Committee of 
Azerbaijan and was considered to be Brezhnev’s close friend–they 
worked together in Moldavia in the post-war period.  
– Listen, Filipp Denisovich, have you seen Aliev lately? 
– Why? 
– Well, they reported from the control post that he had come to 
the Committee and I cannot find him. 
Geidar pleaded with a gesture: “Don’t tell him I am here.” 
– I will tell him to come to you if I see him, –I replied. 
And we continued our tête-à-tête conversation. “Surely I 
couldn’t reject Brezhnev’s offer, –said Aliev, –it is great trust.” 
He was thinking over what to start with: to overcome the 
republic’s lagging behind was impossible without the most severe 
struggle against corruption that corroded the whole society.” 
 
 
“Tell me, is he an honest man?” 
 
They met again a couple of years later in Baku. To Bobkov’s 
question, if he had managed to defeat corruption, Geidar Alievich 
said the following: “I can only guarantee that nobody takes bribes 
in the Central Committee of the Azerbaijan Communist Party.” 
 82 
And what about the CPSU Central Committee? It is a naive 
question. The same Bobkov in his book KGB and the Power wrote 
about unimaginably expensive presents to Brezhnev–in Georgia, 
for example, dear Leonid Ilyich was presented with a golden 
samovar, in Uzbekistan dear Andrei Pavlovich Kirilenko, a 
Politburo member, Secretary and Ilyich’s intimate friend received 
“fur-coats for his wife and daughter made of unique astrakhan of 
special currying” from the First Secretary of the Central 
Committee of the Communist Party of the Republic Sharif 
Rashidov. 
Everybody or almost everybody accepted presents. The 
exceptions among the top authority in assessment of such an 
informed person as the First Deputy of the KGB Chairman 
F.D. Bobkov were few–A.N. Kosygin, Yu.V. Andropov... 
Prominent organizers, morally pure and decent, grouped around 
them. There were quite a few such people in republics, areas and 
regions: Vladimir Vasilyevich Shcherbitsky and Alexander 
Pavlovich Lyashko in Ukraine, Peter Mironovich Masherov in 
Byelorussia, Geidar Alievich Aliev in Azerbaijan, Nikolai 
Ivanovich Ryzhkov in Sverdlovsk, Vladimir Ivanovich Dolgikh in 
the Krasnoyarsk Territory, Vladimir Kuzmich Gusev in Saratov. 
They were party and state leaders of a new formation, who 
considered service to the people’s interests not as a hackneyed 
phrase or a political stock phrase, which set everybody’s teeth on 
edge, but primarily as high service, life devoted to others. 
On becoming Head of the Republic Geidar Aliev already knew 
its cadres in general. He saw which segments should be 
strengthened–or using the party language–which should be get rid 
off. His favorite question when discussing a new appointment 
was, “Tell me, and is he a decent man?” Then it was followed by 
questions about his business qualification, ability to work with 
people and many many others. 
But first of all–the candidate’s decency? Honesty? Otherwise it 
was impossible to break the vicious cover-up of thieves and bribe-
takers. Here is a typical for Azerbaijan of 1960s (and not only of 
Azerbaijan) story: a state farm director is released from his job for 
bribes and is immediately given the same post in another region. 
Communist Ramiz Tagir ogly Tagirov wrote to the CPSU Central 
Committee: 
“I ask you to read my short story, which is very important for 
our state, our people and our party due to the ideas set forth 
below.” This non-indifferent person wrote with pain about a 
perished vineyard, spoilt apricot garden and about smart dealers 
who “plant melons and water-melons on 20-30 hectares every 
 83
year and then sell them for their own profit. This is deceit of the 
state, the party and the people.” 
In another region collective farmers rejected the candidature of 
a chairman that had been caught stealing. The Secretary of the 
District Party Committee summoned militiamen to the meeting. 
People cried, “All of us read newspapers and magazines! Now 
nobody elects the collective farm chairman under threats and with 
militiamen.” It reminded of habits that ruled in the times of 
Sephevid State (16th century), when a word of mouth passed from 
man to man in Azerbaijan: “Who is a burden to your region?” 
Who is a burden and not who rules... 
…Nazim Ibragimov was quite a successful scientist and 
production worker. He headed a geological party, defended a 
thesis for a candidate’s degree, wrote a thesis for a Doctor’s 
degree, and gave time to social work and to sports. He saw his 
future in science, in industry but not in a full-time party activity. 
However the First Secretary of the Central Committee of the 
Republican Communist Party Geidar Aliev knew better. In his 
opinion people of such turn of mind, young and energetic, highly 
qualified and undoubtedly decent were needed in party 
committees. In short in January 1971 Nazim Sadykovich 
Ibragimov was invited for a talk to the City Party Committee, then 
to the Central Committee–he was recommended for the post of 
First Secretary of Oktyabrsky District Party Committee.  
The conversation of the First Secretary of the Central 
Committee with the young scientist-communist lasted two hours. 
Nazim was 35 at that time. Even now at 70 he remembers that 
cordial dialog-parting words. Aliev pointed out main directions of 
work of one of the largest party organizations of the capital, which 
included scientific research institutes, higher educational 
institutions, industrial corporations, and warned: 
– Bear in mind that the district party committee secretary is 
always in the spotlight–everyone pays attention to how he speaks 
to people, how available he is, even how he gets into the car... Try 
to remain an ordinary man but not a party functionary even in the 
position of the secretary. 
At that time there were ten districts in Baku, so there were ten 
district party committees. 
– Later Geidar Alievich was reproached for nominating only 
people from his native town of Nakhichevan, –says Ibragimov. –
But there was no one among us, first secretaries, from 
Nakhichevan. For example, I was born in Baku; a Russian 
comrade headed Karadag district committee; Kirov district by an 
Armenian, one colleague was invited from Shemakhi... No, clans 
 84 
have nothing to do with it. All of us came from science or industry 
and worked like hell... 
Communists of Oktyabrsky district of Baku elected Nazim 
Ibragimov as their leader three more times. The First Secretary of 
the Central Committee frequently visited his district; he seemed to 
know everything about his nominee, but before every new election 
conference he always invited him to his office for as long a 
conversation as the first one. He was interested in his plans, 
suggestions and worries. 
– I was an absolutely free person, –sighed Ibragimov, –I didn’t 
even suspect that someone would write anonymous letters about 
me. 
– Ibragimov, remember one thing, –told me Aliev then. –You 
should live in such a way that all these conjectures would never be 
confirmed. –And he put his hand on the file that was close at his 
hand. 
Later on Aliev’s recommendation Ibragimov became Head of 
the Republican State Publishing Committee. The First Secretary 
did not set going anonymous letters against those people whose he 
was sure of. Probably he expected similar attitude towards 
himself. However, when in his Moscow period the Central 
Committee and the Council of Ministers were flooded with 
anonymous letters and denunciations against the First Deputy 
Chairman of the Union Government, only Nikolai Ivanovich 
Ryzhkov was wise enough to believe Aliev but not to fabricated 
papers. But it is not time for this story yet. 
 
 
Giving advice to Aliev his predecessor recommended, 
“treating all our cadres equally...” In principle it is a correct 
wording. It may mean to be objective, appraise people according 
to their attitude towards work... Or according to their personal 
loyalty to the previous leader? The new First Secretary very soon 
let everyone understand that he would not be “equal towards all 
our cadres”, that there was no more place for bribe-takers, 
scroungers and smart dealers in the leadership of party 
organizations, ministries and agencies, enterprises and higher 
educational institutions. 
In the archives we looked through dozens, hundreds of cases 
that were considered in the Central Committee of the Azerbaijan 
Communist Party–equal requirements, strict and based on 
principle, regardless their positions. In the assessment of Igor 
Sinitsyn, an assistant Chairman of the USSR KGB, Geidar Aliev 
 85
was very close to Andropov in respect of his business qualities 
and his hatred of corruption. 
“Checkup of the received letters and signals established that 
Deputy Head of Organizational Party Work Department of the 
Central Committee of the Azerbaijan Communist Party 
D.N. Bagirov committed some unworthy actions that are 
compromising for a party worker and a communist. 
“Bagirov lived beyond his means and in order to conceal that 
fact he committed various machinations. For instance, he bought a 
car, received a land plot in the countryside and built a mansion, a 
swimming-pool and a garage built in it in dummies’ names... 
There are no vouchers for most of the construction materials. 
“For actions undermining the title of a communist, in 
particular use of official position for selfish ends, moral 
degradation and insincere behavior Djamal Nasreddin ogly 
Bagirov, a CPSU member from 1961, party card No. 02800043 is 
to be relieved from his post of Deputy Head of the Organizational 
Party Work Department of the Central Committee of the 
Azerbaijan Communist Party and expelled from the ranks of the 
CPSU.” 
...In Shemakhinsky district facts of mass bribery have been 
discovered in the Pedagogical School, and of abusing official 
status by some functionaries, and of thefts in large volumes... The 
Central Committee of the Azerbaijan Communist Party dismisses 
First Secretary of the Shemakhinsky District Party Committee 
comrade S.A. Sailov from his position and proposes, “to consider 
the question of his party responsibility in connection with the 
results of the complex check up of the work of the Shemakhinsky 
District Party Committee”. 
There were similar cases in the Kirovabad and Khachmassky 
District Party Committees, the Republican Trade-union 
Committee of Construction Workers and Construction Material 
Manufacture, the Azerbaijan State Institute of Arts named after 
M.A. Aliev and the Republican Office of Public Prosecutors... 
Yes, there were no untouchables. The First Secretary of the 
Central Committee believed that only in this way, in an open 
struggle it was possible to cope with vice, though both in Moscow 
and his colleagues in other republics criticized him for glasnost 
that had not become fashionable yet.  
– I remember as in 1975 we dismissed a first secretary of a 
district party committee from his post, expelled him from the 
Party and handed his case to court, and everything about this case 
was published in our newspapers, on two columns, one of the first 
 86 
secretaries from some other republic asked me during our 
meeting: “Why did you do that?” 
“He said that some first secretaries of district party committees 
came to him and complained that Aliev compromised the institute 
of first secretaries of district party committees. And I asked him, 
‘Do you agree with this?’ He said, ‘I don’t agree with it. But why 
should we make it available to the public?’ I replied, ‘If they 
compromised themselves, in what way do I compromise them? I 
punish one, two, three people for their serious misdemeanors or 
even crimes, not merely for mistakes, and make it available to the 
public of Azerbaijan to save others to prevent them from 
following this way” (From a talk with Russian and Scandinavian 
journalists on March 11, 2001, Baku). 
...In early 1970s Aliev got acquainted with Boris Pastukhov, 
who was Second Secretary of the Central Committee of the All-
Union Leninist Communist League of Youth. Boris Nikolayevich 
came to the Congress of the Republican Komsomol. Assessing 
Aliev’s first steps at party work he emphasized his keen attention 
to the youth. 
First of all a call to work with the youth Aliev addressed to 
himself. The talented mathematician Fatima Abdullazadeh was 
among first republican grant-receivers sent to Moscow. Neither 
she, now Dr. Sc. (Physics and Mathematics), nor the country 
President forgot about it. Here are the results of Aliev’s care for 
the youth that years and decades later are still obvious. 
– We were present at the Congress of the Azerbaijan 
Komsomol together with cosmonaut Patsaev who later perished 
during the flight together with Dobrovolsky and Volkov, –
remembers Boris Pastukhov. –I was astonished with how curious 
Aliev was, how he was attracted to this cosmonaut, how he 
questioned him; there was nothing formal, official in it. I felt for 
the first time then that this man could e carried away, in a word, 
he was not lazy and apathetic. 
Years passed and Boris Nikolayevich became First Secretary 
of the Central Committee of the VLKSM. Once he came home 
from work, sat down to have some tea in the kitchen. The phone 
rang. It was Aliev from Baku. 
– I am talking to a candidate-member of the Politburo of the 
Central Committee of the CPSU, First Secretary of the Central 
Committee of the Azerbaijan Communist Party from my kitchen, 
–tells Pastukhov. –He asks me about Vagif Guseinov, a Secretary 
of the Central Committee of the VLKSM: –Tell me, if he is an 
honest person, please? 
 87
I see that it is a matter of cadre promotion and ask Geidar 
Alievich about his plans. 
– We want to call him back and appoint him First Secretary of 
Baku City Party Committee. 
Baku, the capital of the Republic, has a large party 
organization... My first reaction was as follows: Of course, he is a 
trustworthy person and, Geidar Alievich, I’m sorry to say, but I 
will sin against my conscience if I won’t. This promotion seems 
rather bold to me. He is a journalist and a humanitarian... Aliev 
listens then repeats his question again: 
– I only need to know, if he is an honest, decent man. 
– As far as I know him, –I answer, –this is a trustworthy, 
honest person; he works a lot; he is modest; he is bright and 
talented; but will he be able to cope with that hard work... 
– This is another question. You just tell me for sure, if he is an 
honest man or not. –And he finished our conversation with the 
phrase: –All right, I’ll have consultations with the CPSU Central 
Committee secretaries tomorrow and later I’ll call you back. 
The next day he called me and said: “We have discussed 
thoroughly your opinion as well, but still we’ve made a decision 
to give way to the young! 
 
 
Feeling of Fulfilled Duty 
 
On March 30, 1971, the 24th CPSU Congress started its work 
in Moscow. On April 1 at the morning meeting Aliev made a 
speech–he was on the Congress rostrum for the first time. He 
behaved with confidence and told about “triumph of all-
conquering Marxist-Leninist ideas”, about approaching of our 
“communist tomorrow”, about Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev’s 
indefatigable activity... But it was just a prelude common for all 
speakers. 
But the rest of his speech was to the point: on the ways of 
overcoming lag in the development of productive forces in the 
republic, on carrying out the resolution of the CPSU Central 
Committee and the USSR Council of Ministers “On Measures for 
Further Development of National Economy and Agriculture of 
Azerbaijan SSR” approved a year ago in 1970.  
– During the current five-year period Azerbaijan plans to put 
over 100 new enterprises into operation–almost twice as many as 
during the previous five-year period, –said First Secretary of the 
Central Committee of the Azerbaijan Communist Party. –Modern 
machine-building branches of industry are to be created in the 
 88 
Republic, oil-refining industry and railway transport are to be 
reconstructed and accelerated development shall be ensured in 
chemical, food and some other branches of industry. 
Comrades, let me on behalf of the party organization and all 
the working people of the Republic ardently and cordially thank 
the Central Committee of our Party for its care and great help 
provided for the Azerbaijan SSR and assure you that we will put 
our gratitude into particular deeds. 
Five years later on the rostrum of the 25th CPSU Congress he 
had the right to say: 
– With a feeling of fulfilled duty we report that the tasks set 
forth for Azerbaijan have been successfully put to life. Long-
standing lag in economy has been overcome, there has been 
achieved a radical turn in its development. For the first time in 
many years the five-year plan has been fulfilled according to 
major economic indexes and moreover it has been fulfilled ahead 
of time! Azerbaijan has achieved such high rate of economic 
growth, as we never had before. 
 
 
In May 2000 President of Azerbaijan came to Gandzha; one of 
the meetings was with workers and specialists of the alumina 
manufacturing plant. It manufactured its first products in 1969. It 
was obvious that Geidar Alievich was pleased to remember that 
great event–not only in the republican scale. 
– In 1969 I was elected as Head of Azerbaijan. At that time 
this plant was in a difficult situation. As, on the one hand, there 
were some construction-installation works under way–many shops 
had not been put into operation yet. On the other hand, the plant 
had started operation, –said the President at his meeting with the 
plant’s working collective. –At that time I discussed the progress 
of work at the plant construction practically every day... The 
process was going on very slowly. It is good you have such a great 
collective of engineers, technicians, highly qualified workers, and 
specialists now. But then it was not so... We did not have cadres 
necessary to ensure production. We had to invite most people 
from Russia and other regions of the USSR.” 
It is amazing that three decades later Geidar Aliev even 
remembered the surname of the first director of the plant–Yamov. 
The plant was put into operation and immediately some 
problems emerged nobody thought of at the stage of design, or 
even if they were discussed, it was decided to economize as 
purifying structures were put into operation at that time much 
later. In short, day after day dust fell from the skies on the city, its 
 89
surroundings, the mausoleum of great Nizami Gandjevi (1141-
1209), whose creations were connected with Gandzha. The 
workers of culture sounded the alarm. They remembered the 
philosopher’s behests: 
“Consider love for this land as your duty. Don’t be 
ungrateful.” 
– I remember, –continued Geidar Alievich at the meeting in 
Gandzha, –poet Rasul Rza, composers Kara Karaev and Fikret 
Amirov, poet Suleiman Rustam and a number of others addressed 
a letter to me personally. They expressed their concern in 
connection with the fact that the mausoleum of Nizami was in 
such poor condition. Since the plant had been erected and it was 
impossible to move it to some other place, they saw the way out in 
moving Nizami’s tomb to a place where it would not be made 
dirty... I remember that we were put before an option: either to 
move Nizami’s tomb or to destroy the plant. Such plants can be 
erected and put down, but Nizami is such invaluable treasure for 
us, that it can be compared with nothing else. So transferring 
Nizami’s mausoleum–from the moral point of view–would be a 
crime on our part, we just were unable to do that... 
The problems of the plant could not be solved on the spot. So 
the First Secretary of the Central Committee applied to Moscow 
for help. Chairman of the USSR Council of Ministers Alexei 
Nikolayevich Kosygin received him. He said from the start: 
– If you started something, you should carry it to the end. But 
you come and complain each time–something got covered with 
dust in one place, something else broke down in another place. 
Kosygin reminded Aliev of the case with the Kirovabad plant.  
...In early 1950s First Secretary of the Central Committee of 
the Republican Communist Party Bagirov came to the reception 
with Joseph Vissarionovich Stalin with a sample of alunite, 
excavated in Dashkesan. He reported with great pride that alumina 
could be made of it, and, as it is known, it is impossible to 
manufacture any aluminium, so called flying metal, without 
alumina. In world practice alumina is made of bauxites, but there 
was no enough bauxite in the Soviet Union, there is no enough of 
it in Russia either; export supplies are used. 
In general Stalin supported Bagirov’s suggestion to set up a 
strategically important alumina manufacture in Azerbaijan and 
assigned Kosygin, his deputy in the Council of Ministers at that 
time, to “see to this matter”. 
– And I saw to it, –Alexei Nikolayevich told Aliev, –the 
project was prepared, specialists were sent. And now you come to 
me with one or another complaint. 
 90 
Recollecting this bygone event, President of Azerbaijan 
questioned the correctness of their decision: “Didn’t we make a 
mistake?” Then he answered assuredly: 
– No. Alunite is actually very useful mineral wealth, a gift of 
the nature, and we have to utilize it. But we should use high 
technology in order to manufacture quality produce and don’t 
spoil and pollute the environment. 
At the suggestion of the First secretary of the Central 
Committee, a special competent committee was set up that 
consisted of leading scientists and industrialists of the Republic. 
Finally we managed to “reconcile” the great classic of our national 
literature with his industrial surrounding. Now alumina is 
delivered for processing to Russia and Tajikistan and the plant has 
perfect prospects–including new jobs, which the Republic needs 
so much. 
In Maydays of 2000 President of Azerbaijan visited the 
instrument-making plant “Djikhaz” as well. Among others they 
produce meters for hot and cold water there. And again Geidar 
Alievich remembered the 1970s.  
– In 1975 we approved a very significant resolution on 
developing instrument-making industry in Azerbaijan, in fact the 
resolution was not our initiative, the Central Committee of the 
Communist Party and the Council of Ministers of the Soviet 
Union initiated it. On the basis of that resolution we set up many 
instrument-making enterprises in Azerbaijan. The resolution 
provided for development of this plant in particular... The plant 
has a brilliant future... It makes me happy as I did a lot for its 
development and modernization at that time. Today I am certain 
that our efforts were not in vein; they have yielded fruit. 
Nowadays Azerbaijan and external market need this plant very 
much.  
The Soviet epoch was more than once painted in black colors. I 
remember Sadovoye Ring in Moscow in November 1990 crowded 
by confused people. The fooled people carried transparencies in 
which the number “73”–the age of the Soviet power–was crossed 
with a black cross. Though very soon they got sober–when their 
scientific research institutes had been closed and junior and senior 
scientific workers, candidates and doctors of sciences had been 
thrown out. Know your place in the market: line up near metro 
stations and sell cigarettes, clothes, bread and kefir...  
Geidar Aliev never renounced the past that means himself. 
Assessing 70 years of the Soviet history of Azerbaijan he states 
with confidence: 
 91
– Within these years science, education, culture and economy 
of Azerbaijan developed in a headlong way. The appearance of 
Azerbaijan changed, our republic got stronger and huge 
intellectual potential was created in Azerbaijan. 
It is really so. There were seventy years of the Soviet power 
and for the period of fourteen years within it Geidar Aliev was at 
the Head of the Republic. He managed to push significantly 
forward economy, science, and education, to help to the revival of 
the people’s spiritual memory. Here is impartial statistics: during 
the period of his rule in Azerbaijan 1,155 libraries, 1,316 clubs, 
849 schools and 44 museums were opened. His name is associated 
with setting up a boarding school with military specialization in 
1971, which was first, such educational institution in the republic. 
Now it is a military lyceum named after Djamshid 
Nakhichevansky, military leader well known in Azerbaijan. He 
was decorated with St. George’s cross and awarded silver armor 
for bravery during the First World War and commanded a division 
in the Soviet times. Geidar Aliev followed the formation and 
development of the lyceum, according to him, like it was his own 
child. And it was also a reserve for the future–preparation of its 
own officer cadres.  
In October 1975 there were Days of Soviet Literature in Baku. 
Most popular poets and writers from all over the large country 
came to the capital of the Soviet Azerbaijan. They had meetings 
with readers, participated in grand opening of Samed Vurgun’s 
Memorial House–Geidar Alievich recited his poems since his 
young years. At the initiative of the First Secretary of the Central 
Committee a monument to the other great poet Djafar Djabarly 
was opened on March 23, 1982. A bit earlier Aliev visited snow-
covered town of Shusha and cut a ribbon at the opening of Molla-
Panakh Vagif’s mausoleum, where he made an excited speech... 
Could anybody imagine then that just a decade later a war 
cannonade would roar over the blessed Shusha and’ sub-machine 
gun fire of “liberators’ would cleave the monument to the great 
humanist?! 
Fourteen years at the head of the Republic... We happened to 
hear idle talks of whether the leader of the Republic had a concept 
for the development of Azerbaijan or being guided by his flawless 
intuition solved emerging tasks one by one. I think there is no 
ground for arguments. Planned economy determined prospects of 
Azerbaijan in a single economic complex of the Union. By late 
1960s the Republic lagged behind the All-Union indices in most 
spheres of national economy. It was necessary to develop new 
industries, create new jobs. But first of all it was essential to take 
 92 
oil industry out of crisis. By late 1960s oil production decreased 
by 1.3 million tons and gas production by 659 million cubic 
meters a year. 
Oil, gas and coal were of special importance in the 
Government of the Union. The Chairman of the USSR Council of 
Ministers Kosygin dealt with energetics sector personally. 
Speaking about this period in Aliev’s activity let us quote the 
fundamental study “Azerbaijan Oil in World Politics”. Its authors 
Ilkham Aliev and Akif Muradverdiev notice that the First 
Secretary of the Central Committee disclosed “actual causes for 
long-lasting lagging and tension in this important sector of 
industry”. 
What was going on in the industry, which the republic had 
been always proud of? Geological prospecting lagged behind. The 
resources were scattered. There were more and more accidents. 
Oil wells fell out of operation. Moreover, for ten years (1960-
1970) “about 45% of all capital investments in the republican 
industry was allocated to development of oil industry”. Yet from 
1966 oil production fell year after year. Aliev met many 
specialists–scientists and industrialists, engineers and first class 
foremen. It was generally agreed that the major flaw was the 
condition of the drilling operations. 
In the period of 1966-1970 the volume of the well drilling 
dropped by a million meters. 31 percent of the drilled wells did 
not reach the design depth. Half of the work time was lost due to 
accidents and downtime. We cite these figures and facts from the 
monograph mentioned above. 
After thorough preparation the Central Committee of the 
Azerbaijan Communist Party called a republican meeting of 
oilmen and scientists working in the industry. It was a great 
council with the people who knew everything about oil. 
Addressing them Geidar Aliev said: “We demand from engineers 
and technical workers, geologists of Kaspmorneft and Azneft, 
from chief executives of both amalgamations to carry out 
measures necessary to stabilize oil production in old fields 
through improving geological prospecting and drilling works 
especially in Mesozoic formations in order to increase resources 
which will enable us to achieve growth of oil and gas production 
in future. We should focus especially on developing offshore oil 
and gas fields.” 
Geidar Aliev never was an office party functionary. Of course, 
due to evident reasons the First Secretary had to spend quite a lot 
of time at his desk. He was regularly seen at the oil fields, in the 
shops of the oil-refining plants and in scientists’ laboratories. And 
 93
they were not visits of a dabbler or a high-ranking visitor. He did 
not restrict himself to ask to repeat what even now seems 
extraordinary, to listen attentively to well-known scientists–Azad 
Mirzadjaizadeh, Arthur Rasizadeh, to read to the works of Yusif 
Geidarovich Mamedaliev, the deceased great scientist-chemist, 
Corresponding Member of the USSR Academy of Sciences, 
Academician of the Republican AS. Such people are said to burn 
at work. During the wartime he designed a method of producing 
high-quality additives to aviation fuel and received the Stalin prize 
that was given the name of the State prize later.  
Figures are often called boring matter. But one cannot do 
without them speaking about production. The Azneft 
amalgamation fulfilled the ninth five-year plan in relation to gas 
production for three and half years and in relation to oil 
production in 4 years and 8 months. 
Then new goals were to be achieved. In 1974 on Geidar 
Aliev’s initiative, the CPSU Central Committee and the USSR 
Council of Ministers approved a resolution on significant increase 
of pace and volumes of works aimed at prospective drilling in 
deep structures of the Caspian Sea, designing and introducing into 
production new technical means for drilling, developing and 
operating deep offshore wells. 
Intense work of hundreds of people yielded good results. New 
oil and gas producing facilities were put into operation; the 
existing oil refining plants were modernized. The gas-processing 
plant achieved its full capacity–it was the only enterprise of such 
profile put into operation in 1961. In 1986 after reconstruction, its 
production capacity reached 6.5 billion cubic meters of gas. 
The new plant for production of home conditioners was 
originally planned to locate in Zaporozhe, which Brezhnev treated 
with affection. There at Zaporozhstal he spent his days and nights 
in first post-war years, rising up the plant from ruins. The Union 
Ministers certainly knew about it and insisted on the plant’s 
location in Zaporozhe. 
Aliev, backed by Baibakov, went to Brezhnev. Leonid Ilyich 
considered his arguments. So Zaporozhe plant became a Baku 
one. Japanese equipment and technology were bought for it and 
thousands of conditioners sold all over the Soviet Union and for 
export. 
On December 25, 1975, the plant was put into operation. At a 
meeting the First Secretary said with pride, “The history of 
Azerbaijan industry is rich in numerous achievements of the 
working class. But today we can bravely state that never such a 
 94 
labor feat had been witnessed in the industrial history of our 
country...” 
Let us remember other new construction projects of that 
period: the electrical device plant Ulduz, Baku factory of 
champagne wines, Baku plant of deep-sea substructures (it was 
originally planned in Astrakhan, the equipment was bought for 
500 million dollars), Electroterm plant, shoe factories, Lenkoran 
tinned food factory. New enterprises were built in all regions of 
Azerbaijan: in Nagorny Karabakh and Gandzha, Baku and 
Nakhichevan... 
For ten years 22 million m2 of housing were put into service in 
Azerbaijan. Modern architectural ensembles made Baku more 
beautiful: the building of the Supreme Soviet of the Republic, the 
Moscow, Apsheron, Gandzhlik hotels, Gyulistan palace, the 
Institute for Space Research, the House of Arts in Shuvelyany, 
railway and sea stations... 
“They were the best years, –President Aliev remembered later. 
–Sometimes after finishing work I didn’t leave for home, I 
thought, made new plans to improve our republic’s state. I thought 
of ways to use the opportunities provided by my post for benefit 
of my people. There were two things necessary for that: to 
successfully lead the Azerbaijan Communist Party and to increase 
gradually my authority. I suppose I have succeeded in both.” 
The Central press called Aliev the leader of a new type. It was 
really so. Assessing his work at the Central Committee of the 
Republican Communist Party, Geidar Alievich could rightfully 
say, “For 14 years of my leadership in Azerbaijan we, together 
with my party comrades, performed great deeds for Azerbaijan.” 
Aliev was appreciated in Moscow. But what is even more 
important–his countrymen appreciated him. 
– In our Djulfinsky district we sowed wheat year after year, –
remembers Dovlat Mamedov, –though we gathered a scanty 
yield–three centners per hectare. Notwithstanding our protests we 
could not prove anything. We were just told one thing: “Plan!” 
But as soon as Geidar Alievich Aliev became First Secretary of 
the Central Committee of the Azerbaijan Communist Party, 
comrade “Plan” turned out to be not so powerful. On Aliev’s 
initiative in Nakhichevan, including our district, we started 
developing viticulture. It was better for both the Republic and 
people. We supplied with grape the northern regions of the Union. 
In my native village 64 families bought cars, many built two-story 
houses and bought nice furniture. 
Nakhichevan was changing very quickly. There appeared the 
modern hotel Tebriz, the Hydroelectric Power Station on the 
 95
Araks, a new textile industrial complex was put in operation and 
the Palace of Culture was opened... 
This is only one example, even not the largest one. 
The archive documents will add more. This mosaic will let you 
see the range of the First Secretary’s responsibilities, his 
aspirations and concerns. 
...Since 1970 in Azerbaijan there was introduced compulsory 
study of the Russian language from the first form. Two years later 
the Central Committee approved a number of measures aimed at 
further improvement of the Russian language teaching at 
secondary schools of the Republic.  
...On March 13, 1973, the Central Committee Bureau 
discussed a plan of actions to prepare and celebrate the 600th 
anniversary of the great Azerbaijan poet Imadeddin Nasimi. 
...It approved a resolution on opening a monument to the Hero 
of the Soviet Union Mekhti Guseinzadeh in Baku on May 9, 1973. 
...It discussed the work progress on the third Baku water-pipe 
system. 
Since January 1975 in Baku was started the broadcasting of the 
second republican television program–this also thanks to the First 
Secretary’s will and energy, as well as setting up of the State 
Drama Theatre in Sheki and the Construction Engineering 
Institute in Baku. 
On March 25, 1978, the Central Committee Bureau approved 
the resolution “On Further Development of the Space Research of 
the Natural Resources at Academy of Sciences of the Azerbaijan 
SSR”. 
And so day after day, week after week–economics, culture, 
science, education; urgent tasks and strategic goals; problems of 
the youth and veterans; commerce and services; construction of 
the Baku underground system; outstanding countrymen’s jubilees 
and the festival “Melodies of the Soviet Transcaucasia”.  
In March 1976 at the 25th Party Congress Geidar Aliev was 
elected as candidate-member of the CPSU Central Committee 
Politburo. For the first time a representative of Azerbaijan became 
a member of the staff of the Party, but in fact the entire Soviet 
Union. This new stage in Aliev’s career provided more 
opportunities to solve the problems of the Republic–economic, 
social and national ones. 
 
– Of course, he was an outstanding personality, –an opinion 
expressed by Academician Primakov about Aliev in our 
conversation. –Geidar Alievich did very much for Azerbaijan. He 
and Shevardnadze, First Secretary of the Central Committee of the 
 96 
Georgian Communist Party, had a private competition. In this 
competition Aliev was a winner, so was Azerbaijan, as its leader 
was better organized and better prepared.  
– I met Aliev rather frequently, –continued Yevgeny 
Maximovich Primakov, now President of the Russian Chamber of 
Commerce. –Once I even had a rest in his country-house in 
Mardakyany for three days. We went into the sea and talked... 
– It was hardly a talk about the sea element or how waves ran 
from Baku to Makhachkala... 
– Of course, not, –smiles Yevgeny Maximovich, who is not 
alien to poetry himself. –It was a conversation about people, the 
destiny of the state; we talked about the country in general and 
about Azerbaijan in particular... 
One can understand why Primakov and Aliev chose the sea as 
a place for their frank talk. In Azerbaijan there is a saying “every 
wall and every door has a pair of ears”. But the Caspian Sea will 
never report nor betray.  
– Even then Geidar Alievich certainly did not express his ideas 
on everything openly, but we exchanged our views rather 
sincerely. Aliev was a progressive man. This craving for progress 
combined with tough exactingness. It is right. I don’t doubt it. 
Democratic principles, on the one hand, and need for strict order, 
on the other hand, were mixed up in him. During his rule 
Azerbaijan underwent great changes–economic and social. Of 
course everything was done on the basis of planned economy, not 
on the market principles. 
Yevgeny Maximovich remembers how he was once surprised 
at a meeting that Aliev chaired. Once he summoned the Central 
Committee Bureau members to the Baku airport before leaving for 
a business trip. 
– An amazing clearness in setting objectives–without any 
shouting, reprimanding, scolding, though there were those present 
who should have been scolded. But he was very reserved in this 
respect. Yet at the same time he could be demanding. Two words 
before parting: “I’ll come and check”. An try not to obey... 
 
 
Let Justice Prevail 
 
On November 18, 1981, Literaturnaya gaseta published a long 
interview with the candidate-member of the CPSU Central 
Committee Politburo, First Secretary of the Central Committee of 
the Azerbaijan Communist Party Geidar Aliev “Let Justice 
Prevail…” This issue of Literaturnaya gazeta, one of the most 
 97
popular newspapers of that period, was passed from hand to hand; 
many local periodicals reprinted this interview. 
– I think that readers of Literaturnaya gazeta are interested in 
restoring and strengthening legality in the Republic in its wide 
meaning, –Geidar Aliev answered a question of the journalist 
Antonina Grigo. –Although we had sensational denunciations and 
severe punishments of people, whose names seemed untouchable 
and unavailable for law for many years. By the way bourgeois 
commentators are mostly interested in these particular cases. Ten 
days after the August 1969 Plenary Meeting of the Central 
Committee, when we told the working people of Azerbaijan 
frankly and honestly about serious shortcomings in the life of our 
Republic, the bourgeois press raised a clamor and got expectant of 
sensations of criminal character. 
I would like to stress–pronouncing the word “legality” we 
mean the Moral Code of our society rather than the Criminal 
Code. And from that point of view violation of law themselves 
and their prevention are not only a matter of law. Social and moral 
aspects are also involved, as first of all, we speak of the struggle 
for man, about respect of rights, protection of dignity and honor of 
the Soviet man, about bringing him up with best civil qualities and 
high moral principles. 
This approach is the basis of work of the Azerbaijan party 
organization and was ardently approved by the working people, and 
absolute majority of them are guided by these principles in their 
lives and work. But in the conditions of abuse of official status, 
corruption, bluff and lack of respect for honest work it was 
inevitable that the initiative of the masses decreased, moral anxiety 
in the society increased, which later was replaced with depression 
and apathy in many layers of population. All this caused chronic lag 
of the Azerbaijan economy behind the average Union indices. We 
had to help our people to believe in justice, in firmness of Leninist 
norms of life of the socialist society and its rule. This is the core of 
the many-sided restoration work; it is the very link laying hold of 
which we could take out the whole chain. The process was hard and 
complicated. I say, “was” not because today the situation is ideal 
but because the irreversibility of this process became a reality. 
It is proved by fast rise of economy, culture, and social 
development for the last decade.  
...I have already said that we would not have been able to 
change anything if we had not believed and had not been 
convinced many times that the overwhelming majority of people 
lived and worked honestly. It is another point that very frequently 
their work was wasted because of wastefulness, negligence and 
 98 
bluff. In most cases men of principle, honest cadres could not be 
promoted or achieve positions that fitted their abilities. 
We are paying special attention to cadre training. So it is not 
accidental that simultaneously with establishing order in economic 
and social-moral spheres we paid much attention to higher 
educational institutions. The active interference of the Central 
Committee of the Communist Party into the activity of higher 
educational institutions was prompted by widely spread facts of 
bribery, protectionism and nepotism among the teaching staff. 
This fact caused great harm to the preparation of cadres with 
higher education as well as enormous moral damage to the 
upbringing of the youth.  
We faced with cases when some teachers of higher educational 
institutions, leading figures tried to place their children in higher 
educational institutions according to “parents’” specialities. We 
had to restrict such actions and today children of executives of 
administrative bodies are not allowed to enter the Law Faculty of 
the State University.” 
– Even so! But, Geidar Alievich, though there is a saying that 
God takes a rest on children of geniuses yet there have always 
been and there should be hereditary intellectuals. We have just 
started accumulating generations of Soviet intelligentsia. Is it bad 
when a child that has grown up in the atmosphere of family 
spiritual interests continues the cause of his grandfathers and 
fathers?  
– We speak about different things. Let us make clear the subject 
of our discussion. What characterizes an intellectual first of all? A 
diploma of higher education? A diploma of a Candidate or a Doctor 
of Sciences? I don’t think so. The key feature of an intellectual man 
is selfless devotion to service to the society. The history of Russia, 
by the way, is full of examples of intelligentsia’s dramatic destinies 
when class prejudices prevented them from free service to people 
and to have talented successors to their cause. They did their best to 
overcome these obstacles. Risking their lives they went “to people”, 
went to the remotest parts of the country, to tsarist national outskirts 
with a civilizing mission. They were happy if their children 
possessed an ability to continue their cause. Cause! And if they 
were incapable to do so, they encouraged them to realize their 
personal abilities to their own benefit and to the benefit of the 
people. Because they cherished their family honor and protected 
their children from the inferiority complex, speaking in a 
contemporary language. 
But now when all barriers to free service to the society and to 
the interests of the state of workers and peasants have been 
 99
eliminated, we sometimes witness emergence of Philistines with 
diplomas that use the people’s confidence and money towards 
their own selfish ends.  
How can we call intellectuals those professors and even 
academicians who place their own children, grandchildren and 
other relatives in their department, laboratory or institute and 
moreover create special conditions for preparation of a thesis, for 
promotion in scientific work regardless of the fact whether they 
possess necessary abilities or not? 
As for the Law Faculty, our decision here was also connected 
with morbid tendency. We found out that overwhelming majority 
of the students accepted to this faculty were children of 
representatives of militia, procurator’s office, courts, law faculties, 
party and Soviet bodies. We were worried by the existing 
situation, which was often connected with abuses, and even more 
so by harmful consequences, danger of spreading nepotism and 
“inheritance” in administrative organs.  
When I opposed these distortions, first I heard arguments like: 
What do we need such severe measures for? We had hereditary 
doctors, teachers, lawyers, scientists–a grandfather, a father and a 
son. Why is it prohibited now? My answer is as follows: Yes, we 
had and we may have but only on the basis of high morale and by 
vocation. As for me I deeply respect and highly appreciate 
dynasties of hereditary miners, oilmen, steel-makers, and grain-
growers. Heredity based on honest attitude to work forms genuine 
culture in generations, be they menial or manual workers.  
From everyone–according to abilities, to everyone–according to 
work. This is the law of socialism. But since we have these 
distortions we should take extreme measures to improve the 
situation. It is not family intellectual traditions that are under threat, 
but nepotism, protectionism and clans that are supported by 
frankpledge. “You give me–I give you”. We will put an end to it. 
This is a good example of class treatment of the problem, if you 
like... 
– But this phenomenon is not of local nature at all. Striving “to 
take care of your kin and kith” by placing them in a prestigious 
institute or by securing “a warm place” is typical of many parents 
even when they are aware of their offsprings’ inability to work 
hard. This is a phenomenon. Such young people are called 
“fatherschildren”. It is written as one word. Maybe some general 
requirements of a stricter character should be worked out... 
– It is a phenomenon I talk about. It is some kind of line. What 
do we need additional rules for? As it was said at the 26th 
Congress we have got enough good laws, the point is to observe 
 100 
them in most accurate and mandatory way. Any law lives only in 
case everyone and everywhere observe it–. 
We have the Constitution and we have the Moral Code of the 
Builder of Communism; there is the civil duty and there are moral 
principles of the Soviet way of living. Concrete practice emerges 
on the basis of all this. 
For example, we had to prohibit our party functionaries and 
state officials to build country houses, purchase personal cars and 
defend theses for obtaining scientific degrees... 
– Excuse me, Geidar Alievich, we are speaking about legality! 
And this is, to put it mildly... 
– Don’t look for mild expressions. Yes, it is a volitional 
decision. As First Secretary of the Central Committee of the 
Communist Party I suggested it and my colleagues agreed to it. 
In 1960s construction of country houses was set on a large 
scale in Baku. Who built country houses? Mostly executives, 
intelligentsia. And what did it end up in? In many cases there were 
abuses: illegal use of machinery, means of transport, construction 
materials, work force from enterprises and construction sites. 
Moreover, construction of country houses causes recurrence of 
proprietary psychology, individualism and leads to neglecting the 
public duty. We had to severely punish some executives to the 
extent of expelling them from the party. But nobody suffered from 
our ban on construction of country houses while the society 
gained. Instead of a plant director’s country house we have now a 
rest home or a dispensary for the entire collective of the 
enterprise. These are our motives. A lot of such rest homes have 
been built, including those for executives, for the last years. Our 
measures have gained public approval in the republic. 
A ban on purchase of personal cars is connected with facts, which 
are getting more and more frequent, of profiteering on car sales. We 
had to punish some top executives for such actions as well.  
I am far from recommending somebody to copy our experience 
blindly. We made such decisions under the influence of the crisis 
situation we had at that moment. Even a shadow of suspect should 
not fall on top officials. 
– What about scientific degrees? We constantly talk about 
necessity to govern the society on the basis of scientific approach. 
And if a party functionary or a minister is a scientist at the same 
time... 
– I suppose you know rather cynical but true rephrasing of 
some poet’s lines: “You may not be a scientist, but you must be a 
candidate”. We cannot do without science now. And everyone 
who is involved in management has to master basis of science, 
 101
especially of social sciences. Moreover, they have to contribute to 
science through their practical work, must be able to analyze 
events taking place in the society, and take final not hasty 
decisions. We are for the situation when every top executive 
possesses such qualities. There is Head of the Propaganda and 
Agitation Department of the Central Committee of the Communist 
Party Afrand Firidunovich Dashdamirov sitting opposite you. He 
is under 40 but he is Doctor of Philosophy, professor. He came to 
the Central Committee staff as a scientist and combines his party 
work with scientific one. And it yields good results. There are 
justified exceptions from every rule. Otherwise a rule will turn 
into a dogma.  
But it was impossible to consider as a norm the situation when 
a former First Secretary of Sumgait City Party Committee 
Balakishiev received a scientific degree of a Candidate of 
Technical Sciences. Since he had not done any scientific research 
before becoming a party functionary, he had never performed an 
engineer’s duties or worked in production. That’s why the 
inspection results were not surprising. They confirmed our 
doubts–Balakishiev was not the author of his thesis, he used 
someone else’s work. Under decision of Higher Certification 
Commission of the USSR of August 12, 1981, Balakishiev was 
deprived of that scientific degree for the actions that are 
incompatible with the title of the Soviet scientist. Earlier 
Balakishiev was dismissed from his post for numerous 
shortcomings in his work and assigned to ordinary job. 
But it was not a single case. In the 1960s a craving for 
scientific degrees became fashionable among top executives. We 
have come to the conclusion that there is no actual benefit either 
for science or party and state activity from this. But it can be 
harmful; it might cause enormous moral damage. Some executives 
abused their position, while the ranks of scientists became 
“littered”. Here is an explanation of this ban. 
The examples of such moral taboos may be unexpected. But 
existence of a moral taboo in a work collective is not a rarity at all. 
It is characteristic of socialist concepts of honor and decency and 
gets particular forms under certain conditions. Special requirements 
are imposed upon a head of a collective. Moral image of a leader, 
moral examples are of great importance in educating people. If, for 
example, from a rostrum a leader holds up to shame recurrences of 
petty-bourgeois psychology but in his private life he abuses his 
position, indulges in purchasing, buys up gold, speculates, he is a 
hundred-fold more dangerous than a person who doesn’t know 
other values in life besides things and money. 
 102 
– I have an impression that bribery provokes greater disgust in 
you than any other type of crime. And poet Fikret Godzha says as 
follows: “Bribe is a knife plunged into one’s back... Why bribery 
in particular? 
– Because bribe is a universal crime. Other vices turn around 
it. A bribe-taker doesn’t sell a sheepskin coat from under the 
counter; he sells state interests... The poet’s aphorism is not an 
exaggeration. All of us, even those who are honest and those who 
despise the people who take and give bribes, carry blame for 
tenacity of this malicious vestige of the past. Personal integrity 
and personal squeamishness are not civic merits in themselves. 
Civic consciousness presupposes active life, ability and desire to 
struggle against the evil. 
– One prominent lawyer said: “A person who lives on 
unearned income will always be able to buy a certificate of the 
“earned” income.” 
– Well, it is easily checked. And both parties involved should 
be punished. Then, and it is the main aspect, concrete measures of 
suppressing the evil are not an end in them. They should be a part 
of the harmonious system of general intolerance towards violation 
of law. A publication in a newspaper is one of the examples of 
manifesting an active life position. There cannot be any active life 
position without an actual deed. Elaboration of the active life 
position is the backbone of all ideological work of our time. 
– In the film “Interrogation” made at the Azerbaijan film 
studio, which, by the way, greatly impressed Muscovites, the 
investigator Seifi does everything to expose the real criminals–top 
executives. The filmmakers–scriptwriter Rustam Ibragimbekov 
and director Rasim Odzhagov as journalists the principle: “A law 
is a law for everyone.” But to make this principle triumph the 
major character of the film had not only to withstand pressure and 
threats, he had to neglect some case investigation judicial 
procedures. We can guess that the retribution is unavoidable for 
him. A law is a law for everyone! A poet said, “Good should 
possess fists”. But justice also has a fist. 
Or there is an old but non-aging movie, as we draw our 
examples from art, –“Watch out for a car” by Eldar Ryazanov. 
Fighting away their sympathy the judges and assessors pronounce 
their sentence on Yuri Detochkin who is so unselfish that even the 
woman who loves him calls him an idiot. There are examples of 
different attitude towards such “infringers”, especially among 
those who stand guard over the law. One lawyer expressed his 
regret that Smoktunovsky made a charming character out of “an 
anarchist”. 
 103
– As for me, I sympathize with Yuri Detochkin! Of course, he 
makes a mistake, acting alone. But evidently he cannot act 
otherwise. Neither could Seifi. A live person can make mistakes. 
Everything depends on what moral principles he sticks to.  
The filmmakers drew public attention to the necessity to 
struggle against swindlers and showed new types of their mimicry. 
Thanks to characters like Detochkin and Seifi the struggle against 
negative phenomena goes on more successfully. We need more 
such people, even despite the fact that they make mistakes choosing 
forms and methods of struggle, rather than indifferent ones. 
In conflict situations writers, poets, cinematography workers show 
discrepancies between the fast-changing life and existing laws. This 
doesn’t only concern jurisprudence, but habitual ideas, inert customs, 
seemingly unshakeable state of affairs. So creating brilliant works of 
art they perform deeds and show their civic position.  
I can only regret that literature, I mean the Azerbaijan writers 
first of all, am behind the times. We have few works so far that 
would reflect the present struggle of Azerbaijan communists 
against antipodes of communist morale or where modern knights 
without fear and blemish would act. Though there are lots of them 
in our real life!.. 
We are not idealists; we don’t assert that we’ll achieve ultimate 
triumph of Good over Evil. But it is possible and necessary to 
achieve the situation where justice, law and ideals will tip the 
scale. 
– Geidar Alievich, I’d like to express my wish for your success 
through poetic lines: 
 
“Let justice always prevail, 
Let oppression be disgraced,  
Let generosity triumph 
And the kind-hearted be glorified,” 
 
as Nizami said. 
– “Be modest. Throw wealth and pride 
 to fire, burn them! 
...If you wish to gain your freedom 
 from perplexing passions 
Burn all tiresome nonsense in a single, 
 fiery breath!” – 
 
as great Azerbaijan poet of the 12th century Nizami Gandzhevi 
said. 
 104 
December 2, 1982, Baku 
 
– And now we are to discuss the organizational issue. You 
know, comrades, that I have been appointed as First Deputy 
Chairman of the USSR Council of Ministers and at the Plenary 
Meeting of the CPSU Central Committee Politburo I was 
transferred from Candidate-Member to Member of the CPSU 
Central Committee Politburo, –with these words Geidar Aliev 
opened the meeting of the Central Committee Bureau of the 
Azerbaijan Communist Party, the last meeting which he chaired 
by the right of First Secretary. At that time it was necessary to 
elect his successor. –And consequently, we have to make a 
decision today concerning First Secretary of the Central 
Committee of the Azerbaijan Communist Party... –Geidar 
Alievich read out the documents approved in Moscow and 
continued, –I think on the basis of the foregoing we have to make 
a decision on “Relieving G. Aliev from duties of First Secretary of 
the Central Committee of the Azerbaijan Communist Party and 
Member of the Central Committee Bureau of the Azerbaijan 
Communist Party’. But before we put this issue to a vote I would 
like to say a few words. –Geidar Alievich looked at his comrades. 
–First of all I would like to say that the decision made by the 
CPSU Central Committee Politburo and the 7th Session of the 
USSR Supreme Soviet on electing comrade Aliev as Member of 
the CPSU Central Committee Politburo and appointing him as 
First Deputy Chairman of the USSR Council of Ministers is 
enormous trust to the Azerbaijan Communist Party, our republic 
and our people. I guess we are unanimous in considering this fact 
first of all as appreciation of the activity of the Azerbaijan party 
organization, successes of the working people of our Republic and 
the whole Republic in construction of communism, and 
appreciation of the activity of the Central Committee of the 
Azerbaijan Communist Party and the Central Committee Bureau. 
Great trust has been put upon me. I am aware of the meaning of 
this trust and great responsibility connected with it. And I would 
like to assure that I would try to do my best to justify this trust and 
this new assignment of our Party, the Central Committee and the 
Politburo. 
Today I recollect July 14, 1969, when... I was elected as First 
Secretary of the Azerbaijan Communist Party. And it is almost 
thirteen and a half years we have been working together and I 
have been carrying out these duties. And now... after such a long 
time and so much work this new appointment on the Party and 
State lines obliges me and sets very large and crucial tasks before 
 105
me. I see a lot of difficult and hard work ahead. I hope that in this 
new job I’ll remain the same as I have been until now and I’ll try 
to justify this trust, in particular in the Azerbaijan party 
organization and the Central Committee of our Republican 
Communist Party.  
I will yet have an opportunity to express my ideas in a more 
detailed way at a Plenary Meeting of the Central Committee of the 
Azerbaijan Communist Party, but now I would like to say that... 
the Central Committee Bureau, the Secretariat of the Central 
Committee of the Azerbaijan Communist Party work in an 
efficient, well-organized, successful and fruitful way. During this 
period a lot has been done, our republic has achieved great 
successes. We have managed to eliminate our long-standing 
lagging. The Republic has made fresh advances on the All-Union 
scale. The Republic has been among the winners of the socialist 
competition for twelve years running; it has been awarded Red 
Banners of the Motherland. During this period the Republic has 
been awarded three orders of the Soviet Union–the order of the 
October Revolution, the order of Friendship of Peoples. For early 
fulfilment of the tenth five-year plan–the order of Lenin that 
Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev presented to us quite recently. There is 
perfect, healthy moral-political and moral-psychological 
atmosphere and work spirit in the Republic. Spirit of friendship, 
internationalism and brotherhood. In other words, comrades, our 
Republic has risen and risen quite high.  
And all this is first of all the result of the activities of the 
Central Committee, the Central Committee Bureau and the 
Central Committee Secretariat of the Azerbaijan Communist 
Party. Everything that has been done since July 14, 1969, has been 
prepared, worked out, outlined and set forth here at the meetings 
of the Central Committee Bureau of the Azerbaijan Communist 
Party. Our every step–large and small,–every event, every big 
deal, which all together have ensured the republic’s success, are 
results of our collective work, collective efforts, collective mind 
of the Bureau and collective activity of the Central Committee 
Bureau. So today I have the absolute right to say that the Central 
Committee Bureau of the Azerbaijan Communist Party has been 
adequate to the Party demands, the decisions of its congresses, 
plenary meetings and all the requirements of the CPSU Central 
Committee.  
And today, when I’m parting with you, at this last meeting of 
the Central Committee Bureau I consider it necessary to say about 
this with a feeling of great satisfaction and a feeling of great 
gratitude.  
 106 
I would like to thank first of all the members of the Central 
Committee Bureau of the Azerbaijan Communist Party for our 
joint fruitful active and fundamental work during all these years. I 
would like to thank you, my dear comrades, for your constant 
support, for help and understanding as well as for the fact that 
acting according to our principles, taking tough decisions, 
sometimes very painful, we have always been driven by high 
principles of the Party, State, by interests of our Republic and 
interests of our Country... 
We have solved a lot of hard matters of principle. Sometimes 
there were various opinions, judgments, but we always found the 
most correct solutions and always acted in a well-organized way, 
always acted in a friendly manner. Our major joint achievement is 
creation of healthy business-like atmosphere in the work of the 
Central Committee Bureau and the Central Committee Secretariat 
of the Azerbaijan Communist Party. In the past our Republic 
suffered a lot because of lack of business-like atmosphere and 
business-like relationships in the work of the Bureau, in the work 
of the Secretariat and in the activity of the Central Committee of 
the Azerbaijan Communist Party. Personal interests often gained 
the upper hand. There prevailed mercantile approach, intrigues, 
squabbles, groupings and other negative phenomena. We put an 
end to all this very soon and every month, every year we moved 
towards this healthy, business-like spirit that should prevail in the 
work of the Central Committee Bureau. And we have achieved 
this due to establishing principles of collective leadership in the 
work of the Central Committee Bureau. 
And today, I repeat, the Central Committee Bureau works in a 
very efficient, well-organized and purposeful way on the basis of 
healthy party principles and I think this is a guarantee of further 
successful and fruitful work of the Central Committee. That is 
why I express my gratitude to you again and again and appreciate 
the work of every member of the Central Committee Bureau, 
every candidate-member of the Central Committee Bureau, every 
secretary of the Central Committee of the Azerbaijan Communist 
Party. The heads of the Central Committee departments, leaders of 
some party organizations and ideological institutions often 
participated in the meetings of the Bureau and the Secretariat of 
the Central Committee and today I would like to thank the Central 
Committee staff (I will probably say about it separately at a 
meeting with the workers of the Central Committee staff), heads 
of the Central Committee departments, all other comrades who 
worked with us during all these years to make the activity of the 
Central Committee Bureau fruitful, efficient and successful. 
 107
Thank you very much, comrades. And finally, I don’t doubt that 
on the basis of accumulated broad experience, firm and stable 
business-like traditions in the activity of the Central Committee 
Bureau and the Central Committee Secretariat the work will 
proceed and continue and every member of the Bureau and every 
leading party, Soviet, production worker will try to multiply the 
achieved results, to enrich the accumulated experience and to 
develop everything that has been created. And I am sure that the 
basis, the foundation is so strong, so firm, that in future in our 
Azerbaijan party organization there will never be again any 
negative phenomena that existed for a long time until 1969. 
I would like to wish all of you, my dear friends, comrades, 
companions-in-arms, new great successes in putting to life the 
decisions of the 26th Congress of the CPSU, objectives set forth 
by the November (1982) Plenary Meeting of the CPSU Central 
Committee, decisions of the 30th Congress of the Azerbaijan 
Communist Party and Plenary Meetings of the Central Committee 
of the Azerbaijan Communist Party. That is what I wanted to say. 
 
 
A meeting of the Party Bureau, whether it is small or large, is 
not a place where you can hear applause. But that time without 
previous arrangements everyone present in the room clapped their 
hands loudly. Then it was necessary to arrange formal voting by 
raising hands... But first someone had to say a few words–Second 
Secretary of the Central Committee Yuri Pugachev took the 
initiative. His speech was a bit muddled but sincere. He said about 
great confidence, how they would be missing Geidar Alievich as a 
chairman, assured... And he sounded the name of a new chief–
during “extensive studies of the opinion of people, communists, 
members of the Central Committee and members of the Central 
Committee Bureau... a final opinion was formed that was reported 
to the CPSU Central Committee, Secretariat, Politburo and 
personally to comrade Yuri Vladimirovich Andropov. It was 
considered expedient to recommend comrade Kyamran 
Mamedovich Bagirov, who at that moment worked as Secretary of 
the Central Committee of the Azerbaijan Communist Party, to this 
post.” 
By that time Kyamran Bagirov had gone through all interviews 
in Moscow and visited the General Secretary. The Politburo 
recommended him for the post of First Secretary. Actually the 
decision was made in Moscow but there were procedure 
requirements yet to be met–so the members of the Bureau voted, 
so did the Plenary Meeting. 
 108 
– I am well aware, –said Kyamran Mamedovich Bagirov, –
what it means to be at the head of such republican party 
organization that has such glorious revolutionary traditions. If the 
Central Committee of the Azerbaijan Communist Party does me 
the honor I promise to use all my forces and abilities and in joint 
work together with the entire Central Committee to do everything 
in order to cope with the duties of the First Secretary... 
The next day, on December 3, 1982, in Dzerzhinsky Club a 
Plenary Meeting of the Central Committee took place. The 
Plenary Meeting relieved Geidar Aliev of the duties of the First 
Secretary of the Central Committee of the Republican Communist 
Party and elected Kyamran Bagirov to this post. Aliev wished 
Kyamran Mamedovich “success in this high, very hard–know 
from my own experience–and responsible post, and, of course, 
strong health and all the best for all our expectations to come 
true”. 
Just a few years later, the 1970s would be called the years of 
stagnation. But a question arises: “Who was in a state of 
stagnation?” Is it possible to stick an offensive label to the epoch 
and millions of workers? There was no stagnation at the 
construction of the Baikal-Amur Main Line, at the West Siberian 
and Caspian oil fields, at Donbass, Kuzbass and Karaganda 
mines... There was no stagnation dampness smell in Azerbaijan. 
For incomplete decade and a half of Geidar Aliev’s rule per capita 
national income increased twofold, gross volume of production 
grew 2.5 times; increase in national income was equal to its entire 
volume in 1969. The industrial production almost tripled; labor 
productivity doubled; consumer goods production tripled as well. 
The volume of industrial products manufactured in those years 
was equal to the volume of the previous 50 years. 250 large plants, 
factories, workshops were built, over two million people improved 
their living conditions. Within that period practically second Baku 
was erected. 
Azerbaijan gained one of the leading positions in the country 
in terms of production of petroleum products, oil equipment, steel 
pipes, non-ferrous metals, synthetic rubber, electric engines, 
construction materials, home air conditioners, automobile tyres, 
chemical fertilizers, earthenware products, carpets and carpeting. 
350 types of products manufactured in Azerbaijan were exported 
to 65 countries of the world. New industries emerged in the 
Republic such as machine-building, electronic industry; oil-
refining enterprises underwent large-scale reconstruction and the 
Baku underground system was built.  
 109
People all over the world, especially in the countries of the 
Middle East, Africa and Latin America, were interested in 
Azerbaijan’s experience, achievements of this original republic, 
its extraordinary leader. On the eve of the 60th anniversary of the 
USSR’s formation (1982), Chairman of the Soviet Committee for 
Solidarity with Countries of Asia and Africa Alexander 
Dzasokhov suggested a large international forum to be held in 
Baku devoted to the Soviet Union’s role in political, diplomatic 
and practical assistance to national liberation movement of young 
independent states of the post-colonial world. Large delegations 
from fifty states and leaders of national liberation movements 
came to the conference. As Alexander Dzasokhov remembers 
their meeting inspired eminent guests with Geidar Alievich Aliev, 
acquaintance with Baku, a city of many nations and many 
confessions, a city where ancient history was marvellously 
combined with modern forms of community life, with developed 
industry and science. 
Aliev strove for Azerbaijan to obtain a decent place in the 
state, for representatives of the republic to be promoted to 
different positions of the All-Union scale, of course in conformity 
with their organizational abilities and personal qualities. For 
example, when after death of the outstanding Tajik poet and 
public figure Mirzo Tursun-zadeh there arose an issue of who 
would stand at the head of the Soviet Committee for Solidarity 
with Countries of Asia and Africa, it was on Geidar Aliev’s 
initiative that Mirza Azhdarovich Ibragimov, the great scientist 
and the person of encyclopaedic knowledge, the author of 
numerous wonderful novels, Aliev’s countryman, was 
recommended and unanimously elected to this post and then 
successfully worked there. 
But how much filth was poured on those years, how many 
attempts were made to discredit deeds and people by the “foremen 
of perestroika” and their yes-men who did not drive a single nail 
themselves for the whole life. Equipped with the figures Aliev 
opposed those who “took the path of indiscriminate running down 
of the past, the activity of the Republic’s party organization and 
achievements of its working people in the 1970s”. 
– How to prove that the figures you are talking about are real? 
–Andrei Karaulov, a journalist and a TV commentator, asked 
Aliev. 
– All the figures that I quoted are from official sources. In 
order to disprove official statistics some other data should 
probably be quoted. But there are no such data. They do not exist 
 110 
and there cannot be any other figures. Because everything I say is 
the truth. 
– OK, have you come across upward distortions, let’s say, in 
the activities of ministries, enterprises, and districts?.. 
– Before me and during the period of my work in Azerbaijan 
there were upward distortions in different spheres of economy–as 
well as all over the country... We started our work with launching 
active struggle against all negative phenomena, including 
eyewash. Have they disappeared? No. They were still revealed. 
We worked to reveal them. They took place within the entire 
district, in the work of enterprises, construction projects, 
collective and state farms. All facts that the Central Committee 
got to know were discussed at the Bureau. We thought that in that 
way we could prevent executives of various levels from unlawful 
actions... We worked on the problem of utmost elimination of 
negative phenomena. And I will tell you frankly that we did not 
accept any compromises. 
The documents we studied during our work on this book prove 
Aliev’s words. 
 
 111
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 6 
“THE WHOLE UNION NEEDS YOU, GEIDAR!” 
 
 
The Last Visit of the General Secretary 
 
In the Crimea from the end of July to the last days of August 
of 1982 Brezhnev received foreign visitors–leaders of the 
Countries of the Socialist Commonwealth: Gustav Gusak 
(Czechoslovakia), Erich Honecker (the German Democratic 
Republic), Wojciech Jaruzelski (Poland), Yumzhagiyn Tsedenbal 
(Mongolia)... 
On September 24 the General Secretary of the CPSU Central 
Committee, the Chairman of the USSR Supreme Soviet Presidium 
flew to Baku. According to the newspapers he “had to take part in 
celebrations devoted to awarding the order of Lenin to the 
Azerbaijan SSR, which it received for great success achieved by 
the workers of the Republic in the tenth five-year in the 
manufacture of industrial and agricultural products”. Azerbaijan 
was awarded two years before and the award could have been 
handed long ago, but Aliev insisted on Leonid Ilyich coming to 
hand over the award. And finally he succeeded. 
Four days of the intensive program could have been a heavy 
burden even for a younger man let alone the old and sick General 
Secretary who vaguely perceived what was going on around! 
Though he might have remembered how about ten years ago he, 
hale and hearty, stepped on the platform, how accompanied by the 
thunder of applause and greetings he entered the square near the 
station which was crowded with people and after looking around 
handed bunches of flowers to two black-eyed beauties and 
enjoyed the warmth of this city. Now the Russian television never 
shows such Brezhnev. Several generations have only the image of 
a bloated and helpless old man imprinted in their minds. 
Let us look through the newspapers that told about “comrade 
L.I. Brezhnev’s visit to Azerbaijan” and speak to the witnesses to 
get a better idea what this great four-act performance was like. 
...At the stairway comrade L.I. Brezhnev was heartily 
welcomed by the Candidate-member of the CPSU Central 
 112 
Committee Politburo, the First Secretary of the Central Committee 
of the Azerbaijan Communist Party G.A. Aliev, the Chairman of 
the Supreme Soviet of the Azerbaijan SSR K.A. Khalilov, the 
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Republic 
G.N. Seidov, Members of the Central Committee Bureau of the 
Azerbaijan Communist Party. The Guard of Honor Chief reported 
to comrade Brezhnev. Then the anthems of the USSR and the 
Azerbaijan SSR were performed. 
According to the national traditions the dear guest was given 
gifts of Azerbaijan land. Pioneers handed him flowers. 
All along the way from the airport to the city in streets, 
prospects and squares decorated with transparencies, pictures, 
slogans Leonid Ilyich were welcomed by hundreds of thousands 
of Baku citizens. 
It was written so in the newspapers on the next day, September 
25, 1982, and it was the truth. The capital of Azerbaijan did not 
stand out with pomp of its welcome against the background of 
commonly accepted procedures. Similar pompous welcoming 
took place when the General Secretary came to Kiev, Tbilisi, 
Tashkent–it was a typical style of the epoch of “developed 
socialism”. But let us follow the motorcade that reached the large 
and beautiful square that had the name of Lenin. 
Journalists telling about the solemn manifestation hardly 
checked their emotions. 
...With great fanfare the assembled crowds cheer comrade 
L.I. Brezhnev and the Republic Leaders, then with storm of 
applause and welcoming speeches in honor of the Communist 
Party and its Leninist Central Committee. Comrades 
L.I. Brezhnev, G.A. Aliev, K.A. Khalilov, G.N. Seidov and other 
leaders of the Republic make for the Government Platform, where 
there are prominent people of Azerbaijan. 
The resolution of the Baku City Soviet of People Deputies is 
announced–expressing the will of all the working people of the 
capital of the Soviet Azerbaijan as a token of infinite love and 
deep appreciation for constant concerns for development of the 
city economy, culture, science and arts the Soviet of People 
Deputies conferred the rank of Baku Honorary Citizen to Leonid 
Ilyich Brezhnev. There are ovations, words of greeting heard over 
the square. 
The People’s Artist of the USSR, the Hero of Socialist Labor 
R. Beibutov and the Chief Executive of the Drilling Rig, the Hero 
of Socialist Labor S. Nagiev decorate Leonid Ilyich’s breast with 
the medal of the City Honorary Citizen and hand him the diploma. 
Young pioneers bring him flowers. 
 113
Comrade Brezhnev is heartily congratulated on receiving the 
honorary rank by representatives of industry, agriculture, 
intelligentsia and the youth. Masters of arts and collectives of 
amateur art activities perform national dances and songs that 
praise friendship and brotherhood of the people of our 
multinational Motherland. 
It is the end of the TASS correspondents’ report on the first 
day of the General Secretary’s visit to the lit-with-warm-
September-sun Baku. We hope the reader will excuse us for long 
quotations as they help to set more vividly the atmosphere of 
those days and to see the hero of our narration from different 
points of view. They were certainly special hours and days for 
him, the host of the meeting, and the host of the place. 
“Guest after guest bring elation to the host –says a Russian 
proverb. An Azerbaijani one sounds practically similar: “If one 
guest is a joy for another guest, they are not a burden on the host”. 
The Azerbaijanians traditionally give all the best to their guest. 
Alirza and Izzet Alievs brought up their children in such 
traditions. If a family, even a large one, had only two rooms, one 
of them was reserved for a guest. The best bed linen, blanket and 
pillows were also for a guest. Once small Geidar and his brother 
came from Nakhichevan to the village to see their relatives. “We 
were received and fed in the hall and we were not let into that 
room, –remembered Geidar Alievich. –Who is this room for? It is 
for guests. There was a bed, a fine silk blanket and pillows there, 
while they did not have even a carpet themselves. Well, I thought. 
A guest may come once, twice or three times a year and the room 
remains empty the rest of the time while the family live here all 
the time and have to huddle together in such conditions. What 
psychology! But it must be connected with our people’s character: 
all the best to the guest.” 
Years later one of the interviewers reminded Aliev of “too 
frequent Brezhnev’s visits to Baku and too pompous receptions in 
his honor”. 
– What nonsense! –Geidar Alievich replied in temper. –What 
was wrong in visits of the country’s first person? What is wrong in 
the fact that we, the Azerbaijanians, are very cordial and 
hospitable by nature? What was wrong in the fact that all the 
world, all the television- and radio-broadcasting satellites were 
aimed at Baku? And after all what was wrong in the fact that in 
connection with the General Secretary’s visits we were able to get 
some money for our new construction projects? 
We have to give the hosts’ due: even during that last 
Brezhnev’s visit they did not content themselves with the standard 
 114 
program–wreaths to the monument to V.I. Lenin and to the 
Eternal Flame, a customary approach to veterans. Leonid Ilyich 
was taken to “Shelf-2”, a rig designed to drill deep-sea oil wells, 
to the plant manufacturing home air conditioners, where a beauty 
with naked shoulders gave flowers to the guest. Remembering his 
youth the guest caressed her tenderly. And on Sunday Brezhnev 
handed the order of Lenin over to Azerbaijan. Let us cite the 
TASS report again 
...Opening the grand meeting comrade G.A. Aliev warmly and 
cordially greeted Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev. He said that comrade 
Brezhnev’s visit on the eve of the 60th anniversary of the USSR 
formation, a great holiday of internationalism and brotherhood of 
the Soviet people, was enormous honor and great joy of all the 
people of the Republic. Comrade Aliev emphasized that sincere 
cordial feeling of Baku citizens during their meetings and talks 
with Leonid Ilyich as well as solemn festive atmosphere in this 
auditorium–all this is manifestation of ardent love and infinite 
gratitude of the workers of Azerbaijan towards Leonid Ilyich 
Brezhnev, and of unanimous approval of the internal and external 
policy of the Communist Party and the Soviet State. 
The Honorary Presidium of the Meeting is elected 
unanimously (by the way, did anyone in the auditorium question 
the purpose of this virtual icon?) consisting of the Politburo of the 
CPSU Central Committee headed by comrade L.I. Brezhnev. The 
floor is given to comrade L.I. Brezhnev. All the present stand up 
and greet Leonid Ilyich with long ovation. 
A corpulent man with five golden stars stumbled to the 
rostrum. Then he spread sheets with notes: 
– Dear comrade Aliev!  
Dear comrades! 
Yesterday we conferred the highest award of our Motherland–
the order of Lenin–to your Republic but now we have to discuss 
with all the party frankness... 
Brezhnev spoke slowly and stumbled every time on the 
difficult for his false teeth word “Azerbaijan”. In the country that 
for a long time had been telling anecdotes about its leader people 
got used to the defects of his speech, though; some geniuses 
mimicked Ilyich in a rather talented way. However that time a 
slight noise flowed over the auditorium: something unexpected 
had happened. The General Secretary was reading the speech, 
which he was supposed to make on the next day at the Central 
Committee... The General Secretary’s assistant Alexandrov-
Agentov rushed from the second row to the rostrum. The speaker 
paid no attention to him. The confused assistant came back to his 
 115
seat. And then Aliev came up to Brezhnev, whispered something 
to him and took the tomorrow text away. 
– Well, anything is possible, –said the General Secretary 
calmly, and the audience that worried for him as well burst into 
applause. Further on Ilyich went on smoothly, just once said 
“Afghanistan oil” instead of “Azerbaijan oil”.  
– We would like to point out with great satisfaction that 
Azerbaijan was again the first among the Union Republics to fulfil 
its socialist obligations for corn sale to the state. Receive, dear 
comrades, cordial appreciation of the Central Committee of the 
Party and the Government for this great labor victory. What is the 
key to this success? –asked the speaker. And looking the audience 
over his thick eyebrows he returned to the sheets with unusually 
large letters. –First of all it is the fact that the Central Committee 
of the Azerbaijan Communist Party and its Bureau headed by our 
dear comrade Geidar Alievich Aliev put the line of the Party into 
life in a consistent and energetic way based on principles. 
It was the fourteenth year since Geidar Aliev headed 
Azerbaijan. A big period was coming to the end both in his life 
and in the life of the Republic and he, as a man of honor, did not 
separate these two notions. He deserved the right to be proud. 
Azerbaijan fulfilled and exceeded its state plans for economic and 
social development year after year. In the Republic new plants and 
factories were put in operation one after another. The oil 
production grew to 14 million tons a year and its two thirds were 
extracted from the bottom of the Caspian Sea. Social programs 
were put to life. 
 
 
On Monday after the meeting with the Members of the Central 
Committee Bureau of the Azerbaijan Communist Party and 
reading out the appropriate speech Brezhnev left for Moscow. The 
time was counting last days of his life.  
On November 5 he sat in the Presidium of the Grand Meeting 
devoted to the 65th anniversary of the Great October Revolution 
at the Kremlin Palace of Congress. Dozing he listened to a long 
speech of Viktor Grishin, the Member of the Politburo of the 
CPSU Central Committee, the First Secretary of the Moscow City 
Party Committee. Viktor Vasilyevich did not spare colors for the 
Chairman–the General Secretary: 
– In his brilliant reports, speeches and works he enriched 
Marxist-Leninist theory with fundamental generalizations and 
conclusions. With his name the Soviet people justly associate a 
dramatic turn in our country’s economy towards numerous 
 116 
objectives connected with the wellbeing of the people and great 
organizational work of the party towards this end. Firm loyalty to 
Lenin’s maxims... 
Comrade Grishin did his best, it goes without saying, but he 
was far behind his colleague Shevardnadze. Eduard Amvrosievich 
introduced an amendment towards geography. With his proud 
statement that the Georgian sun raises in the north, in Russia, he 
exceeded everyone–ashugs and akyns, bandurists and bards.  
On November 7 Brezhnev stood in Red Square greeting the 
parade and the demonstration. At the reception at the Kremlin 
Palace of Congress he made a short speech and offered a multi-
storey toast: 
– To our Leninist Party! To the Great Brotherhood of Peoples–
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics! To Happiness and 
Wellbeing of every Soviet family! To long-lasting Peace and 
Friendship between Peoples! To health of the everyone present 
here! 
This was the last toast in his life. On Friday, November 12, 
1982, the first columns of the Soviet newspapers were in 
mourning frames.  
...The genuine successor of Lenin’s great cause, ardent patriot, 
prominent revolutionary and fighter for peace, for communism, 
the outstanding politician and statesman of nowadays Leonid 
Ilyich Brezhnev finished his days. 
The medical certificate of decease and the cause of the death... 
The notice from the commission on arranging the funeral: 
Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev’s funeral will take place in Red Square at 
12:00 on Monday, November 15. 
On November 12 the Plenary Meeting of the CPSU Central 
Committee was held; it elected Yuri Vladimirovich Andropov for 
the post of the General Secretary. The same day the Plenary 
Meeting participants went to the Hall of Colomns to bid farewell 
to Brezhnev. In the middle of a large photograph there are 
Andropov and Tikhonov, on the left there are Shevardnadze, 
Aliev, Kuznetsov, the First Deputy Chairman of the Presidium of 
the USSR Supreme Soviet at that time. 
It was high time for a change in the rule of the CPSU–and 
automatically of the Soviet State. At the reigns in the great 
country there were old men who hardly understood what they did. 
To be more exact it was not them who ruled but their surrounding 
who “surrounded the thrown” shoulder to shoulder.  
Brezhnev got very ill in 1974 during his journey to the Far 
East. The condition got worse and worse. At minutes of clear 
 117
conscience he realized himself that it was time he retired. But his 
surrounding insistently dissuaded him from this step. 
Andrei Pavlovich Kirilenko was in complete prostration. He 
was still in the lists of the Central Committee Secretaries and the 
Politburo Members but he had not attended meetings for a long 
time. Chernenko was seriously ill. Ustinov and Gromyko were 
over seventy both... It was an excellent team! 
A couple of years before Leonid Ilyich’s death another old 
Bolshevik left for a better world. It was Mikhail Andreyevich 
Suslov, person No. 2 in the Party hierarchy, the “grey cardinal” 
who spent about a half century in Staraya Square. Stalin himself 
took his opinion into consideration. He was one of those who 
during the Kremlin struggle for power after Stalin’s death helped 
Khrushchev to push Molotov, Malenkov, Kaganovich and “sided 
with them” Shepilov off power (such was a formulation in the 
party documents that leaked to public). In April 1964 when 
Khrushchev was 70 Suslov was most enthusiastic among those 
proposing toasts to dear Nikita Sergeyevich’s health. Ten years 
later he denounced Khrushchev with the same enthusiasm and 
party fury and eulogized Brezhnev. In general the country needed 
renovation like air. And it was Yuri Vladimirovich Andropov who 
spoke it out, resolutely and definitely. He was the Chief of the 
USSR KGB for almost two decades, was the Secretary of the 
CPSU Central Committee for last two year, chaired the Politburo 
meetings and was trusted to “keep the house” as he was much 
more aware of the real state of affairs than the others.  
It is difficult to say if Andropov had a detailed program for the 
country’s renovation. Here is what Aliev said about it: “Andropov 
had a lot of plans he did not disclose to anyone, these plans 
remained unknown.” But first it was necessary to determine what 
“the society we live in” was actually like.  
Scientists excelled in formulas devising new names for the 
system–real socialism, mature socialism, developed socialism... 
But even such fruit needed improvement. Prosaic, everyday 
problems multiplied in the country: to feed and dress the people, 
to give them housing, education and get out of the war in 
Afghanistan. 
 
 
November 22, 1982, Moscow 
 
The next Plenary Meeting of the CPSU Central Committee 
discussed the report made by the Deputy Chairman of the USSR 
Council of Ministers Nikolai Konstantinovich Baibakov “On the 
 118 
State plan for Economic and Social Development of the USSR for 
1983” and the report made by the USSR Minister of Finance 
Vasiliy Garbuzov “On the State Budget of the USSR for 1983”. 
The official report also mentioned the organizational issues 
that were discussed at the Plenary Meeting: 
“The Plenary Meeting of the Central Committee transferred 
comrade G.A. Aliev from the Candidate-member to the Member of 
the CPSU Central Committee Politburo. 
The Plenary Meeting of the Central Committee relieved 
comrade A.P. Kirilenko of his duties of the Member of the CPSU 
Central Committee Politburo and the Central Committee 
Secretary at his personal request. 
The Plenary Meeting of the Central Committee elected 
comrade N.I. Ryzhkov the Secretary of the CPSU Central 
Committee.” 
We would like to add that both Aliev and Ryzhkov were 
appointed on Andropov’s proposal. On the eve of the Plenary 
Meeting on Sunday (for a long time Yuri Vladimirovich 
considered Sundays as working days while he worked both in the 
KGB and in the Central Committee) he met them in the Kremlin. 
As it was appropriate the newspapers published a photograph of 
the new Member of the Politburo and a short profile. 
“Comrade G.A. Aliev was born in 1923 in the family of a 
worker. He is the CPSU member since 1945. He graduated 
History Faculty of the Azerbaijan State University named after 
S.M. Kirov. 
He worked as the Head of the Department of the Soviet of 
People Commissars of the Nakhichevan ASSR. Then he worked 
in the State Security Services where he went a way from a rank-
and-file operative to the Chairman of the KGB under the Council 
of Ministers of the Azerbaijan SSR. 
In July 1969 he was elected the First Secretary of the Central 
Committee of the Azerbaijan Communist Party. 
At the 24th, 25th and 26th Congresses of the CPSU he was 
elected the Member of the CPSU Central Committee. Since March 
1976 he was the Candidate-Member of the Politburo of the CPSU 
Central Committee. 
He is the Hero of Socialist Labor. He is the Deputy of the 
USSR Supreme Soviet for several terms.’ 
According to the choice expression of the historian and 
publicist Roi Medvedev “a new rising star emerged in the Kremlin 
sky”. Years later Andrei Gromyko, the Minister of Foreign 
Affairs, one of the most influential figures in the Soviet governing 
bodies, expressed his view of those days. He admitted that he 
 119
thought to himself that it was necessary to have such a young and 
ambitious person to rule the Soviet Union. It is a pity Andrei 
Andreyevich did not express this right idea at the crucial moment 
when after Andropov and Chernenko’s deaths it was time to 
determine a new leader.  
Outside everything looked like it used to be. But it was only 
outward appearance. Brezhnev was still praised and the Central 
Committee, the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet and the 
Council of Ministers approved resolutions “On Immortalizing 
Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev’s memory”–to name after him towns and 
districts, plants, collective farms, institutions, schools and squares 
as well as the training tank division where Leonid Ilyich served in 
1930s... 
But in the country the course correction started and–for the 
first time!–people could hear the word acceleration that later 
Gorbachyov tried to pass as his own idea.  
The new General Secretary Yuri Vladimirovich Andropov told 
about accelerating the economic development rate, raising the 
gross national income increase, volumes of industrial and 
agricultural production, retail commodity turnover. It was only the 
end of the second week after Brezhnev’s death. His very first 
words were not about achievements but what it was necessary to 
achieve. We will mention only a few major points. 
Yuri Andropov drew his comrades’ attention to “the fact that 
the plans for the first two years of the five-year were not fulfilled 
in relation to some indices”. “Somebody” the General Secretary 
said, “may just not know how to deal with it. It is necessary to 
think what help should be provided to such comrades”. And again 
they heard the key work–acceleration. It was necessary to 
accelerate work on improving the whole sphere of economy 
governing–management, planning, economy mechanisms. 
The General Secretary considered it necessary to “create such 
conditions–economic and organizational–that would stimulate 
quality, productive labor, initiative and enterprise”. But there were 
no ready recipes for solving existing problems. The solutions were 
to be found by “summarizing domestic and world experience, 
accumulating knowledge of best practical workers and scientists”. 
The General Secretary thoroughly analyzed the focal problems 
in development of basic spheres of industry–fuel and energy 
complex, non-ferrous metallurgy and railway transport. The 
situation with railroads was dramatic–and it was exactly the 
sphere Geidar Aliev was going to be responsible for, among many 
other spheres, in the Council of Ministers. 
 120 
Immediately after the Plenary Meeting of the Central 
Committee the session of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR was 
held. It was the seventh session of the tenth convocation.  
On the same day, November 23, at the same time, 16:00, at the 
Grand Kremlin Palace the first meeting of the Soviet of Union was 
opened and at the conference-room of the Supreme Soviet 
Chambers–the first meeting of the Soviet of Nationalities. At the 
Grand Kremlin Palace, according to the newspapers, deputies and 
guests greeted comrades G.A. Aliev, M.S. Gorbachyov, 
V.V. Grishin, A.A. Gromyko, D.A. Kunaev, G.V. Romanov, 
N.A. Tikhonov, D.F. Ustinov, K.U. Chernenko, V.V. Shcherbitsky, 
P.N. Demichev, V.I. Dolgikh, T.Yu. Kiselev, M.S. Solomentsev, 
I.V. Kapitonov. 
This sequence was dictated to the press in Staraya Square: in 
alphabet order–first, of course, the Politburo Members, then 
Candidate-members and finally the Central Committee 
Secretaries. It was quite a logical scheme. But it did not satisfy 
everyone. Why! The list started with Aliev and Gorbachyov was 
only the second. It was infringement, Mikhail Sergeyevich! 
 
 
There is no complete history of the Politburo (the Political 
Bureau) even now, though it is already the second decade since 
the CPSU together with the Soviet Union sank into oblivion. At 
the Party Congresses delegates elected the Central Committee and 
at its Plenary Meetings the Central Committee elected the 
Politburo, the executive power that knew everything, made all 
decisions and guided everyone. In the PB (let us call this structure 
so for short) a kind of core, as they said, in fact a small group of 
especially trusted people formed around the General Secretary. At 
the last years of Stalin’s rule they were Malenkov, Molotov, 
Beria, Khrushchev; Brezhnev made no decision without 
consultations with Ustinov, Gromyko, Andropov a bit earlier with 
Suslov; Gorbachyov trusted Yakovlev, Shevardnadze, Medvedev 
most of all... 
The members of the PB left some memoirs. In Soviet times 
nobody was allowed inside this kitchen where very spicy dishes 
were cooked, in post-Soviet times it did not get much more open. 
The Politburo archive is practically unavailable for researchers. 
New authorities prefer to decant themselves what the public is 
worth, in their opinion, knowing. Yet the curtain rises, though 
slowly. 
...The PB was established in March 1919–it included 5 
members of the Central Committee; its functions were specially 
 121
set forth “to make decisions on matters that brook no delay”. Here 
is the first five members of the PB: Lenin–the Chairman of the 
Soviet of People Commissars, Trotsky–the People Commissar of 
Military and Navy Affairs, Krestinsky–the People Commissar of 
National Affairs, Kamenev–the Chairman of the Moscow Soviet. 
In the opinion of the historian Yuri Zhukov the list of the 
Politburo evidenced that it was narrow leadership of the country, a 
state authority rather than a party body. Stalin continued along the 
same line, achieving by mid 1930 “complete merger of recently 
existed, though formally, two branches of power–party and Soviet 
ones”. The PB remained in that way until Gorbachyov’s 
perestroika that made a discussion club out of the all-powerful 
Politburo. 
Being elected for new posts at the same Plenary Meeting 
Ryzhkov and Aliev turned out to be a kind of party godchildren. 
They were congratulated by comrades. They exchanged a firm 
handshake. For Aliev it was a logical step in his successful party 
career. But Ryzhkov later admitted that he had never seen himself 
as a party functionary: “I am industrialist.” 
Of course, they had a nodding acquaintance for a long time, 
they met at different meetings, Plenary meetings, sessions at the 
USSR Gosplan, where Ryzhkov, a former Chief Executive of the 
well-known Uralmash, worked for the last four years. There was 
finance, resources at the hands of the First Deputy Chairman of 
the Gosplan and the Leaders of the Republics often dropped in on 
him.  
Nikolai Konstantinovich Baibakov headed the USSR Gosplan 
from the pleiad of the outstanding People’s Commissars of 
Stalin’s times. Nikolai Baibakov was born in Baku; there he 
became an oil engineer who was a well-known professional in this 
sphere. When he was under thirty he headed a trust in the Volga 
region and then the whole oil industry, later he run the RSFSR 
Gosplan. In Khrushchev’s times for disobedience he was sent to 
Krasnodar to manage Sovnarkhoz; he was called back to Moscow 
later, though. After Khrushchev’s dismissal Brezhnev and 
Kosygin suggested him running the USSR Gosplan. But wherever 
Nikolai Konstantinovich worked he never forget his place of birth.  
– Baibakov’s attitude towards Azerbaijan was always very 
good, –noted Nikolai Ivanovich Ryzhkov. –For many years he 
represented the Republic in the USSR Supreme Soviet. When in 
Moscow Geidar Alievich always visited Baibakov.” 
The Chairman of the Gosplan always invited the first of his 
four Deputies–Ryzhkov–to these meetings. 
 122 
Then after that memorable for them Plenary Meeting of the 
Central Committee Aliev and Ryzhkov harnessed themselves in 
the same team. In the Central Committee Ryzhkov was 
responsible for economy, Aliev became the First Deputy 
Chairman of the Government. 
We chanced to hear that Geidar Aliev did not leave any 
documents after himself and that in his biography everything was 
rewritten, even his place of birth and his parents’ origins. We 
cannot agree with this version. Andropov’s Department “x-rayed” 
its personnel better than any x-rays themselves. We are sure: the 
General Secretary knew everything about the person he took with 
himself to the Politburo: the person’s origin way back to the tenth 
generation, his relationships and surrounding, habits and state of 
health, personal qualities, interests... By the way, in the references 
his intellectual potential and morale were appreciated to the 
highest degree: unpretentious and ascetic in private life. The 
Chairman of the Council of Ministers Nikolai Alexandrovich 
Tikhonov remained in this position from Brezhnev’s times. Yuri 
Vladimirovich Andropov preferred not to replace him but 
assigned Aliev as his First Deputy. Is it possible that he saw the 
successor to the second post in the state in him? It is not just our 
guess. Such supposition was expressed by many of our 
interlocutors, connoisseurs of the Kremlin kitchen.  
– I am sure that Yuri Vladimirovich Andropov saw the other 
person in the post of the Chairman of the USSR Council of 
Ministers but not Tikhonov, –expresses his point of view Nikolai 
Semenovich Konarev who now heads one of the largest 
forwarding companies in Russia, Intertrans Closed Joint-Stock 
Company but who was the USSR Minister of Railways for nine 
years–appointed on Andropov’s proposal in November 1982. –
The Council of Ministers was to be headed by a more powerful, 
flexible, experienced executive and politician. In addition a 
national aspect was evidently considered too–the Government of 
the multinational state should not consist of people of Russian 
nationality only. Yuri Vladimirovich knew the personnel better 
than many others. And analyzing his personnel policy then and 
now I have come to the conclusion that Aliev was appointed with 
far-fetching prospects. It is a pity that the fate doled out so few 
years to Andropov... 
Tikhonov was obviously far from pleased with this 
appointment. Once he was himself the First Deputy to Kosygin 
and methodically moved towards his lifelong goal pushing aside 
the Premier with his natural authority. The aged Tikhonov 
considered Aliev as his more energetic rival, who enjoyed 
 123
absolute trust on the part of the General Secretary and could 
replace him any moment; Nikolai Alexandrovich was not afraid of 
his other first deputies–Baibakov and Arkhipov were his peers and 
they were never close to the Party top leadership. Only two people 
in the Council of Ministers–Tikhonov himself and Aliev were the 
Members of the Politburo; it seemed logical that Aliev should 
have been the first among the other first Deputies when Tikhonov 
went on holidays or on business trips, but he never left Aliev to 
substitute himself. Of course it hurt Geidar Alievich but he 
managed never to give a sign of it.  
He spent five years in the Kremlin, in the Council of Ministers, 
the five years that contained the whole epoch–from Andropov to 
Gorbachyov with faceless Chernenko in between. 
 Our paths constantly crossed, –remembers Nikolai Ivanovich 
Ryzhkov about those years. –Aliev was responsible for transport, 
light industry and a number of other industries and I, as the 
Secretary of the Central Committee, supervised the work of the 
Gosplan, the Goskomtsen (The State Committee for Pricing–the 
Translator’s note) and other structures. We started to work in 
close contact from the very first days in our new positions. We 
met in the Central Committee and in the Council of Ministers, 
occasionally worked together at some documents, discussed 
current and prospective business. 
I liked Geidar Alievich then for his–as I would call it–solidity. 
He was a very sociable person, very sociable. He was never 
reserved, unsociable or arrogant. He was calm, sometimes with 
humor. As a human being he was easy to work with. 
 
 
The Sovmin–Workday Routine 
 
The working routine of the Sovmin and the First Deputy 
Chairman of the Government and in addition the Member of the 
Politburo or more exactly it was first of all! What was it like? Let 
us look through news items of the first months of 1983. 
On January 3, 1983, Monday, the Soviet delegation is leaving 
for Prague to participate in work of the PCC (the Political 
Consultative Council of the countries–members of the Warsaw 
Treaty.) Besides Yuri Vladimirovich Andropov, the head of the 
delegation, there is N.A. Tikhonov, the Chairman of the Sovmin, 
A.A. Gromyko, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, D.F. Ustinov, the 
Minister of Defence, and K.V. Rusakov, the Secretary of the 
CPSU Central Committee. 
 124 
The departure is organized in full conformity with the 
protocol. The newspapers, as it was prescribed, enumerate all 
those who came to see the delegation off–from Aliev to Ryzhkov. 
He is the last on the right in the obligatory photograph. Two years 
later Nikolai Ivanovich would make it to the centre. Aliev is in his 
“Olympic overcoat” behind Tikhonov. Nikolai Alexandrovich 
tries to rule. There is no Gorbachyov in this photo. He might have 
been on holiday. In the same issue of the Socialist Industry there 
is a map of the major construction projects of the year: five (!) 
blocks at Nuclear Power Stations, three Hydro Electric Power 
Stations, new sectional elevations in Yakutia and the Krasnoyarsk 
Territory which would give 20 million tons of coal, gas pipelines 
Urengoi-Uzhgorod (4.5 thousand km), Urengoi-Novopskov (1.5 
thousand km); new capacities for manufacturing steel, rolled 
stock, the largest world blast-furnace at the Cherepovets 
metallurgical plant that is called “Severstal” now... And this is 
only heavy industry. And there were sugar-refineries, 
meatpacking plants, confectionery plants, textile manufactures, 
construction of housing, outpatient clinics, sanatoriums... And 
tasks that were thrown in by life itself, like manufacturing 
domestic video tape-recorders. 
The CPSU Central Committee, as remembered Filipp 
Denisovich Bobkov, set up a special commission as long ago as in 
1980. The comrades assembled a few times and everyone was 
resolutely against the idea. “We don’t need it. Let customs and the 
frontier guards do their work–withdraw videocassettes at the 
border”–it was common opinion including those of the USSR 
Minister of Communications V.A. Shamshin, First Deputy of the 
USSR Minister of Culture V.I. Popov, the Chairman of the USSR 
Gosteleradio S.I. Lapin. The KGB suggestion for setting up 
manufacture of video equipment was supported only by the First 
Deputy of the USSR Minister of Foreign Affairs G.M. Kornienko 
and–with some limitations–by the Chairman of the Goskino 
F.T. Yermash. 
Two years passed. On the day following Andropov’s election 
for the post of the General Secretary of the CPSU Central 
Committee the Commission gathered again. This time the decision 
to pass the matter of video equipment manufacture to the USSR 
Council of Ministers was taken. Geidar Alievich Aliev chaired the 
meeting of the Sovmin. The Soviet industry started manufacturing 
video equipment.  
On April 9, 1983, the Politburo of the CPSU Central 
Committee considered the draft of the Energy Program of the 
USSR for long prospects until the year of 2000. As usual when 
 125
significant matters were discussed Aliev expresses weighed 
thought-out ideas. 
On April 12 the Council of Ministers and the VTsSPS (All-
Union Central Soviet of Trade Unions) submitted an Act on Labor 
Collectives and increasing their Role in Managing Enterprises, 
Institutions and Organizations to the Supreme Soviet of the 
country. And this–new for the country’s social life–document 
there was also Aliev’s idea, it contained his thoughts and certain 
suggestions. 
On April 18 the All-Union Meeting devoted to the 
development of agriculture and fulfilment of the Food Program.  
On 22nd of the same April the Politburo considered the 
Measures for Further Development of the fuel-energy base in the 
Regions of Transbaikalia and the Far East in 1983-1985 and for 
the period till 1990. 
In the evening at the Kremlin Palace of Congress there was a 
grand meeting in honor of 113th anniversary of V.I. Lenin’s 
birthday. In the Presidium there was the entire Kremlin array. 
Gorbachyov made a speech. He did not spare vivid epithets for 
Lenin and Leninism, the Communist Party and the Soviet State. 
There were only eight years left before the General Secretary 
would repudiate from his party and from the ideals he vowed 
fidelity to. Who could think it possible then? 
Rereading that speech you notice banal remarks here and there. 
There was a glimpse of the idea about the human factor in 
economy but it got lost behind standing turns like “to strengthen 
disciple is everybody’s cause”, accurate references to the new 
General Secretary–as comrade Andropov points out... 
– We are sure, –warbled Gorbachyov, –that in the struggle of 
ideas the final victory will be on the part of the truth and 
humanism, on the part of Marxist-Leninist ideology. We, 
communists, are entrusted by history the most precious property 
the mankind possesses–ideological heritage of thinker-geniuses 
and revolutionaries Marx, Engels and Lenin. 
...On the tenth of May 1983 Geidar Aliev was 60 years old. He 
was decorated with the second Golden Medal of the Hero of 
Socialist Labor. The newspapers published warm greetings on 
behalf of the CPSU Central Committee, the Supreme Soviet 
Presidium and the USSR Council of Ministers. Among those who 
came to congratulate Aliev in the Kremlin there was Filipp 
Denisovich Bobkov. He remembered, “With what pride Geidar 
Alievich showed Yuri Vladimirovich Andropov’s greeting. It 
must have been the highest sign of appreciation.” 
 126 
Behind this pride, which may look a bit boyish, there is a 
characteristic feature. Many years later at one of important 
meetings the President of Azerbaijan said that everyone wishes for 
their work to be appreciated and “I have always longed for it”. 
We have to note in this respect that Geidar Aliev, in opinion of 
those who knew him well, was not from the breed of ambitious 
men who according to Dahl “strive for ranks, awards, glory, 
praises and so act not in conformity with moral principles but 
according to these goals”. He worked all his life not for praises. 
But who would not be pleased with a word of appreciation for his 
deeds? 
In Aliev’s work calendar railway transport took more and more 
time. It was Andropov’s personal assignment. The General 
Secretary liked repeating while looking at the map of the Soviet 
Union that in our country the railways fulfilled many roles–
economic, strategic and national, as they united the peoples of our 
state into a single whole. Yet during the last years the railways 
worked worse and worse. The Minister of Railways Pavlovsky 
was invited to the Politburo Meeting–he could not say anything 
intelligible, some others were to blame. “We have nothing to do 
with such Minister,” –Andropov summarized. 
On November 29–a week after the meeting–Nikolai 
Semenovich Konarev was appointed a new Minister of Railways. 
Such people are said to grow up at the railway. He worked and 
studied, studied and worked and always considered efficiency and 
integrity as essentials. First the Chief Executive of the Railway 
Department, then the first Deputy of the Chief Executive of the 
Railway and the Chief Executive of the Southern Railway 
(Kharkov), then the Deputy Minister, the First Deputy Minister... 
In this position he was invited to Andropov. 
In the office there are almost all the Members of the Politburo–
except comrades from the Republics.  
– Comrade Tikhonov reported me on your consent to stand at 
the head of the Ministry of Railways, –said Andropov. –So we 
approve this decision. On behalf of the Politburo comrade Aliev 
will be responsible for matters of transport. Do you have any 
questions to us? 
– Yes, I do, –answered Konarev. –I have one question. If the 
railway transport is further treated like it is treated now, by 1990s 
we will materially hinder the whole economy. 
And then Nikolai Semenovich cited some figures. In 1970 the 
railway networks received 80 thousand new cars, in 1980–only 70 
thousand. The workload increased by 25% and the car fleet 
decreased by 15%. “How can we provide transportation?” The 
 127
situation with locomotives and rails was no better. In early 1950s 
investments in railway transport were 11% of the budget and in 
1982 they were just 4.2%. “Of course it is necessary to develop 
nuclear electric power and other industries but what would happen 
if the railways are not able to cope with transportation?” 
The Chairman of the Gosplan Nikolai Konstantinovich 
Baibakov also participated in that discussion. It was he that 
Andropov addressed his final words about the 12th five-year plan, 
which he must have thought out and weighed before: It is to be the 
five-year of transport development, the transport five-year! 
A few days later Aliev invited Konarev to his office–not 
through his assistants, he called himself. The Minister expected to 
return in one and a half–two hours and so he informed his 
deputies.  
– But our meeting lasted for four hours and fifteen minutes! –
exclaims Nikolai Semenovich. 
Yes, for over four hours they “went through” page after page, 
problem after problem all the railway economy, all it’s closely 
connected to each other services. And only first three-four minutes 
did Aliev allow himself to remember that he was from the family 
of a railway worker himself, his father worked as a foreman at the 
station pumping-house in Nakhichevan and worried about every 
steam locomotive... 
The meeting with the Deputy Chairman of the Gosplan Viktor 
Yefimovich Biryukov, one of the best connoisseurs of the railway 
transport and transport in general in the country, was similarly 
well organized and business-like. 
One episode from our present Russian reality comes to mind in 
connection with it. The Premier Kasyanov was receiving the head 
of one of the Central Departments. The latter had a lot of 
questions, so he reported briefly, knowing that every day of the 
Government Chairman was scheduled up to a minute. Suddenly 
from the rest room emerged one of those who are called oligarch 
in Russia and said, “Misha, I am in a hurry, let’s go!” The boys 
with shining eyes were in a hurry to make money. They had no 
time for industries, regions, and the whole economy! They were 
interested only in what yields profit. Dough. The time of dough. It 
did not matter for them what to run–Russian oil or Russian coal, 
Russian sky or its seas. And everyone who was not with them 
were doomed to retirement or dismissal or as they used to say 
about steam locomotives to dregs! 
When Nikolai Semenovich Konarev still worked as the Deputy 
Minister once on Sunday he was on duty at the Ministry. There 
was a telephone ring. 
 128 
– Kosygin. Good morning. How are the things? 
– Everything is fine, Alexei Nikolayevich. It’s OK. 
– It is not OK. When are you going to complete removal of the 
corn from Riga port?  
The ports did not cope with unloading dry cargo ships with 
imported corn and they remained for days in their roadsteads in 
Riga, Leningrad, and Murmansk. There were not enough cars. 
– Take the necessary measures and report me in two days, –
Kosygin finished the conversation. 
Two days later carrying out the Premier’s assignment Konarev 
dialled Kosygin’s reception and found out that Alexei 
Nikolayevich was on holiday and called the Ministry of Railways 
from Latvia. He could not forget about his work even being on 
holiday.  
One more occasion got imprinted into Konarev’s memory. In 
the West Siberia the oil production was increasing. In order to 
send it for export the country carried out parallel construction of 
high-capacity oil pipelines and new railways and put in operation 
new diesel locomotives. The engines for them were designed in 
Kolomensky and Kharkovsky plants. The State Commission chose 
Kolomensky diesel engine but it failed. After all the matter 
reached Kosygin. The Minister of Railways Pavlovsky sent 
Konarev to the meeting at the Sovmin. Nikolai Semenovich after 
preliminary consultations with his specialists came to the 
conclusion that Kolomensky diesel engine was not ready. The 
railway workers testing it in the field were of the same opinion.  
– How can it be that it is not ready? –the Deputy Chairman of 
the Government Kirillin interfered the young Deputy Minister. –
Here is the act with eight signatures, including that of the Minister 
of Railways Pavlovsky. 
By the way, sending his Deputy to the meeting at Kosygin’s 
office Pavlovsky did not warn him that he had signed the 
document. His directive was as follows: “Do not agree to 
Kolomensky diesel engine.” 
– Alexei Nikolayevich, –Kirillin raged meanwhile. –How can 
it be that the Minister has signed the document but his Deputy 
does not agree to it! 
Silence hung in the large meeting-room. 
Kosygin looked at Konarev, at Kirillin, then turned up the 
corners of his mouth in a barely perceptible smile. 
– You see, comrade Kirillin, it is not the matter of who has 
signed and what has been signed. The truth only matters. Let us 
listen to the Chief of the Depot in Tomsk. 
 129
In that way Kosygin looked for the truth. So worked Aliev, 
Konarev, Biryukov... 
They thoroughly analyzed the situation with the railway 
transport in those four hours. 
– In Aliev, –says Konarev, –I did not only meet an interested 
listener but smart state figure with large-scale thinking as well. He 
clearly distinguished between the major and the minor, he could 
find the link upon finding which, according to one classic, you 
would be able to take out the whole chain. I felt that he was a man 
of bright mind. He did not get involved in technical problems 
solely, he could see people behind them...” 
Nowadays few people know that until late 1980s the railway 
workers were not considered to be participants of the Great 
Patriotic War. Under bombs and shells they drove trains to the 
front-line, they sent special trains with equipment to evacuation 
from fiery encirclement rings... 
– I set a goal to publish a book that will become a monument 
to the war railway workers, –says Konarev. –And such book has 
been issued. It is called “Railway Workers in the Great Patriotic 
War”. It tells about the people who fought standing at the rudder, 
at the right fender of the steam locomotive. Pointsmen, car 
inspectors–what heroic work they did! Just imagine–20 thousand 
attacks at stations and junctions, 115 thousand kilometers of 
restored railways. I was glad to give this book to Geidar Alievich 
as a present... 
And it took some more years for the railway workers who 
worked in special units to receive the status of the Great Patriotic 
War participants. 
 
 
In the Government among other responsibilities Aliev ran the 
Sovmin Commission on Urgent Matters, its abbreviation–the 
CUM. At the meeting of this Commission there frequently was 
present Yuri Petrovich Batalin, the First Deputy Minister of 
Enterprise Construction for Oil and Gas Industry, who later 
headed the USSR Goskomtrud and was the Deputy Chairman of 
the USSR Government.  
– At the Commission most various issues were discussed, 
which required as it is seen from its name urgent interference, 
quick solutions, –remembers Batalin. –Under the Commission’s 
special control there was the gas industry development, 
construction of the five largest gas pipelines from Western Siberia 
to the Centre as well as construction of the export gas pipeline 
Urengoi–Pomary–Uzhgorod. 
 130 
The major objective of the five-year–so these construction 
projects were attributed in the Party documents. Batalin, as the 
First Deputy Minister of Enterprise Construction for Oil and Gas 
Industry, dealt directly with them. 
– To the meetings of the CUM which took place every week 
the Minister usually sent me, –continues Yuri Petrovich. –When 
Aliev started chairing these meetings I was surprised with the way 
he did it. He did it in an efficient and well-organized way. He 
listened to different points of view, compared them and made 
decisions then. You could feel large experience and extraordinary 
intuition in his manner. 
A lot of issues concerning various industries were discussed at 
the CUM meetings. It was often impossible to assess them 
immediately. Then a special group was set up to look for a 
compromise. But more frequently there was no time for it. For 
example, supply of some pipes is delayed to the spot. Why? Does 
the plant foil the plans? Or the railway? Where is the cause for 
delay? Where is the truth? 
One of the issues the CUM constantly dealt with was “jams” in 
gas pipelines and oil fields. The sections of the railway from 
Sverdlovsk to Tyumen and from Tyumen to Tobolsk were 
permanently overloaded. The second rails were laid; the station 
rails were widened... Still there were enough problems. Then the 
old best practice was made use of–they arranged for dispatcher’s 
monitoring–a kind that was used for wartime military trains–over 
special trains that carried pipes and other cargo for oil and gas 
construction projects. And Aliev took an active part in it. And 
since then the Ministry of Enterprise Construction for Oil and Gas 
Industry had no problems. Aliev could find a correct solution due 
to his patience and being well organized, his ability to see and 
appreciate who worked and who just created the appearance of 
activity. I would also add his great psychological skills and ability 
to see the essence behind the words.  
The Chairman of the CUM as a rule made definite and clear 
decisions. Self-control and logic distinguished him. He suppressed 
any bursts of emotions. It was obvious how thoroughly, deeply 
and seriously Geidar Alievich prepared for the meetings of the 
CUM. It was typical of his style. 
– I was also present at the meetings that Aliev chaired under 
his responsibilities in the Sovmin or on the instruction of the 
Government, –continues Yuri Batalin. –Some financial problems 
got to the Goskomtrud where I worked. We needed funds to solve 
them. For example, it was necessary to set forth regional 
 131
coefficients, to stimulate development of some or other 
manufactures or areas or to increase teachers’ salary. 
But where can we obtain money? The Goskomtrud suggests 
something, the Minfin rejects. In particular we had such a conflict 
in relation to increase of salaries for teachers. The Goskomtrud 
prepared its proposal on the basis of the Central Committee and 
the Sovmin resolution on School, taking into account the point of 
view of teachers, but the Minfin objected: they require too much. I 
went to the Minister of Finance Garbuzov, to the Gosplan, to 
various meetings. I tried to assert our position, as it was deeply 
reasoned, checked-out, discussed with teachers in the Republics 
and at the Academy of Pedagogical Science, in party and Soviet 
authorities. The requirements were high, but in my opinion we 
found an optimal decision. Yet for the Minfin they turned out to 
be too enormous again. 
At one of the next meetings that Geidar Aliev chaired 
emotions became heated. I was making a report on the 
Goskomtrud proposal when without asking for Aliev’s permission 
Garbuzov started criticizing me in a very tough way. In fact he did 
not have any reasonable arguments and in such cases people 
usually become personal. “You understand nothing on the topic, 
such proposals can be submitted by dilettants only!” 
After a pause Batalin continued his speech. There was no 
stopping Garbuzov and again he interrupted Yuri Petrovich. Still 
Batalin managed to check himself. But when the Minister of 
Finance interrupted him for the third time, saying that it was 
necessary for him to learn from older and more experienced 
people before climbing such a high rostrum, Batalin responded 
with: 
– Learn? Who from? 
– From me, for instance, –replied the Minister. 
– What shall I learn from you? Your rudeness, impudence and 
temerity? –Garbuzov did not expect such charge. And Batalin 
poured out his heart: –If you want to teach–teach but not 
impudence. Because it is not for the first time. –In fact feeling the 
might of money behind his back and having great power 
Garbuzov could afford talking to petitioners in a haughty manner, 
to put it mildly. –Don’t you understand that as the Member of the 
Party Central Committee you should set an example for us?! 
Everyone was frozen in the room, just exchanging glances. 
Garbuzov sprang to his feet. 
– Comrade Garbuzov, take your seat, please, –Aliev said in a 
quiet manner. But the Minister went on raising his tone. –You’d 
better sit down and listen. If you have counter arguments you will 
 132 
speak them out. And if you don’t have arguments it is not worth 
getting outraged then. 
The meeting was over. Batalin came back to his office. And 
soon there was a call from the direct line. 
– You did right when you silenced Garbuzov, comrade Batalin, 
–said Aliev. –He behaved incontinently. But I recommend you not 
to get excited yourself when you rebuff someone. 
Batalin remembered this call because it was also a lesson that 
the Politburo Member who preferred not to give in public. 
And here is one more Batalin’s observation: Aliev always tried 
to find accurate balance between the treasury possibilities and the 
needs of an industry, a department or a person. 
Batalin got to know Aliev better when he became the Deputy 
Chairman of the USSR Council of Ministers himself. He was 
responsible for construction projects and a number of other 
directions. At that time Nikolai Ivanovich Ryzhkov was the 
Chairman. According to Batalin’s recollections Aliev always 
reasoned his position at the meetings of the Government 
Presidium. He could not say, “I think it is wrong...” and stop at it 
as some other party functionaries used to do relying on the 
authority of their office. No, Aliev usually went on, “Because...” 
and built a clear system of reasoning. 
Since his youth Geidar Alievich appreciated efficient people 
who possessed thorough knowledge of the subject they dealt in. 
And at that moment he appreciated the expertise of Batalin-
builder. If they were to consider issues concerning construction 
matters at the meeting of the Commission for Urgent Matters he 
was likely to ask Batalin to take part: “Yuri Petrovich, may I ask 
you to be in person. Together we will find a reasonable solution.” 
 
 
At the end of May in 1983 the Politburo discussed Additional 
Measures on Improvement of Studying the Russian Language at 
Comprehensive Schools and Other Educational Institutions of the 
Union Republics. It was a matter of great importance. From 
Estonia and Georgia, Kirghizia and Latvia young people that 
could hardly speak Russian went to the army. The situation was 
slightly better in Azerbaijan and, of course, in Ukraine and 
Byelorussia. By the way, Geidar Alievich knew the Russian 
language perfectly, which surprised more than once his 
experienced assistants and everybody else he met.  
– I was amazed to know how deep his knowledge of the 
Russian Language was, –remarks Viktor Yefimovich Biryukov. –
While working together at some document, he read very 
 133
attentively every phrase as if he weighed it: “Here it would be 
better to use a misrelated participle.” He did his work with great 
diligence and I would add with talent. 
The Politburo had to deal with the Russian language, as it was 
the language of international communication, a must in the 
multinational Soviet Union. 
Once in troubled times of Khrushchev’s decade a story spread 
all over Ukraine and farther on.  
At the Plenary Meeting of the Central Committee of the 
Ukraine Communist Party one of the delegates started his speech 
in Russian. At once Nikita Sergeyevich graciously interrupted 
him: 
– Don’t you know the Ukrainian language? You work in 
Ukraine, don’t you?! 
The First Secretary threw this remark in chase of cheap 
popularity with “samostiiniks”. He did not think that half of the 
republic population was Russian and the Russian language was 
the language of international communication for all the citizens. 
Similar story took place in Baku. In the Azerbaijan subsidiary of 
the Marxism-Leninism Institute attached to the CPSU Central 
Committee the scientists were discussing “History of the 
Communist Party of Azerbaijan”. There were about 200 people 
present all in all–from Baku and Moscow, colleagues from 
Turkmenistan and Georgia, Tajikistan and Kazakhstan... 
Considering such wide diversification of the audience the 
discussion was carried out in the Russian language. The 
participants spoke out a number of serious remarks. The authors 
of “History” in their opinion treated some historic documents in a 
rather free way, including those written by Lenin. They varnished 
and embroidered activity of the local party organization, the level 
of social and economic development of Azerbaijan especially of 
Azerbaijan village in late 19th-early 20th centuries. It was noted 
that the book did not cover the struggle against bourgeois-
nationalistic parties and groups broadly enough; “activity of party 
officials is described lubberly and in some instances in a very 
deliberate way. Instead of demonstrating certain revolutionary and 
party work of Bolsheviks the authors constantly (appropriately 
and inappropriately) gave the whole lists of their surnames. At the 
same time in the book there is scarce information about the 
activity of such people as Dzhaparidze, Ordzhonikidze, Stalin, 
Shaumyan who played a key role in formation and guidance of the 
party organizations in Azerbaijan.” 
One of the local scientists made his speech in the Azerbaijan 
language and his speech was not translated. He said, “The book 
 134 
describes the situation in such a way that Azerbaijan could join 
either Russia or Iran. Couldn’t Azerbaijan have its own 
independent path of development?” For that period it was rather a 
seditious formulation! The Academician Sumbat-zadeh translated 
a part of this rebellious speech in order to correct this erroneous 
and harmful performance, as it was classified in the information 
note for the CPSU Central Committee. The meeting ended in a 
large scandal. The Deputy Head of Marxism-Leninism Institute 
under the CPSU Central Committee N. Shatagin and two of his 
colleagues scribbled a 15-page memorandum to the Central 
Committee. They reported on a meeting with the First Secretary of 
the Central Committee of the Republican Communist Party 
Mustafaev and how they asked the Central Committee of the 
Azerbaijan Communist Party to respond to the incorrect 
statements. Mustafaev gave a promise. But “as it is evident from 
his report about the meeting published in issue of the newspaper 
Bakinsky rabochy of December 30, 1958, in which there was no 
self-criticism at all, the erroneous performance of comrade 
Kurbanov at the meeting has not received the appropriate 
assessment so far.” 
Of course, it was not a private case. Neither was it just the 
matter of personal incontinence and rudeness of the Head of the 
Propaganda and Agitation Department of the Central Committee 
of the Azerbaijan Communist Party Kurbanov. This ideologist 
threw such remarks to his colleagues: “What Narimanov’s cult? 
Didn’t he do enough? And who liberated you, Kirghizes?” 
 
 
On November 1, 1983, Aliev was in Vietnam as the head of 
the CPSU delegation. In that journey Nikolai Ivanovich Ryzhkov 
who highly appreciated Aliev’s work as the head of the delegation 
accompanied him. In Vietnam the long-term program for 
economic and scientific-technical cooperation of our countries 
was signed. 
On November 20 Aliev participated in work of the Politburo 
Commission on Guidance and Supervision over the designing 
“Complex Program for Development and Production of Consumer 
Goods and System of Services for Population”. 
On December 3 the Politburo approved the measures “On 
Establishing the USSR United System of Air Communication 
Control”, that was set up by the Government in order to fulfil the 
provisions of the USSR Air Code. Geidar Aliev took an 
immediate part in preparation of this document. 
 135
On December 26 the Plenary Meeting of the CPSU Central 
Committee was scheduled. Yuri Vladimirovich Andropov was 
expected to get out of hospital by that date. Alas! The text of the 
General Secretary’s speech was handed over to participants of the 
Plenary Meeting. On the next day it was published in newspapers 
under the following heading “The text of the speech of the 
General Secretary of the CPSU Central Committee comrade 
Yu.V. Andropov”. 
“To my great disappointment according to temporary 
circumstances I will not be able to attend the Plenary Meeting. But 
I have studied thoroughly all the materials that the plan for the 
following year is based upon... I submit the text of my speech.” 
Aliev reread this farewell speech with anxiety and bitterness. 
Everybody perceived it as the will. Here it was as if Yuri 
Vladimirovich gave Aliev his approving regards:  
“The work of transport requires unremitting attention on the 
part of economic, party and Soviet bodies. Of course, some 
positive tendencies have been seen here. But in transport sphere 
there are more than anywhere else reserves and unutilized 
opportunities that may be put into operation in short terms.” 
Two incomplete months later the Plenary Meeting of the 
Central Committee elected the new General Secretary–Konstantin 
Sergeyevich Chernenko. 
– Comrades, Yuri Vladimirovich Andropov was measured a 
very short, offensively short period to work at the head of our 
Party and the Government. 
Who could know that the fate measured even a shorter period 
for his successor?! 
Yuri Vladimirovich was buried under a salute of salvoes. 
Plants, riverboats and sea ships honked–for three minutes! 
During those sad days Geidar Alievich remembered more than 
once their meetings–starting with the first one, in 1967. How long 
ago it seemed! Andropov was quite young just over fifty and 
Geidar was only forty-four, they were both tall, strong...  
“After Brezhnev’s funeral, –remembered Geidar Alievich, –
Andropov and I met in private. –“I need you and want you to start 
work in Moscow.” I responded with refusal to Yuri Vladimirovich 
as I did before to Brezhnev. I could not imagine myself without 
Azerbaijan; I was just unable to part with Azerbaijan, with my 
native area. But Andropov objected: “Azerbaijan is already small 
for you” and smiled softly. When I refused again he repeated in a 
firmer manner, “The whole Union needs you, Azerbaijan is too 
small for you, Geidar. You voted for my election to the post of the 
General Secretary and now you don’t want to help me.” 
 136 
Of course the Azerbaijanians were proud of their own man in 
the Kremlin! Besides other duties Aliev was responsible for the 
Soviet Union relations with countries of the Islam world where he 
was treated with accented respect. He had to visit Egypt, Libya, 
Pakistan, Jordan, and Iraq with important diplomatic missions. 
“In 1984 I was promptly sent to Damask,” remembered he. “In 
Syria, according to the KGB report, there was a conflict between 
Hafez Assad and his brother Rifat who headed the Syrian Secret 
Information Service.  
“The Kremlin did not want to allow the change of the regime 
or the leader in Syria. I made for Damask without delay. I met 
with Hafez Assad who was recovering after illness. Despite of his 
decease our meeting lasted for eight hours. Shortly after that he 
sent his brother Rifat to Spain. The problem was solved in that 
way and the Politburo had a sigh of relief.” 
For some years Alexander Dzasokhov worked as the 
Ambassador of the Soviet Union in Syria, now he is the head of 
North Ossetia. “I heard a lot of kind words from the President of 
Syria Hafez Assad about Aliev,” Alexander Sergeyevich told us. 
 
 
Someone Else’s Children 
 
Aliev, the First Deputy Chairman of the Government, 
supervised work of two dozens Ministers and Departments. 
Besides transport, he had to deal with book-publishing, and 
material and technical basis of cinematography, and healthcare, 
and children’s homes–it was Chernenko’s direct assignment in 
connection with the note of writer Likhanov. And it was also the 
case when an official mission and a personal interest were in utter 
coincidence.  
Geidar Alievich first encountered with the problem of orphans, 
homeless children whom the war drove into streets in years of his 
chekist youth. He was in children’s homes in Nakhichevan and in 
Baku. He knew that on September 20, 1945, the Deputy Chairman 
of the USSR Sovnarkom N.A. Voznesensky signed the decree 
“On Children’s Homes Attached to Industrial Enterprises”. There 
were children’s homes attached to collective and state farms 
earlier; often they were built with peasants’ money. It was so, for 
example, in Azerbaijan. At every Town or Region NKVD 
Department there was a Section for Combating Children 
Homelessness and Neglect. Komsomol helped children’s homes–
in 1946 the Azerbaijanian youth gathered 92 chairs, 348 plates, 
275 spoons, 1,725 books, 305 copybooks for them. The young 
 137
people shared not from wealth, sometimes they gave the last. 
There were Aliev’s copybooks among those three hundreds.  
As the time passed the country coped with homelessness. But 
about orphans it should be admitted it forgot. Among Party, 
Komsomol, Soviet functionaries there were not many of those 
who looked into this abyss of despair. They might have been 
afraid to hurt their placid conscience. Visiting children’s homes 
and homes where old people lived out their last days was as usual 
for the First Secretary of the Central Committee of the Azerbaijan 
Communist Party as visiting oil fields or cotton plantations. 
Depressed by a perfunctory look of these establishments once he 
invited architects to the Central Committee and asked them to 
design the draft of such a building where children could feel cozy 
and warm. 
 
 
The writer, the Board Chairman of the Russian Children Fund 
Albert Anatolyevich Likhanov devoted without exaggeration all 
his life to protecting childhood, orphans, and homeless children. 
Among Chernenko’s assistants there was Viktor Pribytkov, a good 
acquaintance of Likhanov from his Komsomol days. He shared 
Likhanov’s worries and suggested writing a note to the name of 
the General Secretary.  
Two days later Likhanov brought his paper. He wrote about 
the destiny of a small child who got in trouble at the very 
beginning of his life. He urged that problems of upbringing should 
be shared by society. He required significant support for orphans. 
He suggested a system of actions that consisted of 45 weighed 
points. At the very first point he referred to Azerbaijan experience. 
“While construction of schools is well under way in the 
country there is no construction of children’s homes. The children 
homes we have are housed in old buildings, many of which were 
built before the Revolution. There is no science-based concept of 
the modern children’s home. Upon its creation, in my opinion, we 
should start building new children’s homes. A single such unique 
example is set by the city of Baku where under comrade Aliev’s 
personal supervision a new model children’s home was built a few 
years ago. 
In my point of view existence of children’s homes in large 
industrial centers and in remote countryside areas is an ill turn for 
children There are not enough efficient pedagogic personnel in 
remote villages while in large cities there is unhealthy 
microclimate created by parents who have been deprived of their 
parental rights. 
 138 
It seems that an ideal children’s home–school (boarding-school 
of a new type) should be located 50-100 kilometers off a large 
centre (with good roads) which will allow to bring children up in 
the atmosphere of half-rural surrounding without isolation from 
big culture at the same time.” 
Albert Likhanov finished his letter at a high note: “During the 
years of the war some secretaries of district party committees 
started their day with a visit to a children’s home. It was 
understandable. There lived the children of the people’s tragedy. 
Now it is other time. And the tragedy of the present day little 
orphans has different resonance. But it sounds in a different way 
for us, adults, only, which understands everything. For a child a 
tragedy is always the bitterest regardless of its cause. 
The Party was always the first to come to children’s support. I 
believe that it will solve this particular problem as well.” 
A week later Pribytkov, the General Secretary’s assistant, 
called Likhanov and said that resolution had been approved. 
Konstantin Sergeyevich assigned Aliev to deal with this problem. 
The General Secretary may have paid attention to the example 
with the children home described in the letter or may have 
remembered Aliev’s insistence while he tried to arrange quotes for 
applicants or a boarding school with military specialization in the 
Central Committee... According to Likhanov’s recollections the 
events developed further as follows: 
“A few more days later Lubov Kuzminichna Balyasnaya, the 
Deputy Russian Minister of Education, called and said 
approximately the following: 
– Thank you for your letter to the Central Committee, it will be 
of great help... 
I will not conceal that it was a pleasant call, yet I asked: 
– Lubov Kuzminichna, tell me, please, if the Ministry itself 
could not do the same. 
– Of course, not! –exclaimed she. –Our paper would have been 
considered as one more bureaucratic document but you are a 
writer and act as if on behalf of the society! 
Of course, thank this woman for the attempt to explain at least 
theoretically the existence of such situation; I smiled as I did not 
believe much in such formulation and I turned out to be right and 
to be wrong at the same time.  
Some more days passed and I was invited to Geidar Alievich 
Aliev at the meeting in the Kremlin. He was the First Deputy 
Chairman of the USSR Council of Ministers then. At the long 
table in his office there were people. They seemed to know each 
other; they exchanged remarks in an animated manner. Aliev was 
 139
at his desk and had a telephone conversation. His assistant brought 
me to his desk and introduced me. Aliev smiled kindly, shook 
hands with me and addressing the others introduced me: “It is a 
writer such and such I ask you to treat him with respect.” 
I sat down to the common table, nodding and greeting to the 
right and to the left; people I saw for the first time examined me 
with curiosity. I never participated in the Kremlin meetings 
before, and though I was the editor-in-chief of the magazine and 
knew many people in Moscow very well, there was no one I knew 
here–there was another world in front of me, the world of the 
Sovmin, and frankly speaking I did not know how to behave in it. 
I should admit that Aliev helped me greatly. His speech–brief 
and rather tough–started exactly as Balyasnaya forecast. He 
referred to me and my letter many times, emphasizing that I was a 
writer and an independent person in that way, but he continued, 
disproving the second part of our conversation with her, with the 
words that it was a pity that the Departments responsible for 
orphaned children did not raise and did not solve these quite 
obvious problems themselves. 
He said that the General Secretary commissioned the 
Government to prepare the Draft Regulation on Support of 
Orphaned Children. He named some people, identified some 
details of organizational character. He repeated for about three 
times: consult with the author of the letter, agree all the details 
with him and finally asked me: 
– When will you be able to attend our next meeting? 
I did not expect such turn of events: my role was that of a 
petitioner. And here I was asked such a question. It seems I spent 
some time pondering over my answer and Aliev added to make 
the situation clearer: 
– Here are the officials and they will come any time you 
choose while you are a busy person and you have other things to 
do–So when will you find time? 
– Any day, –muttered I. –Thank you! 
Yet as the saying goes the fairy-tale is told fast but the deed is 
made slow. I cancelled all my trips, expecting a call–which would 
it, be from, I wondered–but there was silence, and I did not dare 
call Aliev myself. This strange slack lasted for two months, not 
less, and I did not know what to do. Pribytkov reassured me: “If 
Aliev deals with it, don’t worry.” 
At last there was a call from the Kremlin: “We have a meeting 
today at such time, come, please.” I came a bit earlier; they give 
me a draft of the resolution. I started reading and gasped. There 
was practically nothing left of my ideas. I got covered with sweat 
 140 
and felt unwell. I told to the secretary, “Ask Geidar Alievich if I 
can see him before the meeting.” 
I was ushered inside. I started from the door: “It is horrible! 
Everything has been cut out–it is a shame. It is impossible!” 
Aliev smiled and said something like “Don’t worry. Let’s sit at 
the table. I will give you the floor and we will do everything, as it 
should be. 
The meeting begins. First we listen to three Deputy Ministers, 
then the First Deputy Minister of Finance. They smile to their big 
boss and everyone as in accord states that they have prepared 
quite an extraordinary draft of the most wonderful resolution that 
will turn upside down the whole orphanage system, will make it 
better, will humanize it and so on... 
Aliev lets all of them speak out and then says: 
– Now let us listen to the author of this petition to the Central 
Committee, –and he looks smiling at me. 
Appeasing deceitful speeches of my predecessors enraged me 
finally. Among the nonsense they talked there was, for example, 
the statement that it will be enough to increase the food budget by 
20 kopecks a day per a child. The reasoning was like that: there 
are many children in one establishment and if in the common pot 
food for 20 kopecks for each capita is added–it will be more than 
enough! Who did these people economize for? Who did they cut 
off from? What for? I cannot understand even now. Could it be a 
demonstration of the official’s–for the sake of the state treasury–
zeal? Only their zeal was a sham as the matter concerned the state 
children–in the full meaning of this word. Moreover I had a 
conclusion of independent dieticians–experts in small children 
nourishment–my trump card against callousness. Besides porridge 
it contained vitamin, fruit and juice consumption rates and all the 
other serious argumentation necessary to make such a decision. It 
concerned nutrition of hundreds of thousands of abandoned 
children–who would come to their defence if not the authority? 
And how should it, the authority, behave if it assumed 
responsibility for these little people? Can it be a miser? Can it 
protect interests of the budget that impersonal thing which belongs 
to no one knows whom? But this budget that is everybody’s talk 
until now–add a head and a belly to it and you’ll see a kind of a 
bed-bug got drunk on people’s blood–actually and primarily 
belongs to such youngsters. First feed the orphaned and crippled 
and don’t forget the old–then divide all the rest, spread the balance 
among all the other numerous needs–it seems such should be 
thoughts and actions of the Fatherland that is responsible to its 
citizens. 
 141
Alas! Not only now but at that time when people did not hear 
too often this depressing word–budget–as well this invisible 
blood-greedy bed-bug was surrounded by Cerberuses that saw 
their duty solely in barking off and guarding something from 
someone. 
To cut the long story short, I managed to provide 1 rouble 20 
kopecks instead of 20 kopecks for a child and two hundred 
roubles instead of meager 10 roubles for a cotton dressing-gown 
for practical training at the children’s home or the boarding-
school–as majority of orphanage institutions were–and still are–
situated in rural places, where children had practice not in light 
and warm workshops but in fields and near tractors, where they 
need a quilted jacket, warm trousers, a fur hat, fur long-boots and 
mittens let alone a shirt... 
And so item-by-item under Aliev’s supervision I managed to 
insert back everything that the officials sitting around the table 
had crossed out. And Aliev supported me on every point except 
one. As far back as in 1984 I suggested to restore the Children 
Fund named after V.I. Lenin. 
The Deputy Minister of Finance that just then did not want to 
give money for orphans’ quilted jackets immediately ventured: 
– What will they say abroad? Can’t we provide for our own 
orphans? 
It seemed that the word “charity” I used in my speech fell bad 
on their ears. 
Aliev said in an apologizing tone: 
– We don’t seem to be ready for this yet... 
But I was happy with what I have achieved and frankly 
speaking I was afraid that the issue of the Fund would be 
transferred to the sphere of ideology which meant it would be 
beyond the Sovmin and Aliev’s powers. It was clear that if the 
idea of reviving a charity fund, even for children, and even under 
Lenin’s name, and even not foundation but just restoration of the 
existed under the Soviet power organization, which was closed, 
though, got to the hands of a party boss like Suslov, the resolution 
on orphanage could have been cancelled at all. So triumphing over 
what I managed to get, I gave up on this point. 
It must have been to prevent me from wandering along the 
corridors of power and to prevent the officials from depriving the 
children Geidar Alievich entitled me to sign all new versions of 
the resolution. And–Oh, Wonder! –in 1985 the resolution was 
approved and published. I rejoiced. 
Using the modern language the economic situation of 
orphaned children changed dramatically. They got more food, 
 142 
clothes. Previously dressed in grey the children from the 
children’s homes changed miraculously. Their coats, dresses, 
overcoats, and shirts–everything they wear became new and 
lovely–like those of happy “home” children. The salary of the 
personnel rose. In general the orphanage that had been ashamedly 
unmentionable before suddenly got in the limelight. The matter 
developed in such a way that there was nearly a queue of those 
who wanted to become orphanage institutions’ sponsors–plants, 
collective farms, institutes, theatres, everyone wanted to sponsor, 
to mend roofs, to help with food and money, to take children to 
theatres and museums–moreover such children could get there 
free of charge since then. 
The Central Committee approve one more of my ideas and 
decorated many educators, doctors, teachers, nurses, cooks and, of 
course, heads of the children homes with medals. It certainly 
raised prestige of the people who devoted their lives to rescuing 
children.”  
Months passed. Gorbachyov took the office of the General 
Secretary. Ryzhkov replaced Tikhonov, sent to long-deserved 
retirement. In endless train of business of the Sovmin the latter 
marked for himself the problem of childhood as an important one. 
On one of Saturdays he invited Likhanov to his office. Let us cite 
some more lines from Albert Anatolyevich’s notes. 
“I armed myself with a thick file of papers; in each of them 
there was one or other problem set out, some of them had 
photographs attached to them. Besides I wrote a summary note on 
the problem of childhood.  
Ryzhkov met me in his Kremlin residence, he was not alone, 
his wife Lyudmila Sergeyevna was present. He told me that it was 
the famous Stalin’s office, where everything was preserved as it 
used to be. The host and his with sat at one side of the table for 
convenience and I was offered a seat at the other side. 
Naturally, at first I was a bit nervous–I had never had such a 
rendezvous in my life before, –and there would not be any in 
future; the matter is easily explained by the character of Nikolai 
Ivanovich–his utmost integrity and restrain.  
He immediately said that he read my articles about childhood 
and besides Geidar Alievich Aliev, his First Deputy told him 
about me. So Ryzhkov was aware of my letter of 1984 and the 
relevant resolution of the Government. 
That memorable meeting lasted amazingly long–three hours 
and forty minutes. Gradually my speech before two listeners 
turned into a talk. Nikolai Ivanovich told as being a teenager he 
started working during the war, how he lived in poverty, how 
 143
became a student. Lyudmila Sergeyevna also told about her 
childhood. They spoke in a reserved modest manner–it was then 
that I felt we were people of one generation.  
It seemed nothing clouded relationships between Gorbachyov 
and Ryzhkov so far and as I learned much later, on the very next 
day Nikolai Ivanovich told the General Secretary about me and 
they agreed to attract me to drafting a new resolution on 
orphanage and form a small team of specialists from the Sovmin 
in order to avoid delays. The leading part was assigned to Viktor 
Ivanovich Vlasov, Geidar Alievich Aliev’s Sovmin Deputy at the 
Bureau on Social Matters and me.” 
The Russian (previously Soviet) Children Fund, founded in 
1987, operates until now. Lots and lots of kind deeds, mercy 
actions, thousands of saved lives are credited on its account... The 
only pity–there are more and more orphans. And there are no 
authorities in Russia now, whose souls would be hurt by a child 
tragedy like it happened to Chernenko, Aliev, and Ryzhkov... 
 
 
BAM Remained in His Heart 
 
The railway transport was renovated day after day. The 
construction project was going on at the Baikal-Amur Main Line, 
one of the largest construction sites of the 20th century. 3,150 
kilometers of the second line towards the Pacific Ocean, new 
towns and settlements, stations and mines, forestries and mills that 
were built by the entire country.  
On July 5, 1984, the Politburo of the Central Committee 
“listened to comrade G.A. Aliev on some issues connected with 
construction of the Baikal-Amur Main Line. It was noted that in 
general the main line construction was going on at high pace. In 
severe nature-climatic conditions a large volume of work was 
done, many bridges, tunnels and other facilities were built. In 
inhabitable places new settlements emerged. All this was the 
result of purposeful efforts of workers, technicians and engineers, 
local party, Soviet, trade-union, Komsomol organizations, sponsor 
support of working people from many republics, regions and 
areas.” 
In that year, 1984, the construction collectives were going to 
finish laying of the main railway line–by the holiday as it was 
customary–by the 67th anniversary of the Great October, and to 
open traffic all along the main line a year in advance of the 
scheduled term.  
 144 
Let us attract your attention: a year before the schedule that 
means in November 1984. It was already July! Meanwhile as the 
Politburo noted according to Aliev’s report on the route “there are 
delays in construction of locomotive and car facilities, engineering 
systems of the main line, housing, children’s institutions, 
hospitals, trading enterprises, public catering establishments”. The 
Politburo of the Central Committee of the Communist Party 
suggested that the Heads of Ministries and Departments took 
measures to ensure timely putting the planned objects of the 
Baikal-Amur Main Line in operation.  
On September 30 of the same year, 1984, the newspapers 
reported on joining that took place at the BAM. “There is a 
railway from Baikal to the Amur!” exclaimed the “Socialist 
Industry”. “Crowning titanic work of the collective of the All-
Union Top-Priority Komsomol Project, yesterday–a year before 
the scheduled date–the line assembling brigades of Alexander 
Bondar and Ivan Varshavsky, moving towards each other from the 
west and the east, joined 3,159-kilometer-long track of the BAM 
near Balbukhta halt.” 
The reporter did not lie. Actually the rails joined in this taiga 
clearing. The operators showed the “golden link” being laid. But 
nobody said that the Severo-Muisky tunnel was not ready; a 
bypass was being built there. There was a mistake on the part of 
prospectors and designers–they directed the route across the 
break. The subterranean river blocked the builders’ progress. 
Severo-Muisky tunnel must have been the only tunnel in the 
world that saw so many big bosses. Ministers, Party officials, 
scientists came there. Geidar Alievich Aliev, the Minister of 
Railways Nikolai Semenovich Konarev, the Deputy Chairman of 
Gosplan Viktor Yefimovich Biryukov came among the first as 
soon as it was known about the accident on the drifting... 
Biryukov was 72 then but his younger companions hardly kept 
pace with him, who was still tall and strong. 
It is two decades since that memorable trip. Biryukov is over 
ninety but he is still sharp-sighted and accurate in details and his 
assessments. They went from Irkutsk to the Severo-Muisky tunnel 
on the special train. One carriage was for Aliev, as the Member of 
the Politburo, the other–for the rest part of the delegation. In early 
morning Biryukov in his tracksuit ran out of the carriage. 
– Yesterday the grass was green and today it is somehow 
silver. Oh dear! It is snow. In August! –exclaimed he with youth 
ingenuousness. 
From the neighbor carriage also in a tracksuit Aliev jumped 
down. 
 145
– Geidar Alievich! –Biryukov shouted so loudly that echo 
resounded in the distance. –Catch up! 
– I will! 
And they ran along the path, two strong healthy men filled 
with happiness because of the shining grass turning green under 
the first sunrays and because of primeval taiga silence. 
Then followed three kilometers inside the tunnel where on the 
left and on the right slightly tamed torrent was thundering. Later 
Nikolai Ivanovich Ryzhkov got there–twice!–and gave 
picturesque definition to the place: “It is like going inside a 
waterfall.” 
In Aliev’s salon-carriage first the suggestion sounded: it is 
necessary to build a by-pass, otherwise we won’t be able to join 
the track. Returning to those days in his memory even now 
Nikolai Semenovich Konarev gets anxious: 
– The sharpest feeling was what a pity that such thing had 
happened. Some drift miners perished... Work of thousands of 
people was wasted. And another feeling–it is necessary to find the 
way-out immediately... Do you know what “twelve-thousand” 
means for railway workers? It is the up gradient, –explains 
Konarev this special term. –It was the maximum grade level 
permitted according to the standards of that time. The grade of the 
by-pass for Severo-Muisky tunnel was 18 meters. We sanctioned 
it as an exception. 
After gaining the essence of the problem on the spot, Aliev 
backed up Konarev’s proposal to construct a by-pass. But the final 
decision was to be made by the Government. Considering the 
scale of works Nikolai Ivanovich Ryzhkov chose to see the site 
himself. He also was for building a by-pass. And the tunnel was 
being “completed” for two more decades. 
Taking leave from the builders of the tunnel the passengers of 
the special train rolled off to the East. New stations, clearings, 
hills covered with purple. Wild rosemary twigs during meetings-
partings.  
Under one of the photographs taken during that journey there 
is a short inscription: “BAM. Acquaintance with Urgal station. 
G.A. Aliev, the First Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers 
of the USSR. 1984”. Geidar Alievich is in the middle; there is a 
deputy badge on the lapel of his jacket. General Kogatko, the 
Chief of the Railway Forces hands over a large album to Aliev. It 
might have contained the photos of Urgal how it was when 
everything was just starting there. Konarev applauds–he is in a 
railway uniform, some other people also clap their hands. In the 
background there is a passenger carriage... 
 146 
Ten years before the train under the name “Donbass” pulled up 
to the unknown then station from Donbass. Five more trains 
followed it. They brought trucks and cranes, prefabricated 
elements and construction materials, a boiler-house and an electric 
power station, a bathhouse and a club. According to the railway 
documents there were thirteen thousand tons on the trains. It was a 
future town on the wheels. The panels would be assembled into 
houses and they would make a street... The first street would be 
named after Artem as it was in Donetsk. 
According to official documents it was called the Ukrainian 
workers’ sponsorship over construction of Urgal Station. 
Unofficially Ukraine built a railroad terminal, a station and a 
town. For these purposes “Ukrstroi” trust was set up. “Donbass” 
Detachment was the principal one in the trust, its base. 
Hardly anyone of “Donbass” workers heard of Urgal. They 
looked up in the Large Soviet Encyclopaedia. The LSE, volume 
44, informed about Urga, told about Urgench. There should have 
been Urgal between them. But when this edition of the LSE was 
being prepared Urgal’s hour did not come yet. 
We move along our life and are absolutely unaware of and 
even cannot imagine, –noted Konstantin Paustovsky, –how many 
great tragedies, perfect human deeds... have happened and are 
happening in that tiny plot of land, where we live... Yet 
acquaintance with every such tiny plot of land my bring us to the 
world of people and events that are worth of a place in the history 
of the mankind or in annals of great unfading literature. 
The same may be applied to Urgal, a taiga station in the branch 
line from the Transsib to the BAM, where one of us, then a 
journalist with the Komsomolskaya Pravda, got almost 
simultaneously with the first train from Donbass. But the very first 
special train arrived at the station on the seventh of November 
1941. There was a military parade on that day in Moscow. From 
Red Square the troops marched to the front-line that was near the 
capital then. But here, far from Moscow the railway construction 
was the front-line. The tanks thundered across the major square of 
the country and the first honk of the steam locomotive scattered 
over the unknown settlement and over the astonished taiga... 
From Urgal a live thread of the railroad stretched farther to the 
East towards Komsomolsk-on-Amur... That BAM the Far East 
citizens called the old one. On the site they published their own 
newspaper that, of course, was named “Bamovets”. On November 
7, 1932, “Bamovets” told about the work of the builders: 
“The general meeting of the communication workers 
unanimously approved the decision–to complete the construction 
 147
of the railway works by the 15th anniversary of the Great October. 
The wood-finishing brigade suggested a counter-plan–to complete 
all woodwork by November 1. Today we can report that all 
assumed obligations have been fulfilled in full.” 
“Bamovets” reminded about quite recent then fights with 
interventionists. “Now in those places where the partisan 
detachments acted the route of the Baikal-Amur Main Line is 
being laid. A few years more and instead of deserted partisan huts 
there will be rails along the paths known to the partisan scouts and 
smoke will be seen from steam locomotives, plant and mill 
chimneys of the Great Socialist country.” 
The near future, which was seen from the scaffoldings of the 
first five-years was pushed further ahead by the Great Patriotic 
War. The rails were taken off the new railroad up to the Transsib. 
Stalingrad needed them. 
Time smoothed away the old embankment. And now only old 
residents could notice that “crossroad of history”–the old BAM. 
Once Gleb Maximilianovich Krzhizhanovsky, the well-known 
power engineering scientist, remarked that struggle against the 
North was, first of all, struggle against space. It was impossible to 
win in this struggle without roads. The entire history of 
developing the Far East may be represented as the history of 
building roads. As long ago as in 1857 count Muravyov-Amursky, 
the governor of Eastern Siberia, assigned the military engineer 
Romanov to design “the draft of the wheel road” from Cape of Joy 
on the right bank of the Amur, where the town of Sophiisk was 
laid to De-Castri Gulf. This road, according the Muravyov’s plan, 
should have been constructed in such a way that it would be 
possible to convert it into a railroad without large difficulties 
afterwards. After completing his prospecting works engineer 
Romanov printed the brochure “Sophiisko-Alexandriiskaya 
Railroad”. 
The project was ahead of its time, though–the country was not 
ready for such grand construction yet. Only decades later the first 
metres of the Great Siberian Railroad were laid. One French 
newspaper compared the significance of Transsib construction to 
that of discovering America or the Suez Canal construction. 
Laying the second railroad to the ocean turned out to be along the 
same line. 
Take a good look–in the eastern section of the BAM the town 
of Urgal is marked with a circle. Next to it the railroad crosses the 
Bureya.  
I remember how we made our way from Urgal to the Bureya in 
the “Uazik”. The eternal taiga sided the road. It made just a slight 
 148 
retreat but it was ready to join tree-crowns and engulf without a 
trace a narrow human track–a road, as soon as people let 
themselves slacken their efforts. 
All of a sudden the trees gave way. Pure light of the river 
blinded the eyes. There was blue ice and over it there was again 
black blank taiga wall on the far other bank.  
On this spot they planned to erect a bridge over the willful 
Bureya. But so far on the bank there was only a hut made of logs 
knocked together –the headquarter of transport builders vanguard 
detachment and a bit farther down the Borodins’ farmstead, the 
only one for dozens of kilometers around. Mikhail Matveyevich 
went hunting and his wife Pasha at the age of seventy-eight kept 
the house. 
...Far from this place there are rivers with villages and towns 
beaded on them like glass-beads, where they say like that: “the 
Dnepr flows from Kiev to Cherkassy, from Kremenchug to 
Dnepropetrovsk and Zaporozhye...” 
Here the hostess may drop by chance: 
– The river flows from Mikolai Ivanych. 
Here rivers flow not from town to town but from person to 
person. With her vivid word Baba Pasha made the map alive, 
helped to look behind statistical reports and see man who drudged 
alone in his personal square kilometer.  
When ten years later Aliev went along the BAM he could see 
settlements every now and then. Every republic built one, many 
regions and territories did the same. Niya was built by Georgia, 
Olekma by Tajikistan, Eterkan by Moldavia, Dugda station by the 
Volgograd region... Of course, Azerbaijan had its own BAM 
address as well–Ulkan station was situated on the 210th kilometer 
of the western section of the railroad. There in taiga area on the 
bank of the fast Kirenga a new settlement rose–beautiful houses, a 
school, a kindergarten and a day nursery, a first-aid station and a 
trading-cultural centre... Aliev supervised this construction site 
while he worked in the Central Committee of the Republican 
Communist Party. It was he who advised to use elements of 
Azerbaijan architecture in decoration of the railway station and 
the other buildings. And now in this many-day and difficult 
business trip Geidar Alievich felt enthusiasm. Yes, there was 
much to do yet, but what was already done gave raise to quite 
natural pride for personal involvement in such a great deed.  
The delegation left for Moscow from Vladivostok. The 
Member of the Politburo was supposed to have a private salon on 
board IL-62 as well. But Geidar Alievich is not of those who seek 
 149
for quietude of the exalted rank. He invited his companions to his 
salon and asked to lay the table. 
– So, friends, let me be the master of ceremonies today. –And 
according to Viktor Yefimovich Biryukov, he found warm kind 
words for everyone. 
...A decade and a half passed. In the capital of Azerbaijan there 
was a large international conference of the railway department 
heads–from 24 countries. The President of Azerbaijan received 
the Minister of Railways of Russia Nikolai Aksenenko. They 
discussed joint projects, the Minister told about the situation on 
the Russian Railroads and mentioned the BAM... What do you 
think Aliev asked about when he heard about the Baikal-Amur 
Main Line? Of course, about the notorious tunnel.  
– Did they finish the tunnel at the BAM? 
– On March 30, –answered Nikolai Aksenenko, –they joined 
the two sides (the meeting took place in July 2001–the Author’s 
note), everything has been tested and by the end of the year we 
plan to open service traffic. It is also a remarkable event as it is 25 
years since the start of work. 
– I was there, –said Geidar Aliev. –I came both ways: from the 
East and from the West. At that time only three-four kilometers of 
the total 15 kilometers were drifted on one side and approximately 
the same distance on the other side that was less than a half of the 
whole tunnel. I went on foot–there was no motorway there–three 
kilometers in water up to the knee both from the East and from the 
West... This is one of the most difficult places of the route. What 
do 15 kilometers of drifting mean? It is nothing. Look when the 
construction of the BAM started in 1974 the term was set for 10 
years. And in 1984 ten years later I went to the BAM for ten days: 
first from Moscow to Bratsk by railway, then from there to 
Vladivostok and to Nakhodka I went and inspected all the 
stations. 15 kilometers is not a large distance for a tunnel. But 
there are very difficult geological conditions there. I summoned 
the special Commission many times. It included many 
academicians, specialists, and seismologists. Some of them 
persuaded to stop the construction, as it is a zone of high 
seismicity. “If we complete the tunnel construction it may crumble 
one day.” 
– This construction was a kind of school for the whole world, –
pointed out Nikolai Aksenenko. –Specialists from all over the 
world came there–from America, from Japan... A unique 
technology has been developed for this drifting. We have coped 
with this task. 
– My congratulations. There is a grain of my work there too. 
 150 
Happy is a person who can say this about such roads, such 
construction sites: There is a grain of my work there too. It is the 
right of makers. And the world, as Geidar Alievich liked to say, 
lives and develops due to creation. 
We could also tell in detail about other spheres Aliev dealt 
with alongside transport, education, and healthcare–for example, 
development of cinematography. It was also Andropov’s 
assignment. 
“I tend to delve in every detail so in order to do something, to 
prepare something I have to gain a thorough understanding of the 
sphere. With this assignment I did not only have to know 
cinematography itself, I had to know the situation in this sphere, 
its possibilities and so on. I had a lot of meetings with great 
representatives of cinematography and jointly we prepared a 
document–a draft resolution,” remembered Geidar Alievich his 
“cinema epic”. “I told Yermash, the Chairman of the Union 
Goskino to summon the most outstanding filmmakers to his 
department and I would come to the meeting with them. It was 
1984. And we talked for a few hours... As a result we worked out 
a fundamental for that time document–the program for 
development of cinematography of the Soviet Union.” 
Such “delving in every detail”–let us use Aliev’s own 
definition–was his typical approach to any work. The Russian 
word with this meaning, according to Dahl–originated from “very 
accurate, typical of a master, a skilled and experienced 
craftsman”. The Kremlin lacked such masters. “We saw Aliev’s 
new abilities, his enormous potential”–this assessment of Geidar 
Alievich’s Kremlin period was given by the President of North 
Ossetia Alexander Dzasokhov, who also went through thick and 
thin of the Kremlin chambers.  
 
 
Light of the Dead Star 
 
And now, our dear reader, we have to tell about one of the 
darkest days in Geidar Alievich’s life. On April 17, 1985 he, 
Ilkham, Sevil, their relations and friends bid farewell to Zarifa 
Azizovna. 
After election to the Politburo of the CPSU Central Committee 
and appointment to the Sovmin Geidar Alievich went alone to 
Moscow at first. Zarifa Azizovna stayed at home to finish her 
research. 
In faraway pre-war years she saw Moscow earlier that Geidar–
the capital of the Union seemed something unattainable for him, a 
 151
boy from Nakhichevan. Zarifa’s parents had more opportunities 
and they sent their daughter to some friends in Moscow. She came 
back overwhelmed with new impressions and there was an Uzbek 
embroidered skullcap barely perched on her beautiful hair. She 
was sixteen then–the whole life was waiting ahead. 
– I went to discover Moscow then, –Zarifa told her husband 
with a joke, –now it is your turn. 
“I will remain in Baku for a while, –she wrote to 
O.P. Dobromyslova in Leningrad, –I don’t want to leave my work, 
my creation–the laboratory, which carries out very useful and 
interesting work... I have to finish many things in Baku.” 
And here is one more letter. 
“I am in Baku so far. I think it is necessary to complete the 
year here and then leave. The whole family is already there. I miss 
children and my granddaughter very much.” 
On January 30, 1985, from Moscow: 
“I am in Moscow now. I was received very well. I have many 
appealing offers. But I have not made a decision yet... But I have 
some time to think everything over.” She had only two and a half 
months left. 
Z.M. Skripnichenko, the Professor, the Doctor of Medicine, 
was a person Zarifa Azizovna was going to make a research 
together with. One of their meetings took place in winter 1984 at 
the country-house. “My heart shrank at the sight of her sickly 
look. Although nothing in her mood and her entire behavior 
suggested threatening worries. She told with enthusiasm about the 
new research carried out at the Baku plant manufacturing home air 
conditioners... Zarifa Azizovna’s introducing members of her 
significantly increased family to me frequently interrupted the 
animated talk. At such moments there were exceptional warmth 
and love in her words and in her face. The affectionate Sevil gave 
birth to a son in addition to her charming Zarifochka and Ilkham’s 
wife made them happiness by giving birth to a granddaughter. 
Sevil with the baby in her arms looked at her Mother with moving 
tenderness and tried to conceal anxiety in her eyes and small 
Zarifa did not leave her granny’s side. On returning from Moscow 
Ilkham first of all tenderly and affectionately greeted his Mother. 
Yes, you could sense anxiety in the house but it was not tense to 
despair.”  
They planned to meet on the next day to continue their 
discussion. But the next day Zarifa-khanum was taken to hospital. 
So it turned out that meeting was their last one. 
Professor Skripnichenko came to Zarifa Alieva to the 
cemetery. 
 152 
– At her tomb I thought with grief: –Life tried to make me 
used to the largest tragedy–losing friends–very early; it was at the 
front during the Great Patriotic War. But it is impossible to get 
used to–with years you feel the pain of each new loss even more 
severely.  
Since those front-line years I am always ready –in case of a 
friend’s death–to take up and complete what my friend did not 
have time to accomplish. As a must my heart assumed the last 
request of Zarifa Azizovna, who I hold in high respect and love, to 
complete the book we started together and I considered it as my 
duty to do everything in my power to ensure this work publication 
for her thoughts to become available for a wide circle of 
specialists.” 
Professor Skripnichenko kept her promise.  
– As a doctor, Zarifa, of course, understood how dangerous her 
decease was. Doctors know better than anyone else how illness 
changes everything in a person. One may retire into their own 
shell; others can talk about nothing but their illness; still others 
become capricious and even cruel to the surrounding people. 
Zarifa Azizovna remained herself. Her major worry was caused by 
impossibility to spare her relatives from anxiety. 
She is said to have been sent to the oncological center. 
Academician Blokhin examined her and said, “I wish you had 
come at least two weeks earlier!” 
Would it have helped or not, but Zarifa Azizovna left us 
offensively early–she was 62. The funeral took place on April 17, 
1985. It was raining. People carried wreaths to the House of 
Scientists in Kropotkinskaya Street.  
In the morning Boris Pastukhov called the entire Secretariat of 
the Central Committee of the All-Union Leninist Communist 
League of Youth: “Those who want will go, those who don’t–
won’t.” All of us went. 
– We were among the first to arrive, –Boris Nikolayevich 
recollects that sad day, –when it is such a moment there are doubts 
if people will come or not. And then almost the entire Bureau of 
the Komsomol Central Committee came. Geidar Alievich never 
mentioned the fact, but I am sure he did not forget the moment 
when these young people came and it was already beginning of 
the period which turned out to be hard for him.” 
Zarifa’s wide-opened eyes looked from the portrait at the 
people gathered at the House of Scientists. Many of those who 
saw Zarifa-khanum noted her “marvellous expressive black eyes”. 
Professor Dobromyslov from Leningrad said, “The unusual gaze 
of her oriental black eyes distinguished her... Her eyes questioned, 
 153
asserted, excited, laughed and sometimes they rendered surprise, 
disagreement and irreconcilability but never did they express 
indifference. Zarifa Azizovna had ‘speaking eyes’.” Professor 
Shulpina remembered “... large, literally penetrating into your 
soul, dark and expressive eyes”. And in her first child photo, taken 
as early as in 1924, her eyes are notable. A toddler with an 
accurately cut fringe is cuddling a teddy bear to her breast. Her 
enormous eyes look straight at you from unthinkably far time 
distance, like some light of a dead star. 
 
 
Exactly a week after the funeral Geidar Alievich had to make a 
speech at the Grand Meeting devoted to the 115th anniversary of 
Lenin’s birthday. Gorbachyov, the third for the several recent 
years General Secretary, proposed him to refuse, saying that he 
might make a speech in the following year. 
– No, –said Aliev, –I will cope. 
The Politburo of the CPSU Central Committee elected the new 
General Secretary on March 11, 1985. Everybody was present, 
except Vladimir Vasilyevich Shcherbitsky, First Secretary of the 
Central Committee of the Ukraine Communist Party, who was on 
his way back from the business trip to the USA. Gromyko 
pointing out “indomitable creative energy” and a number of other 
Gorbachyov’s merits proposed to elect him for the post of the 
General Secretary of the CPSU Central Committee. There were no 
objections. Tikhonov said, “He is the first of the Central 
Committee Secretaries who is good at economics”. Grishin, First 
Secretary of Moscow City Party Committee said, “He is a well 
educated man.” Kunaev said, “... wherever the discussion turns the 
communists of Kazakhstan will vote for election of Mikhail 
Sergeyevich Gorbachyov for the post of the General Secretary of 
the CPSU Central Committee.” 
The work record of the Politburo meeting (“a single copy”!) 
saved Geidar Aliev’s words as well. “Election of the General 
Secretary of the CPSU Central Committee is a matter of great 
importance. In my opinion the candidature of Mikhail 
Sergeyevich Gorbachyov is quite worthy.” Geidar Alievich 
appreciated his comrade’s experience, modesty and simplicity. “It 
gives us possibility to say with confidence that he will cope with 
responsibilities of the General Secretary. So I completely agree 
with the submitted proposal...” 
Aliev did not participate in backstage distribution of portfolios, 
which was arranged by Gorbachyov skillfully. Although due to his 
business qualities, extensive experience and the organizer’s gift he 
 154 
was quite able to become the General Secretary. “I wish he had 
not believe to those who excluded such possibility,” stated Artem 
Borovik, a popular publicist of 1980s-1990s. Artem said about 
Tikhonov in particular, who thought that Aliev was not suitable 
for this major post in the Soviet Union because of his “nationality 
and belief”. “But I think,” continued Borovik his idea, “that Aliev 
would have defended Russia’s national interests better than the 
others. Look, what Gorbachyov did to the Soviet Union, what 
Yeltsin did to Russia. Aliev would have preferred the path of 
thought-out reforms and the country’s destiny would have been 
another.” Let us remind that Gromyko also considered Aliev as 
the leader of the Soviet Union scale. But having accepted the post 
of the Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet, he 
surrendered to Gorbachyov.  
 
 
April 22, 1985, Moscow 
 
In the Soviet calendar April 22, was always a special day as it 
was Lenin’s birthday. There were grand meetings, wreaths to the 
Mausoleum, festive concerts. At the grand meeting devoted to the 
115th anniversary of V.I. Lenin’s birthday the Member of the 
Politburo of the CPSU Central Committee, the First Deputy 
Chairman of the USSR Council of Ministers G.A. Aliev made a 
report “Historic Correctness of Lenin’s Ideas and Cause”. 
It was his first speech of such scale in the capital. It is clear 
that the report was perceived as the document of the Central 
Committee, of the Politburo, it contained both directives for 
listeners in our country and signals for our colleagues and partners 
abroad... But there should have been certainly something from 
him, Aliev’s something! Geidar Alievich asked his assistants to 
dig thoroughly Lenin’s works and find some unhackneyed 
provisions. But it happened so that looking through the blue 
volume taken from the shelf he drew himself their attention to the 
idea that touched him on the raw: 
– Look, Lenin said, that Bolsheviks were always good at 
“scrutinizing carefully new historic conditions and analyzing why 
life developed in one direction instead of some other...” 
Of course, quoting this phrase one could discuss why life goes 
in another direction so often, but it would have been premature for 
the rostrum of 1985. At that time all Lenin’s phrases were to be 
considered absolutely correct and it was necessary to prove them 
with examples, using Vladimir Ilyich’s theoretic and political 
heritage as foundation for our achievements. 
 155
Rereading Aliev’s report years later it was obvious that he did 
not refuse many of his views even after the change of epochs. 
With great warmth and respect Geidar Alievich spoke of the Great 
Russian people, the Russian language that enriched languages of 
other nations and nationalities of the Soviet Union and “opened 
the widest world horizons to the peoples of our country. Millions 
and millions of people of dozens of nationalities got acquainted 
with the mankind culture and give their own original contribution 
to it through the Russian language.” 
On becoming the President Aliev did not reject his attitude 
towards Russia, the Russian people and the Russian language. 
 
 
Business people noticed long ago–those who carry more are 
loaded more. It was so with Aliev too. Besides responsibilities 
assigned to him in the Council of Ministers and in the Politburo he 
received more and more assignments from Gorbachyov and 
Ligachev, the second person in the Central Committee at that 
time. One of them was connected with notorious anti-alcohol 
campaign. The drafting of the document was entrusted to 
Ryzhkov, Aliev and Solomentsev, the Chairman of the Council of 
Ministers of the RSFSR. 
 
 
– We did a lot of preparation work on this document, –says 
Nikolai Ivanovich Ryzhkov. –The document was approved at the 
meeting of the Central Committee Secretariat that was chaired by 
Gorbachyov. 
According to Ryzhkov Gorbachyov was urged to start struggle 
against drunkenness by Solomentsev and Ligachev. The urgency 
of problem itself is out of question. Drunkenness caused great 
damage to the society. Families broke apart. There were 
understandable and justified concerns. But the saying–make a fool 
pray hard he will split his forehead–was not born in vain. The 
struggle for sober lifestyle got into that rut. Ryzhkov supposes that 
Gorbachyov and his surrounding might have been more interested 
in political dividends received from that campaign than in 
soberness itself. The campaign seemed all-winning at first sight 
and was doomed to public support. 
But alas! The fighters for soberness as any fanatics did not 
possess a sense of proportion. Those who did not see lines at the 
wine stores at the period of perestroika, would not believe–“tails” 
were kilometers long, the store were taken by storms. In towns 
and villages production of home-brew throve. Sharp-witted people 
 156 
rushed to buy out cheap cologne and lotion. And bulldozer blades 
cut grapevines at that time. 
Evidence of Alexander Timofeevich Gavrilov adds a specific 
touch to this plot. Once he, Aliev’s assistant, was visited by his 
old friend–the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Moldavia 
Ustiyan, he knew him since the time of the Virgin-soil Upturn, 
and pleaded: 
– Sasha, do something! The grapevines we have been 
cherishing for centuries are cut down. Go to your chief, tell him. 
– I screwed up my courage or, maybe, impertinence, –
remembers Gavrilov, –and went to Geidar Alievich. He listened to 
my soliloquy without interrupting me and only threw up his hands 
in response, which meant there was nothing he could do. 
It is known now that anti-alcohol campaign was planned in the 
Central Committee a few years before this frenzied attack. And 
originally this assignment was given to Pelshe–there was such a 
Member at the Politburo of the CPSU Central Committee, he was 
the Chairman of the Party Control Committee attached to the 
Central Committee. Arvid Yanovich was known as a tough, but 
careful and prudent person. He understood that it was impossible 
to leap before looking.  
– For some years after Pelshe’s death the Anti-alcohol 
Commission was not summoned, –Nikolai Ivanovich Ryzhkov 
tells, –And then it was reanimated. Inwardly we understood –
something was wrong. 
Once Ryzhkov, he was the Chairman of the Sovmin, asked 
Aliev to come to him. Geidar Alievich apologized, “I am at the 
meeting; in about thirty minutes I will come.” 
When Aliev entered the office, Ryzhkov asked what so urgent 
kept him busy. 
– We had a debate over the question if kefir is a hot drink, –
answered Aliev. –Ryzhkov knew–it was Ligachev’s task. By the 
way, the second task of the second person of the Party.  
It seems funny now but it was not so funny then, though. 
– My attitude towards Anti-alcohol campaign was rather 
critical, –admits Nikolai Ivanovich Ryzhkov in out conversation. –
But as the Member of the Politburo I had to comply. The 
Politburo took a decision–I had to carry it out. I liked working 
with Aliev, –continues Ryzhkov. –Both when I was in the Central 
Committee and when I came to the Sovmin. In foreign trips, in 
contacts with different people a person may open himself 
sometimes from the most unexpected side. Here I got assured: 
Aliev was a sociable and benevolent man, an acute politician. He 
was easy to work with. 
 157
In September 1985 I was appointed the Chairman of the USSR 
Council of Ministers. And at the very first meeting, knowing that 
Tikhonov allowed injustice in his attitude towards Aliev–in the 
Sovmin as in any other structure, there were groupings–leaving 
for holidays or business trips Tikhonov never left Aliev to 
substitute himself; he left Arkhipov, his other first deputy, who 
was not even the Member of the Politburo, by the way. I 
understood how Geidar Alievich was hurt with it. So at the very 
first meeting during distributing responsibilities I said: “Since this 
day whenever I am absent Geidar Alievich will perform the duties 
of the Chairman.” 
– Did you tell him beforehand? 
– No. 
– What was Aliev’s reaction? 
– I sensed he felt greatly relieved. Some slight lack of trust that 
surrounded him in the Sovmin disappeared. 
What can I say about his work in the Sovmin? He worked well, 
very well. Aliev possessed a systematic approach, he did not 
dissipate his energies, and in his work there was no inconsistency, 
unreliability that was typical of some top officials. Thoroughness 
was his nature. He was a very well organized man, I would say. If 
some task was assigned to him and there were many such 
assignments he would necessarily fulfil it. 
We did not have any conflicts, any inward aversion. It happens 
sometimes that you sit with your colleagues at one table, it seems 
you know everyone well, but behind their back you may hear what 
God alone knows. We did not have familiar relations in the 
Sovmin, did not drink vodka together, did not make family 
friends–there were no such habits in the Sovmin... I did not have a 
single small glass of vodka in my office for all the five years. But 
we had good business-like relationships. And I was completely 
satisfied with Aliev’s work...” 
In the Central Committee there were some cases known when 
General secretaries returning from their holidays rewrote some 
decisions made by those who ruled in their absence. There were 
no such cases in the Sovmin. If something debatable, problematic 
was being considered, Geidar Alievich contacted me: “Nikolai 
Ivanovich, we are discussing such questions.... What do you 
think?” 
 
 
It is interesting to compare actions of Aliev and Gorbachyov. 
Let us make this with the help of one particular example and see 
how each of them dealt with serious economic problems. 
 158 
Farman Salmanov, the former Chief Executive of the Main 
Tyumen Geological Department, the Lenin prize laureate, the 
Hero of Socialist Labor, remembers: 
“After Gorbachyov’s coming to power people expected much 
of him, but unfortunately their hopes were not justified.  
There was no proper mechanism of choosing and training 
personnel and promoting to leading positions. Business qualities 
still were of minor importance, while personal devotion, good 
contacts of people from same area, relative and friendly ties 
remained major criteria. How many “excellent” people were 
promoted from the Stavropol territory, as well previously from 
Dnepropetrovsk Region and Moldavia! 
I often remember a funny occasion when in September 1985 
Gorbachyov came to the Tyumen Region. Before his visit a few 
railroad cars of chocolate had been brought there. And all of a 
sudden the sale of that chocolate was banned. Why? It turned out 
the chocolate was called “Mishka in the North” and local 
functionaries played safe, being afraid of possibility that sale of 
these sweets during the General Secretary’s stay in Tyumen could 
be considered as a personal offence by him. 
In general Gorbachyov’s visit to Tyumen left unpleasant after-
taste, which I described in detail in my diary. 
On September 5, 1985, at Nizhnevartovsk airport a large group 
of people: V.I. Dolgikh, B.N. Yeltsin, N.K. Baibakov, 
B.E. Shcherbina and others–arrived for the meeting. The plane 
with M.S. Gorbachyov and R.M. Gorbachyova landed. 
A.N. Yakovlev and G.P. Razumovsky arrived with them. On the 
previous day the plane from Moscow delivered a Japanese bus 
especially for the General Secretary of the CPSU Central 
Committee as if the General secretary could not go by our 
homemade bus. 
In the evening in the Nizhnevartovsk City Committee there 
was a meeting. The Secretary of the City Committee S.I. Denisov 
and the Secretary of the Regional Committee V.A. Churilov made 
short reports. Then Gorbachyov gave floor to me–the Chief 
Executive of the Main Tyumen Geological Department. I told 
about state and prospects of geological exploration works, cited 
some figures in relation to preparation of raw material resources 
for further development of oil and gas industry. Gorbachyov 
interrupted me many times, tried to criticize Baibakov and 
Dolgikh for poor assistance to geologists. 
At the end Gorbachyov took the floor himself: “Geologists 
assured me of broad prospects of this area in terms of geological 
 159
exploration. I sensed these prospects and I am satisfied with the 
geologists’ work, thank you. But this sphere needs support.” 
Such appreciation inspired us. 
At night we flew to Urengoi. With what joy the people in the 
streets of Urengoi met the General Secretary of the CPSU Central 
Committee on the next day. The weather was fine and sunny. In 
the city centre where there was a crowd of several thousand 
citizens the motorcade stopped. M. Gorbachyov went out of the 
car and talked to people. One elderly woman asked him a 
question: “What is the situation like with allocating the citizens of 
the North housing facilities on the mainland?” When I heard the 
answer I was stricken. Mikhail Sergeyevich answered dead 
seriously: “What for do you need flats on the mainland? Look 
what a marvellous climate you have here. Build more flats here...” 
Didn’t he know that Urengoi is situated near the polar circle? 
People who came to work in the Far North from the European part 
of Russia, Ukraine, Byelorussia, Azerbaijan and other less severe 
regions can not live and work here on a permanent basis. There is 
a zone of tundra with low abundance of oxygen in the air, where 
no normal forest or grass can grow. 
On the following morning Gorbachyov and his retinue 
returned to Tyumen. What was going on in the airport! Four ZIL’s 
were delivered from Moscow to carry the General Secretary and 
his spouse about. The roads were blocked. The traffic along 
Republic Street was turned back to front. It was the work of our 
local ‘window-dressing masters’–they did not want the General 
Secretary to see old rickety wooden houses so they brought him 
through the outskirts. All this made my blood boil. A.N. Kosygin, 
the second person in the state visited Tyumen many times. But 
there were neither Japanese bus nor government ZIL’s delivered 
from Moscow. Everything was organized in a simple and 
business-like way. 
But this time one could not help wondering. It was only 4 
months since Gorbachyov became the General Secretary and he 
already demonstrated such high-and-mighty manners: a wife with 
him on a business trip, such tendency for window-dressing and for 
being in the limelight.  
In the evening Gorbachyov made a speech at the meeting of 
the party-administrative activists in Tyumen. When I listened to 
his speech I did not believe my ears. It was quite opposite to what 
he said in Nizhnevartovsk two days ago. I was very upset. After 
long contemplation I made a conclusion: Gorbachyov merely read 
the report compiled for him by the bureaucratic apparatus in 
Moscow. He paid no heed to what I reported in Nizhnevartovsk. 
 160 
He just read what he was handed over. I remembered Brezhnev’s 
visit to Baku when he mixed up sheets and read the speech 
without any understanding what he said and Aliev had to change 
the sheets with his speech during his performance.  
Having spent a night in musing I came to the conclusion: the 
new General Secretary was a great talker with contradictory 
statements and poor economic knowledge and big ambitions and 
many negative traits. With such personal qualities he was hardly 
able to run the country wisely and we would hardly be able to 
achieve any success under his rule. 
It happened exactly as I thought: the economy declined year 
after year, the industry started losing pace and the oil industry was 
the first to emit the signal of alert, when the level of oil 
production, achieved at the cost of the whole country’s great 
strain, started plummeting.  
I can say only one: to live well and abundantly our people 
should have intelligent and skilled leaders.” 
Wise Farman is right. The only problem is to get it clear–why 
in any system–totalitarian or democratic, socialist or capitalist–
citizens that should not be allowed to come near authorities turn 
out to be in power time and again? There are lots of examples–in 
recent Russian history and in post-Soviet history of Azerbaijan, as 
well as in other peoples’ chronicles. 
 
 
August 31, 1986, Novorossiysk 
 
At 22:10 on the thirtieth of August 1986, near Novorossiysk 
the passenger motor vessel “Admiral Nakhimov” and the dry 
cargo ship “Pyotr Vasev” collided. There are victims. The salvage 
operations are being carried out... 
At night on August 31 similar information was sent to the 
following authorities: the CPSU Central Committee, the USSR 
Council of Ministers, the KGB, and the Navy Ministry... Rumors 
spread information about this disaster all over the country before 
the Soviet radio and television gave official information about it. 
As usual ‘foreign voices’ were the first. 
Ryzhkov called Aliev at midnight: 
– Geidar Alievich, you are appointed the Chairman of the 
Government Commission. Choose people... 
Aliev hardly slept that night. If he knew that there were fifteen 
sleepless nights ahead he might have taken a nap. But he did not 
want to. He remembered his first business trip of such kind –to the 
Volga, three years before. There near Ulyanovsk the passenger 
 161
motor vessel “Alexander Suvorov” full of tourists ran into the 
bridge footings. In the cinema-hall they showed a comedy at this 
moment. Many people came with children. Laughter from the 
screen mixed with groans and cries. The vessel was carried farther 
by the current–without the upper deck, without the cinema-hall. 
As it was ascertained on the spot the disaster was caused by 
drunkenness! There Aliev saw a child foot in a stylish trainer–
there was no blood on it, it was carried away together with its 
small owner by waves. Together with mother and father.  
Aliev usually came to the Sovmin at about nine. That morning 
he came much earlier. He assigned to his assistant on matters of 
transport Vladimir Sergeyevich Ukhov to draft the Sovmin order 
on the members of the Commission and notify all of them. 
– You go with us. 
Ukhov did not have time to come home–he only called: ‘I will 
be back in a dozen days!’ He dropped in at the GUM (Central 
department store in Moscow–the translator’s note)–to buy a shirt 
and some small things necessary in a business trip. At night from 
31 August to 1 September the government plane left ‘Vnukovo-2’ 
airport for Novorossiysk.  
For three years of work for Aliev Ukhov got to know his boss 
well.  
– I guessed even beforehand, –told us Vladimir Sergeyevich, –
that he was a decisive man. But on the Volga, at the crushed 
“Alexander Suvorov” I understood that his character was revealed 
in full measure under critical circumstances where one needs to 
screw up ones will, and emotions, and thoughts–and act in wise, 
tough and assertive way. It even seemed to me that in calm 
everyday atmosphere it was not enough room for Aliev, he had to 
give vent to enormous energy so he loaded himself with work 
from nine in the morning till nine in the evening. 
Sometimes he took up assignments which in our, the workers 
of his secretariat’s, opinion seemed irrelevant to our department. 
But you’d better not tell him: ‘It is not our problem, Geidar 
Alievich’. He supposed that the Chairman of the Government, the 
General Secretary could give any assignment, as they knew whom 
they were able to rely upon. And his duty was to carry it out! 
...According to provisional data, there were about 1,234 people 
on board “Admiral Nakhimov”: 888 passengers and 346 
crewmembers. The vessel sank in 7-8 minutes after the collision. 
Only 836 people were saved. What about the others? 
Two weeks of Novorossiysk trip were an abyss of black 
tragedy. Day after day we meet people who lost their relatives and 
friends; salvaging ‘Admiral Nakhimov’s prisoners from the sea 
 162 
floor–79 for the first three days, 116–by the fourth of September. 
Dozens of problems interlaced into a tight knot.  
Geidar Alievich was suggested leaving only general guidance 
to himself. As there were enough authoritative people–the Navy 
Minister, the Deputy Chairman of the KGB, the Chief of the 
Transport and Communication Department of the Central 
Committee–they could ascertain details and receive people. 
– No, –answered Aliev, ‘I will meet people daily. And the 
members of the Commission will do–on matters of their 
competence. 
The Government Commission had two meetings every day–at 
10:00 and at 17:30. “And every evening at 19:00 its Chairman 
G.A. Aliev met the relatives of the victims,”–wrote the newspaper 
Trud in its report from Novorossiysk, “to tell them about what was 
done for a day, effectively solving all the emerging problems on 
spot.” 
At the Black Sea line where “Admiral Nakhimov” was 
registered, they did not even know exactly how many people were 
on board when the vessel left for the sea. It was considered as a 
normal situation. Captains, like cabmen, agreed between 
themselves how their vessels would pass each other, which was 
against all the regulations. After two-three-four days in seawater 
especially in hot weather the buoyed bodies decayed very fast. So 
some railroad car-freezers were brought. The coffins were made. 
– Aliev demanded very strictly from everyone, –remembers 
Ukhov. –He relieved the Deputy Navy Minister of his post for 
failure to fulfil one of the assignments. It served as a good lesson 
for everyone. 
The greatest ordeal was to listen to those who could not 
identify their relatives among the victims and waited when they 
would be able to bid their last farewell to husband, wife, brother, 
sister or children who went on their honeymoon.  
Risking their life the cameramen took an underwater survey. 
Here the camera closes the vessel and comes to the head of a 
woman that stuck in the partition wall. Due to the underwater 
current her long hair moves as if swaying in the breeze. It seems 
she would look up instantly and the young man who did not divert 
his eyes from the screen would recognize his Natasha. 
– Will you buoy her? –asks he at last in a muffled tone. 
– We’ll try... If it does not put divers –lives at risk,–he is 
answered. –One diver has already perished. 
“We are absolutely sure, –said Geidar Alievich Aliev at one of 
the meeting of the Commission, –that the collision happened as a 
result of culpable negligence and irresponsible attitude towards 
 163
their job responsibilities on the part of the captains of the dry 
cargo ship “Pyotr Vasev” and the motor vessel “Admiral 
Nakhimov”.” 
Aliev regularly reported to Ryzhkov on work progress and the 
results of the investigation. According to Ukhov Gorbachyov 
called two-three times and even intended to come. 
Though few believed in such possibility. Would the General 
Secretary interrupt his holiday! In May he did not screw up 
enough courage to visit Chernobyl, in September–Novorossiysk, a 
year later–and only after Ryzhkov’s persistent advice–he went to 
Spitak, destroyed by the earthquake. It is a convenient position–to 
live beyond somebody’s grief. Though poets with their vulnerable, 
sensitive souls are sure that ‘there is no somebody’s grief’ 
(Konstantin Simonov’s words). And genuine politicians–not 
peanut politicians–think the same. In that summer Gorbachyov 
had a rest from 20 August to 20 September. Before returning to 
Moscow he visited Kuban and Stavropol regions where he 
communicated buoyantly with electorate. Meanwhile Nikolai 
Ivanovich Ryzhkov and a group of leaders from Ukraine and 
Byelorussia visited the Chernobyl zone; and Geidar Alievich 
Aliev carried the burden of the Novorossiysk tragedy...  
...In January of nineteen forty-two in blockaded Leningrad 
Alexei Nikolayevich Kosygin saw two youngsters carrying a 
sledge along a cold street with a body of a brother or a neighbor 
on it. Those days it was a typical sight. Dead people were carried 
in that way from all over the city. Something urged Kosygin to 
stop at this doleful procession and ask whom they were carrying 
for burial. Before the boys had time to answer Alexei 
Nikolayevich noticed that an eyelid winced in the face of the boy 
lying on the sledge. Through the swoon in those last moments of 
his leaving life he might have heard a voice that sounded like his 
father’s. Alexei Nikolayevich took the child in his arms and the 
latter started coming to his senses. Kosygin instructed to warm up 
the boy, to feed him and evacuate him together with his brothers 
from Leningrad. 
Under the assignment of the State Committee of Defence 
Kosygin was to evacuate 500 thousand of Leningrad citizens, 
machines, cranes, motors and entire plants that were needed in the 
Mainland. It was huge and hardest state objective and an 
occasional meeting... The destiny of the blockaded city and the 
destiny of a single man... Kosygin did not differentiate between 
them. 
 164 
Aliev was similar. Most various people evidence it, including 
his assistants that daily reported to the First Deputy Premier, 
jotted down his instructions, went on business trips with him. 
– What, in your opinion, –we asked Ukhov, –impressed Aliev 
most of all in Novorossiysk? 
– Firstly, the fact of collision itself. It could not, should not 
have happened. There were no prerequisites for this collision. The 
sea was still. The sky was starlit. The passenger vessel was all lit 
with light–on-board lights, stoker lights. There were modern 
navigation devices. Leaving the port the vessel received the 
information from the traffic control service on the dry cargo ship 
going in the opposite direction. The same service warned the 
captain of “Pyotr Vasev” of “Admiral Nakhimov”’s route; the dry 
cargo ship was to allow the latter to follow its route without 
hindrance. The dry cargo ship did not do that. The captains started 
to agree how to pass–contrary to the regulations. The third mate to 
the captain of the dry cargo “Pyotr Vasev” warned: “We’ll collide 
soon!” –I see everything, –answered the captain looking at the 
radar screen. –We’ll pass. Everything is under control...” 
Presumption and irresponsibility of the two captains led to the 
irretrievable tragedy. 
Unprecedented lack of order shocked. It caused ‘Admiral 
Nakhimov’s wreck and huge human grief... And there was lack of 
order on the shore again–there was no full list of passengers and 
the crew; it was necessary to restore it from various evidences.  
Aliev practically did not sleep there; neither did his assistant 
Ukhov. Vladimir Sergeyevich worked at the minutes till two-three 
in the morning–who do what and when–and in the morning 
everything began anew. By nine in the morning Aliev went from 
the hotel to the headquarters that were situated in the Sea-line 
office building...  
On the fifteenth day Gorbachyov ordered Aliev to hand the 
Commission over to Pasternak, the Chief of Transport and 
Communication Department of the Central Committee, and come 
back to Moscow: 
– We consider the matter of “Admiral Nakhimov” at the 
Politburo meeting. 
What gave rise to this command? Was it simply the fact that 
other things were waiting for Aliev in Moscow and the rest could 
do without him in Novorossiysk? We have doubts on this point. 
Here is the reason why. Gorbachyov planned a trip to the 
Krasnodar Territory, meetings, and speeches. Aliev with his 
Novorossiysk matters, the whole accident with “Admiral 
Nakhimov” impeded Gorbachyov. The General Secretary arrived 
 165
in Krasnodar on August 17 and from the airport he went to one of 
the districts of the Territory. “On the way he stopped at stanitsa 
Novotitarovskaya and had a talk with its citizens”, –the TASS 
correspondents reported. The sunburned General Secretary asked 
people if they were happy with “what we do in the country now”. 
The journalists recorded the buzz: “Happy”. 
 
 
...On October 30 Geidar Aliev reported at the Politburo 
meeting on the findings of the Government Commission 
concerning the investigation of the causes of ‘Admiral 
Nakhimov’s accident. On the previous day some maps and 
schemes were hanged on the walls of the conference-room–as 
visual support. Against such background they first discussed the 
plan and the budget for the following year, then listened to the 
report of the Party Control Commission attached to the CPSU 
Central Committee on consideration of appeals submitted to 
attention of the 27th Congress of the CPSU... At last Gorbachyov 
gave floor to Aliev. Geidar Alievich reported in a brief and clear 
manner. Everything was obvious: the both vessel captains’ 
culpable negligence, gross violation of the seafaring safety rules. 
The Politburo resolution said that the families of the victims 
received the necessary state assistance. The immediate culprits of 
the catastrophe–the captains of “Pyotr Vasev” and “Admiral 
Nakhimov” were arrested and put on trial. The Chief Executive of 
the Black Sea line S.A. Lukyanenko was expelled from the Party 
and dismissed from his position. The Deputy USSR Navy 
Minister A.V. Goldobenko and the Board Member and Chairman 
of All-Union Association “Moreplavanie” B.S. Mainagashev were 
dismissed from their positions and severely punished along the 
party line. The Deputy Minister of the USSR Navy B.A. Yunitsyn 
was called to the party account. The Board of the USSR Navy 
Ministry was suggested taking measures for dramatic 
improvement of seafaring safety, discipline and order in work of 
navy transport. 
 
 
Assistants are observant people. They see what their bosses 
don’t even suspect. Here is the detail both Gavrilov and Ukhov 
remembered without agreeing. 
– You come to Aliev’s office and immediately see from Geidar 
Alievich’s face that he is deep in thought, pondering over 
something. 
The assistant’s entrance brings him back to current concerns. 
 166 
– Vladimir Sergeyevich, I have a meeting today with the 
Chairman of Yugoslavia Government. You are to prepare: first..., 
second... Why don’t you write down? 
Ukhov is embarrassed to admit that when summoned he was at 
the reception and his favorite notebook was left in his office. Such 
notebooks were handed over to every captain who first went along 
the Kiel Canal. Vladimir Sergeyevich, a recent cargo vessel 
captain, cherished it very much.  
– I will remember, Geidar Alievich! 
– Will you? 
Having an amazing memory, Aliev always without fail made 
himself notes in the notebook. And he always controlled if the 
task had been fulfilled accurately. 
The workers of Aliev’s apparatus usually had holidays 
simultaneously with their chief. Vladimir Sergeyevich Ukhov 
remained on duty. His colleagues envied him: Now you will have 
a rest! 
– Aha! –answered Ukhov. –Don’t you know how Geidar 
Alievich has a rest... 
They knew. They already got used to it. Aliev went on holiday 
to Azerbaijan. But he did not have a day’s rest. The first call in 
Moscow Ukhov received at ten in the morning: 
– Aliev. Good morning, Vladimir Sergeyevich, what has been 
done? 
A brief report followed. 
– There is not decision on this issue yet, Geidar Alievich. 
– Call me back at three o’clock. 
There was one more call at 6-7 o’clock in the evening. 
Sometimes the telephone operator warned that there was no 
‘protection in this area’. It meant that Aliev was in some very 
remote place where it was impossible to discuss all the issues 
through unprotected communication lines. 
 
 
He Could Appreciate Kindness 
 
There is such a term in technology: fatigue of metal. 
Metalware can take load to a certain extent. Then bridges or 
bridge girders or bridge floor must be changed. Special devices 
can exactly ascertain fatigue of metal. How can fatigue of a person 
be ascertained? There are no such devices so far. 
After one of the meetings at Ryzhkov’s office Yuri Petrovich 
Batalin went up to his office on the second floor; cast a glance 
upon Ivanovskaya Square overcrowded with cars as usual; took 
 167
some papers. At that moment Aliev entered. Batalin was 
surprised: the First Deputy, the Member of the Politburo came in 
person instead of inviting to his own office. What happened? 
Geidar Alievich told about the construction of the BAM, about 
a great number of problems that were still to be solved at the site, 
about how difficult it was for a non-specialist to make a decision 
on validity of one or the other variants. And he asked Batalin to 
take up consideration of matters concerning the BAM. 
Batalin objected that it would be difficult for him too to make 
out all these matters. 
– Yet it will be easier for you; taking into consideration your 
professional experience, specialists will treat your judgments with 
more respect. 
This conversation that only its participants knew about seems 
very significant to us. How often in the ancient and recent history 
men in power thought that possession of power in itself made 
them connoisseurs in all fields: from agriculture to linguistics, 
from space travel to ballet and fine arts. In the Soviet Union they 
are responsible for poor destiny of genetics and cybernetics, the 
program for transfer of the North Rivers to the south, etc.  
This talk of Geidar Alievich Aliev with a person who was 
lower than him in party hierarchy was certainly a courageous step. 
– I would like to ask you to make me a favor to take up this 
matter,–Aliev finished this talk. Nobody ever talked in this way 
here. 
Batalin agreed remarking that Ryzhkov should approve the 
matter. Nikolai Ivanovich also understood Aliev’s reasoning. So 
Batalin headed the Government Commission on the BAM and 
Severo-Muisky tunnel. 
Among the departments and ministries that Aliev supervised 
there was the Goskomizdat. Boris Nikolayevich Pastukhov headed 
it. 
– I referred to Geidar Alievich on different matters more that 
once, –he tells, –and I have to say, that Aliev treated the problems 
of this neglected sphere very attentively and creatively. We have 
to develop or it would be better to say set up on the up-to-date 
basis polygraphy, manufacture of paper and colors... He solved 
crucial problems. He took weighed decisions... 
– Can you give any examples? 
– Aliev provided us with his full support on development of 
printing industry; he was one of those who backed up one of our 
utterly unusual ideas. We made a decision to open unlimited 
subscription for Pushkin works, then for Lermontov’s. This 
subscription for Pushkin’s three volumes of collected works 
 168 
brought over 10 million requests. And where could we get so 
much paper? We expected there would be 5 million requests at 
maximum, but when they exceeded ten million, we had to scratch 
our heads: either to apologize to the subscribers and return the 
money or to die but find resources. We did the latter. And there 
was one more interesting fact, –continues Boris Nikolayevich. –It 
was my fiftieth jubilee. There was a tradition to decorate 
Commission Chairmen, Ministers with awards. But I had been 
awarded the order of Lenin not long before and according to 
normative acts a certain period should have passed before the 
following award. In my case I was short of a half year. So the 
Government awarded me a precious gift, –smiles Pastukhov. –It 
was a picture in a rustic style. I was invited to the Kremlin and 
Aliev as the First Deputy Chairman and my supervisor together 
with Smirtyukov, the executive officer of the Sovmin were going 
to hand me over this picture. Aliev’s office (there is no this office 
any more) looked onto the Moskva River. It was October, rather 
cold... 
They hand over the picture, joked... 
– Of course, Boris Nikolayevich you are worthy of an order, 
but the order is above all, you will yet receive orders for sure, but 
you will hardly get such a picture again. 
I thanked him and made one of the best speeches in my life.  
– What difference what you are awarded, your work is 
appreciated and that matters. Excuse me, Geidar Alievich, but it is 
what I want to say. I grew up across this river, in 
Zamoskvorechye... My Mother was a worker, Father perished in 
1942 and here I am standing in front of you, the man, who 
represents the Government of the country. And it is the greatest 
award for me, a boy from Zamoskvorechye that kicked his heels 
with his buddies, missed lessons at school to see a new film at 
“Udarnik” cinema-house, to enjoy the honor of standing here in 
front of the two such celebrated people. Thank you! 
Boris Nikolayevich left with the presented picture. 
Lots of years passed. Pastukhov arrived in Baku as the First 
Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs of Russia. Meetings, 
negotiations... Aliev amazed the guest with his fantastic memory–
he remembered the Congress of Komsomol where they got 
acquainted. He remembered everything. 
– He remained the same until the last days of his life–he 
remembered everything: what happened a day ago and what 
happened twenty years ago. I was astonished. 
“Do you remember your 50th birthday? –Geidar Alievich 
asked Pastukhov. –How Smirtyukov and I handed you a picture? 
 169
“Yes, I do...” 
“Do you want me to repeat what I told you then? You will yet 
receive orders, but you will hardly receive such a picture, Boris 
Nikolayevich...” 
– This picture hangs at my country-house now and makes the 
room much better, –moved Pastukhov comments. –Early spring, 
Russian birches... Now whenever I look at this picture and 
remember Geidar Alievich Aliev. He could appreciate kindness... 
 
 
What is Your Hobby? 
 
Ryzhkov, Batalin, Biryukov, Konarev, Pastukhov are people of 
Aliev’s circle. How do subordinates remember him? For three 
years Alexander Timofeevich Gavrilov, a journalist, scientist, 
publisher, worked as an assistant to Aliev, the First Deputy 
Chairman of the USSR Council of Ministers. Before meeting 
Gavrilov Aliev got acquainted with a dozen of candidates chosen 
by specialists of the Administrative Department–with some of 
them even without seeing them only through their resumes but 
meeting others in person. It came Gavrilov’s turn then.  
On getting information on invitation Alexander Timofeevich 
decided to ask advice from an old pressman who knew Aliev well. 
Here is how Gavrilov retells this conversation of 1984 now: 
“Bear in mind that he is a man of the East and the East as it is 
well known is a delicate matter. The second: he is a man from the 
KGB; it is useless trying to twist him round your finger or dodge 
with him, and what for after all? He possesses knowledge of 
human psychology, extensive work experience in a very serious 
establishment and in the Central Committee. And third piece of 
my advice: in no circumstance if he praises one particular man 
take into your head the idea of joining these praises. –“Who is that 
man?” –“Eduard Amvrosievich Shevardnadze.” 
With such farewell wishes Gavrilov went for an interview with 
Aliev to the first floor of the Kremlin building of the Sovmin to 
the office where previously Vyacheslav Mikhailovich Molotov 
worked. At the reception the secretary met him with a smile: 
“Geidar Alievich asks for apology, he is in a meeting now and he 
will see you immediately as it is over.” Less than ten minutes 
passed and Gavrilov was showed to the office. 
– Later I get assured many times: utmost punctuality and 
accuracy are characteristic of Aliev. The same he demanded from 
others. 
Aliev came from behind his desk and held his hand out: 
 170 
– Please, take a seat, Alexander Timofeevich. What are you 
interested in, what is your hobby? 
– You see, Geidar Alievich, I don’t have any hobby, – 
Gavrilov answers. 
– What about fishing, does it interest you? 
– No. 
– And hunting? 
– No. 
– Do you probably collect stamps? 
– No. 
– Yet, what do you like doing? 
– I like reading. I like writing. 
– So do I. I like reading and writing, –responds Aliev. –You 
must have read my speeches, didn’t you? –Gavrilov nods. –How 
would you characterize my style very briefly? 
– Publicism, –Gavrilov found the term.  
– Exactly! 
But it was not the end of the interview. 
– I don’t know you practically, –continued Geidar Alievich. –
And making you my assistant I risk a bit. 
– But I also take a risk, –Gavrilov answers in unison. –If I 
don’t cope with the job, I will have to make up myself. 
Aliev liked this answer. He commented that he never 
abandoned the people he worked with. Even when he had to part 
with someone he did it in such a way that the person would not 
lose on anything. 
– I can promise you that. 
– Geidar Alievich, it is all right with me. And life in general is 
a risky thing. 
– Well, then go to settle the formalities, –Aliev smiled, –and 
get down to job. 
Gavrilov worked with Aliev for three years. He kept kindest 
feelings towards his boss. He is sure: Aliev could do much more 
useful things for the country. 
At the end of their first meeting Aliev stressed, ‘everything I 
assign to you should be between us. If you consider it necessary to 
report on something to me in person, report, please.’ 
Unfortunately not everybody in the First Vice-Premier’s 
Secretariat liked it–there is always a kind of struggle between 
officials for access to the boss’s office, there are always envious 
people. What to do with them?! Envy is as ineradicable as 
treachery, duplicity, and wickedness... Neither Christian morals 
nor Communist morality could do anything. After all, are there 
 171
any special communist morals or religious ones? It is very 
unlikely. There are just morals. Or there are not. 
By the way, don’t think that Geidar Alievich asked all his 
employees about their hobbies just for no particular reasons. It 
was his key question. He was sure that if a person is keen, for 
example, on fishing, starting with Monday morning he thinks 
about nothing but fishhooks, worms, baits... And that distracts him 
from work. Of course, one could argue with Aliev that it did not 
always interfere with business and give a lot of examples, but he 
stood his ground.  
– At 8.45 he was always at work, –tells Gavrilov. –Except 
those day when he met or saw off somebody in conformity with 
the protocol. I came at eight. I looked through mail, reports of the 
information agencies, other materials, underlined anything that 
required attention. 
On weekdays 9.15 was an official start of the day–calls, 
receptions, meetings, and talks. Aliev planned his work hours very 
punctually. Of course, life introduced amendments, but in general 
everything was taken into account and that allowed keeping that 
large business in a well-organized and efficient way. We respected 
and were a little afraid of our boss. He neither applied any severe 
sanctions to anyone, nor shouted at anybody. Yet everyone knew 
that it was impossible to fail to fulfil any of his assignments. 
Azerbaijan colleagues invited Gavrilov more than once to visit 
the Republic: “Alexander Timofeevich, come for a rest...” 
Gavrilov neither refused them, nor went, realizing that such trips 
usually ended up with some obligations and he, as a squeamish 
person, did not want to be indebted to anybody. 
Through some channels Aliev learned that his assistant 
avoided visits to Azerbaijan. He invited Gavrilov. 
“Listen to me, Alexander, –it was one of those rare cases when 
his boss called him by first name, –I am informed that you don’t 
want to go to Baku for a rest. Is it really so? 
Gavrilov found an excuse that doctors recommended his wife 
central Russia. Aliev looked at him in an inquisitive manner. He 
most likely guessed about genuine reasons, but he did not start 
speaking about them. 
“It’s a pity you don’t go to Baku–there is such a wonderful sea 
there... –And he cited almost a poem about the Caspian Sea. –I 
have been to many countries, have swum in many seas, but 
believe me, there is not a single one better than the Caspian. It is a 
salubrious sea! Go for a rest, Alexander... 
– I promised, –Gavrilov remembers that memorable for him 
conversation, –but I could not go, though. And now I understand 
 172 
that Aliev took offence for Azerbaijan: how it can be that a person 
is sincerely invited and he does not go, hurting the hosts’ feelings. 
Gavrilov cannot forget joint trips with Aliev about the country: 
Altai, Chuvashia, Volgograd... They were purely business trips. 
But Aliev always added something from himself to a standard set 
of a speech at the Party Activists Meeting, a talk at the Regional 
Party Committee, a visit to some plant workshops. For example, 
he liked to drop in on a market, to find out prices, to taste 
something from the counter. At the dinners on occasion of their 
arrival or departure, as Gavrilov remembers, his boss did not have 
more than one–maximum two glasses of cognac. He never sat at a 
table like a bugaboo beyond reach; he participated in 
conversations and was radiant with humor. And here is one more 
distinguishing detail: he did not accept gifts, so nobody offered 
him presents. It was known. Such characteristics spread 
instantaneously. 
Once we came to a village in Altai, had a look at the school. 
The guest was welcomed very warmly and given large bunches of 
flowers. Such a big authority came to their god-forsaken place for 
the first time. There was a talk at the teacher’s staff room. How 
are you doing? What about the salary? And teaching load? 
– Do pupils give you flowers? –asks the guest. 
– Of course. On September 1, March 8 and at the end of the 
academic year. 
– Don’t you think it looks like a bribe? 
After a long pause one of the teachers replied coldly: 
– Maybe in Moscow you consider it as a bribe; probably 
flowers cost much there, but here–look around–all the yards are in 
flowers. Excuse me, but from commercial point of view these 
flowers cost nothing. It is one side. There is another, the moral 
one. If I were not given flowers on such a day, I would quit at 
once. It would mean I have authority neither among pupils nor 
their parents. By the way we gave flowers to you also as a token 
of our respect. 
Geidar Alievich listened attentively. But he preferred not to 
develop this topic any more. 
 
 
In Moscow literary circles at the time when Aliev still worked 
in Baku a story was passed as once coming in the capital Geidar 
Aliev recited Pushkin by heart at the Union of Writers–his lyrics 
and his poem ‘Eugenie Onegin’. The writers that listened to the 
guest were stunned, to say the least. Aliev bewitched them with 
his knowledge of Pushkin’s poetry. (By the way, years later in 
 173
Baku at Aliev’s initiative a monument to the Great Russian poet 
were erected.) A couple of days later the entire literary Moscow 
knew that Aliev recited by heart Pushkin, Lermontov, let alone 
classics of the Azerbaijanian literature–Nizami, Fizuli, Djavid... 
Recalling this episode Gavrilov notes that Aliev had a very 
developed aesthetic taste. He professionally assessed architecture, 
understood fine arts and theatre. That is why prominent artistic 
people always surrounded him: Kara Karaev, Niyazi, Muslim 
Magomaev, and Tair Salakhov. By the way, Salakhov, the Vice-
President of the Russian Academy of Arts, painted a nice portrait 
of the Azerbaijan President. 
Alexander Gavrilov remembers an interesting story in 
connection with it. He went to the performance ‘Two on the 
Swing’–as an ordinary spectator with a ticket bought at the theatre 
box-office, not with an invitation. In the morning there was a call: 
– Good morning, Alexander Timofeevich, it is Tabakov. 
– Good morning, Oleg Pavlovich. 
– I am not acquainted with you, but I called to ask if you liked 
the performance. 
Pondering over the possible reasons of the master’s call 
Gavrilov answered, that he liked the performance as a spectator, 
but he was not ready to give official assessment, which his caller 
was probably eager to hear. 
– Did you tell Geidar Alievich about your impressions? –asked 
the audience’s favorite ingratiatingly. 
– No, he did not ask me about it. But if you insist I can tell 
him. 
– Oh yes-yes, it would be very interesting to know Geidar 
Alievich’s opinion. 
When he was given a chance, Gavrilov retold this conversation 
to his boss. Aliev burst into laugher: 
– And if he calls you again, what will you tell? –and without 
waiting for my answer, he continued: –Tell him that I did not see 
this performance, so I will not express any negative emotions. 
Workers of arts expressed their emotions, though. Aliev 
wanted to stress, that he did not want to participate in the 
punishment of the theatre. 
Cultural workers knew about it and often applied Aliev for 
help, although he did not deal in culture directly. Repertoire 
policy, creative activities were the other department’s 
responsibility. The Sovmin was responsible for material side of 
culture–Aliev together with Ryzhkov dealt with problems of the 
Bolshoi Theatre, with developing book printing, 
cinematography...  
 174 
Once in the mail a letter of the famous film star Armen 
Djigarkhanyan turned up: he asked to help him with 
accommodation. Aliev sent the letter to the Mossovet Chairman 
Promyslov; not just threw over, but sent–with request to help.  
Two months later Armen Borisovich called Gavrilov: please, 
give Geidar Alievich my greatest gratitude. 
 
 
In the Politburo of the CPSU Central Committee 
 
Now with the help of Boris Nikolayevich Yeltsin let’s have a 
look at the Politburo’s “kitchen” that was strictly forbidden for 
everyone except the initiated. What was going on there? 
“The meetings usually started in the following way. The 
Members of the Politburo assembled in one room. The Candidates 
as the second category of the Politburo and the Secretaries of the 
Central Committee as the third category, lined up, waited at the 
conference-room for the General Secretary’s entry. All the other 
Members of the Politburo followed him according to their rank.  
...Here, on the top, at the Party Olympus as it were, castes were 
respected rigorously.  
So, the meeting of the Politburo was declared open. 
Gorbachyov hardly ever asked if anybody had any objections 
concerning the agenda. Starting the meeting he could share some 
recollections, where, what he saw, in particular in Moscow. 
During the first year of my work as the First Secretary of Moscow 
City Party Committee there was not such a habit, but during the 
second year he more and more often started with such questions: 
something is wrong in Moscow, something is bad–he wound me, 
if I may to say so, to the necessary emotional degree. 
Then discussion of some issue began. For example, personnel, 
appointments of Ministers, sometimes Gorbachyov had a 
preliminary interview with them and sometimes he did not, so a 
future Minister was summoned directly to the Politburo meeting. 
...Discussion of any item started with acquaintance with 
materials relevant to the agenda of the Politburo meeting. But, in 
my opinion they were handed over a bit late. Sometimes it was 
done a week before the meeting, but more often it happened a 
day–a couple of days in advance and for such period it was 
practically impossible to study thoroughly the issue that concerned 
crucial matters of the country’s life. It was necessary to consult 
with specialists, to discuss it with those who possessed complete 
understanding of the problem in question. But too little time was 
 175
given for this either on purpose or just because of poor 
organization. 
...Usually Gorbachyov made an introduction, he always did it 
in an extensive manner, sometimes he quoted some letters that 
were prepared for him beforehand to prove some of his ideas. This 
entire prelude usually predetermined the results of discussion of 
the draft resolution, compiled by his assistants. So it turned out 
that his administration ruled everything. The Members of the 
Politburo participated in discussion of the issues in a strictly 
formal way. 
...Let’s say inanity of our meeting was not so noticeable at 
first; but the further the more evident it became that our activity 
was inefficient. Gorbachyov mostly indulged in narcissism and 
enjoyed his speeches–he can and likes speaking smoothly and it 
was obvious that power fascinates him, he loses the sense of 
reality, and living in illusion that perestroika actually develops in 
width and depth and rapidly involves new territories and people. 
But in fact it was far from that in reality. 
I don’t remember any occasion when anybody would try to 
speak out his or her negative attitude in a sharp form. Yet I made 
attempts from time to time...”  
Such is his assessment of the Politburo meetings. It was given 
after all the events, in the period when Yeltsin was without power. 
His hurt feelings are clearly seen for he, Yeltsin, was got round, 
rejected. He is not a little bit worse than Gorbachyov, other 
members of the Politburo, but they consider him to be a man of 
the second category, don’t let him to the sacred room, keep him in 
the common room... It is also interesting to read Yeltsin’s personal 
characteristic of each Politburo member. They slightly remind 
Gogol-Chichikov’s assessments of landowners from ‘Dead Souls’. 
Do you remember Sobakevich, Nozdrev, and Plyushkin? 
Andrei Andreyevich Gromyko, the Chairman of the Presidium 
of the Supreme Soviet at that time, according to Yeltsin, existed 
only ’as if’. He ‘did something, met somebody, made speeches, 
but in fact there was nobody who kind of needed him... Gromyko 
was like someone transferred into the present from the very far-
faraway past. Moreover, naturally he hardly realized what was 
going on around him, what they talked about.’ 
Neither did the critic find any good words for the Chairman of 
the USSR Council of Ministers Ryzhkov, the Chairman of the 
Party Control Committee Solomentsev, the Chairman of the KGB 
Chebrikov, Lukyanov: “He cannot manage non-standard 
situations, he possesses the complete set of party-bureaucratic 
 176 
features–inflexibility, lack of inner freedom, spaciousness of 
mind.” 
“V.I. Dolgikh. Unfortunately for him Grishin entered Dolgikh 
on his list of close companions-in-arms, intended to offer him the 
Politburo Membership and nominated him for the post of the 
Chairman of the Council of Ministers.  
...He must have been one of the most professional efficiently 
working Secretaries of the Central Committee. 
D.T. Yazov, the Minster of Defence. This was a genuine 
soldier, sincere and diligent. He could be entrusted with 
commanding the circuit or the headquarters, but he was not 
prepared for the post of the Minister of Defence. He was narrow-
minded, absolutely unable to accept criticism... 
V.V. Shcherbitsky, First Secretary of the Central Committee of 
the Ukraine Communist Party. Gorbachyov is afraid to touch him, 
as once he did not want to solve the problem with Aliev. 
V.A. Medvedev, the Secretary of the Central Committee, the 
Member of the Politburo. His major merits are obedience and lack 
of new thoughts and ideas.” 
Characteristics like those Yeltsin gave to his colleagues. 
According to him, only ungifted people climbed the Party 
Olympus. It was they who could not appreciate Boris 
Nikolayevich. And it was they, typical representatives of the 
Soviet State machine, who in Yeltsin’s opinion ruined 
Gorbachyov. 
There is much to be argued about in evaluations given by the 
first President of Russia. In particular, with negative assessment of 
Aliev, Ryzhkov, Shcherbitsky... As well as with his statement that 
only Yeltsin “made attempts” to interfere at the meeting of the 
Politburo, while the others kept silence. Frequently it was quite 
opposite–it was he, who kept silence. 
But the major objection is another. According to exact remark 
of the assistant to the General Secretary of the CPSU Central 
Committee Valery Ivanovich Boldin “struggle for rescuing the 
country long ago turned into struggle for Gorbachyov’s survival 
and popularity”. First an assistant then the Head of the USSR 
President’s Administration he knew what he talked about. He was 
a present at the most close sitting at the office of the General 
Secretary-the President.  
According to numerous evidence, Gorbachyov was able to 
impress people when he wanted to. ‘But many others and I’ wrote 
Boldin, “knew other sides of his character, his habits: he could be 
rude, could offend and humiliate his interlocutor.” It happened 
even with close comrades, companions-in-arms if to use the 
 177
elevated party style. Valery Boldin even questions: ‘How could it 
happen that these people allowed the General Secretary to accuse 
them of being unfaithful to the chosen course, to disgrace them? 
Everyone is free to have their own vision, their own point of view 
and no shouting or verbal whip whistling should as it seems 
change their standing.’ 
No, not everyone nodded to Gorbachyov. Ryzhkov, Aliev, 
Slyunkov, Maslyukov bravely defended their opinions. 
Yuri Petrovich Batalin pointed out how independently Aliev 
behaved at the meetings of the Politburo. 
– When the Government introduced some issue at the 
Politburo meeting, the situation was aggravated on purpose. I 
noticed, –Batalin tells, –that Aliev, seeing the scenario of such 
meetings, some or other Politburo Members’ behavior, always 
spoke out firmly, sometimes even in a tough manner to defend the 
Government’s position. 
I remember someone made a remark, it seems to have been 
Gorbachyov: “Geidar Alievich, you don’t behave as a party man 
here defending the economy interests while you are the Member 
of the Politburo.” He was never at a loss for words. And that time 
he answered properly and with dignity. I, he said, defend 
proposals that have been thoroughly discussed together with 
leading specialists in the Government. We have a clear position. 
And if it is accepted it will answer the party interests as well. 
In a word, he defended the position of the Government very 
firmly, convincingly and decisively. I remembered that. 
There were antagonisms between him and Gorbachyov rather 
frequently. It must have been one of the reasons behind 
Gorbachyov’s decision to dismiss him. 
– Does it mean Gorbachyov saw a rival in him? 
– Rival? It is unlikely, –answered Batalin, –but strong 
opponent, that’s possible. Gorbachyov did not like that Aliev did 
not nod to him, but stood his ground. 
One of characteristic examples was attitude towards Chernobyl 
catastrophe. 
– On that day, although it was Saturday, I was at work, –
remembered Geidar Alievich, –by the way, I worked every 
Saturday. I heard of the explosion at the Nuclear Power Station 
but did not know the details. I asked the Head of the 
Administration of the Sovmin Smirtyukov: What has happened? I, 
the Member of the Politburo, the First Deputy Chairman of the 
USSR Council of Ministers knew nothing about it. He answered 
that there was an accident at the Chernobyl Nuclear Power 
Station. The conversation took place at the end of the day. 
 178 
On Sunday I did not work. Naturally I could not find out 
anything. On Monday morning Gorbachyov summoned the 
Members of the Politburo. And he held the meeting in his private 
office. I received a call between 10 and 11 and was invited. Only 
very brief information was provided. 
Sweden, Poland, Germany, other European countries spread 
information on radioactive emission. In fact the entire world was 
aware of the Chernobyl catastrophe. At that moment Gorbachyov 
held a meeting... We sensed there was a tragedy; some measures 
should have been taken. In my opinion the measures stipulated for 
such cases were not enough. I don’t want to make a hero of myself 
now, get me right. I took the floor and said that in connection with 
situation we had to provide immediate communication. And it 
should be true. Everybody should know what happened, because 
the entire Europe already knew the essence of the accident. At that 
moment Ligachev interrupted me sharply: “What do you want? 
Which information do you want?” I said: “Which information can 
it be? I want people to get authentic information. We cannot 
conceal such a fact.” 
Then Alexander Nikolayevich Yakovlev joined me and said 
the same. Later on we met and he complained about Ligachev’s 
actions. He told me: “You see, only you and I were for the idea of 
providing complete information. But Ligachev was an influential 
person at that time. So it happened in that way... 
“It is a very important detail, –thinks the Deputy of the 
Ukraine Supreme Rada Boris Oleinik, the well-known poet. –
Gorbachyov was afraid to go to Kiev. When Shcherbitsky 
intended to cancel the Parade on the First of May and tried to 
evacuate at least children from the zone of the tragedy, 
Gorbachyov threatened him, saying that it was going to spread 
panic among population. Geidar Aliev actually made Gorbachyov 
admit that a wide-scale catastrophe had happened in Ukraine. We 
remember and appreciate Geidar Alievich Aliev’s position.” 
According to Valery Boldin’s evidence, at one of the Politburo 
meetings the General Secretary ‘uncontrollably smashed 
G.A. Aliev to pieces, which caused the latter to be taken to 
hospital with extensive myocardial infarction and he could not 
recover properly for two years. Of course, there were reasons to 
criticize Aliev, but why he was derogated in such violent manner 
at the meeting, where spirit of camaraderie and deferential critic 
should supposedly have reigned? He was sent to retirement, at the 
Plenary Meeting of the CPSU Central Committee 
M.S. Gorbachyov spoke highly of him and his work, but these 
words were cut off when the shorthand report was printed.” 
 179
How can such actions of the General Secretary, seemingly a 
great moralist, be assessed? He cared very much about his 
reputation among contemporaries and descendants. Here is one 
little but very typical of him example. 
On August 23, 1985, there was a large meeting chaired by the 
General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachyov at the CPSU Central 
Committee. They discussed plans for the USSR economic and 
social development for 1986 and for the twelfth five-year. The 
Chairman of the Gosselkhoztekhnika V. Yezhevsky, the Minister 
of the Soviet Union made a speech. He told about the necessity to 
cut down weight of agricultural machines. 
– Decreasing weight by one tone, –he addressed it directly to 
the General Secretary, –saves 900 kilograms of diesel fuel a year, 
Mikhail Sergeyevich. Moreover lighter machines condense the 
soil to a less extent and consequently don’t destroy fertile layer. 
Thus usage of effective structural stock gives a double effect here. 
Gorbachyov interrupts: “Wait a minute. Did you hear what 
Kolpakov said addressing all the workers of machine building 
industry and other metal users?” 
The USSR Minister of Non-ferrous Metallurgy Seraphim 
Vasilyevich Kolpakov, one of the best specialists of the industry, 
said something sensible. But it is not production of structural 
stock and lighter machines that we would like to attract your 
attention to. We speak about business ethics. The Party Leader, in 
the Soviet Union he was the Country Leader as well, addresses the 
Minister, the person much older that him, in a familiar manner. 
But this detail should not have get to history. So the shorthand 
record was corrected–to make his remarks more respectful. It is a 
nuance, but it is characteristic. 
Comparing recollections of the people who knew Gorbachyov 
rather closely and it seems sometimes that they speak about 
different persons. Boldin portrays an unrestrained person to say 
the least. But another assistant, Georgy Khosroevich 
Shakhnazarov, makes a good soul of him: 
“Gorbachyov’s treatment of people is even and well disposed. 
I have never heard him shout at anyone. Sometimes in a chafe he 
could raise his voice, but he recollected at once, smiled or shook 
his hand as if offering to forget this unpleasant episode. He parted 
without any sentimentality with those who disappointed him as 
workers or who let him down, but he did not hold grudge against 
them. He was not vindictive: no one of his adversaries was 
brought to grave, or sent to prison, or deported, or dismissed.” 
It is a portrait of an angel. Readers can make their own 
judgment on how much of it is the truth or what a great actor was 
 180 
the person that to the greatest misfortune of the large country 
turned out to be at its head. By the way, Andrei Andreyevich 
Gromyko, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, the First Deputy of the 
Chairman of the USSR Council of Ministers and undoubtedly the 
most authoritative member of the Politburo at that time, was the 
first to admit his mistake. It was he who recommended the 
Politburo of the CPSU Central Committee to elect Gorbachyov for 
the post of the General Secretary after the third funeral 
(Brezhnev–Andropov–Chernenko). Gorbachyov’s messengers 
promised the Politburo veteran quiet old age in the non-
demanding post of the Chairman of the USSR Supreme Soviet 
Presidium in return for supporting his candidature.  
Quite soon discernment dawned on the other colleagues of the 
General Secretary, this man of integrity according to 
Shakhnazarov’s estimation who was “let down by natural 
carelessness and fanatic belief in his star destiny”. The announced 
perestroika did not bring any yields. In fact it just could not–as it 
was a set of incoherent actions. The key impression of those years 
was the country got drowned in words. The goals changed nearly 
every day: acceleration of scientific technological progress and 
anti-alcohol campaign, state certification and struggle against 
speculation, hopes for cooperative movement and free elections, 
fire to bureaucracy and returning power to Soviets; countless 
peaceful initiatives... Shakhnazarov was right in his conclusion: 
‘Nearly every following step of the authorities was aimed at 
cancelling the previous one or at least at smoothing over its 
consequences. It looked like it knocked blindly at the wall, trying 
in vain to find a way out onto the right path.” 
Still the right path would not be found. Among people 
irritation increased. There were queues all around, it was 
impossible to buy anything, and ‘to procure’ became the most 
popular word. People procured coupons for furniture, shoes, 
clothes, and foodstuff. In oil fields and in mines the trade-union 
leaders divided one cyanotic chicken between two happy coupon 
holders. 
In a number of republics, in particular in Kazakhstan, national 
relations started getting aggravated due to personnel appointments 
made in a hurry. According to authoritative evidence of the 
Kazakhstan President Nursultan Nazarbaev (in his letter to the 
authors) “Geidar Aliev was the only member of the Politburo of 
the CPSU Central Committee who tried to dissuade Gorbachyov 
from hasty decisions on the threshold of Alma-Alta events of 
1986. He insisted on incorrectness of the decision to put 
“imported” leader at the head of Kazakhstan instead of retiring 
 181
D. Kunaev, it was necessary to nominate a local candidate. 
However they did not listen to him. And what could have been 
prevented happened–outraged people went into the streets and 
squares, which ended up in a bloody conflict.  
The same was repeated when he started criticizing the Kremlin 
leaders for shortcomings in their national policy, in particular in 
Transcaucasia, and raised alarm in connection with imminent 
Karabakh crisis. It became the drop that exasperated their patience 
and he was sent to retirement.” 
Yes, it is true. At the Politburo meeting when the matter of 
Kolbin was considered everybody kept silence. After the meeting 
Aliev came to Gorbachyov. Here is Geidar Alievich’s recollection 
of this conversation: 
“You see, Mikhail Sergeyevich, I did not want to say anything 
at the meeting, because there was not appropriate environment 
there. But I would like to tell you that I know national psychology 
of people to some extent. You have made a mistake. Kolbin is a 
good person. He can be a good first secretary. He was the First 
Secretary of the Ulyanovsk Region and he seemed to work well 
although he was involved in bluff. It is well known. I want to say 
that you could appoint him to the largest Party Organization of 
Russia. He would work. But Kolbin is not a suitable person for 
Kazakhstan. Mind it you have made a mistake. Looking at me 
with annoyance and anger Gorbachyov said: “OK, we’ll see.” So I 
think I have performed my duty.” 
Remembering his Moscow period later Aliev said that he, as a 
sober politician, could not agree with the reforms that were not 
calculated and tested in scientific experiments or in reality. “At 
the meeting of the Politburo I often spoke against adventurous 
plans and I have to say that sometimes I managed to prevent 
Mikhail Gorbachyov from some unreasoned decisions. But I was 
unable to dissuade Yegor Ligachev, my major opponent, from his 
anti-alcohol campaign that did so harm to the republics which 
cultivated grape, including Azerbaijan: the entire plantations were 
rooted out, the plants were stopped.” 
Aliev behaved in an independent manner, he did not adjust to 
the General Secretary’s changeable mood, and he stood his ground 
if he was sure of its correctness and so he turned out to be useless 
for Gorbachyov and his surrounding.  
 
 
Among activities that Aliev suggested in the frames of the 
International Year of Youth, there was a contest of works made by 
the technical school students. The exhibition of these works was 
 182 
opened at the VDNKh (The Exhibition of the National Economy 
Achievements–the Translator’s note). During the preparation 
period they received Ligachev’s directive: the event should be 
held under the aegis of the Central Committee. Alexander 
Timofeevich Gavrilov recollects: 
– It was the opening of the exhibition. Yuri Petrovich Batalin 
made a speech... At that moment Aliev decided to add 
something... Ligachev turned to him with something like–‘why do 
you interfere? Batalin is a speaker; we don’t need any other 
speakers. One of the Politburo Members to the other... In public... 
When I heard this remark of Ligachev (I don’t give it here in exact 
wording, but the sense is rendered exactly, I promise), I was 
ashamed. Anyway Aliev was the Member of the Politburo of the 
CPSU Central Committee like himself, the First Deputy Chairman 
of the Union Government! Even if he had not had all these posts?! 
What wrong could be done if had added Batalin’s report with 
some words? 
– They must have already condemned Aliev in the Politburo? –
we asked Gavrilov. 
– Yes, must be so, –he answered with confidence. –
Gorbachyov, Ligachev and Yakovlev did it... 
Alexander Timofeevich remembers one rather specific episode 
connected with his own biography. The Head of Aliev’s 
Secretariat did not like Gavrilov’s independence and the fact that 
he had a direct access to the boss omitting him, the head. In 
general sparkles–taking into account all Gavrilov’s tact–
sometimes flashed out between them. Alexander Timofeevich 
even asked his friends to find another job for him. Yakovlev heard 
the rumors of it and he asked Gavrilov: 
“How are you there? How do you get on with him?” 
“We get on well with him, –Gavrilov answered, realizing that 
his interlocutor tried to avoid names. –I have troubles with his 
surrounding.” 
– I sensed that Yakovlev did not like my answer, –Gavrilov 
tells on. –He must have expected to receive a bad response about 
Aliev from me. But I had good business-like relations with him 
and I did not intend to speak low of him. 
“Don’t worry, –Yakovlev finished the conversation. –We will 
find a place for you in the sphere of ideology.” 
Then the events developed as follows. Gavrilov was offered 
the post of the Sector Chief at the Propaganda Department of the 
Party Central Committee, but.... Yakovlev told Gavrilov that he 
did not want to call him (Aliev): ‘You will submit your 
resignation and leave and we will take you then.’ 
 183
“I will not do that, –Gavrilov answered. 
We have a talk at his small office on the fourth floor of the 
Rossiyskaya gaseta. On the desk covered with books and page-
proofs of new issues there is hardly place for two cups of coffee. 
– I think, –continues Gavrilov. –Aliev came at Brezhnev’s 
times, but by Andropov’s recommendation. He was Brezhnev’s 
favorite as well as Shevardnadze. But what is more important the 
choice was made by Andropov. He was immediately assigned to 
transport like Dzerzhinsky at his time, to bring order to the 
industry. He paid transport exclusive attention and got on with the 
Minister of Railways Konarev very well. They had very good 
camaraderie even friendly relationships. Gorbachyov, Ligachev, 
Yakovlev did not need such people. It was a terrible situation… 
Once Winston Churchill compared political struggle in the 
Soviet Union with some bulldogs fighting under the carpet. 
Gorbachyov and Yakovlev formed their own team by the methods 
that were comprehensible for them. And Ligachev–most likely–
was produced some documents discrediting Aliev and he joined 
the strong. 
– I think that Aliev played a very positive role. He followed 
rigorously administrative moral norms and he never tried to trip 
up Nikolai Ivanovich Ryzhkov. They worked hand in hand.”  
The attack against Aliev was prepared gradually. And as it 
happens most often in big politics it was done with somebody 
else’s hands. And it was disguised with outwardly noble impulses. 
At the beginning of 1987 one the authors of this book worked 
in the newspaper Socialist Industry. Once on returning from the 
meeting in the CPSU Central Committee the editor-in-chief 
summoned the editorial team: we are given a task to find out what 
is going on in Baku, in Azerbaijan (Aliev was the Member of the 
Politburo yet, but the attack was being prepared.) There was a 
series of critical publications in the Party press. Among them there 
were some materials in the Socialist Industry. It was an indirect 
strike at Aliev although the newspaper printed reasonable articles 
on social problems of the big city and gave true worth estimation 
to the USSR Soviet of Minister’s decree “On Further 
Development of the Baku City Economy for the Period of 1985-
1990” adopted at Aliev’s initiative. 
The tenth of May 1987 was a Sunday. On Monday the workers 
of his Secretariat congratulated Geidar Alievich on his birthday. 
Yet they felt a bit at a loss congratulating him. As there were no 
letters or telegrams from Gorbachyov or the Politburo among the 
correspondence. Nobody called from Staraya Square.  
 184 
– I thought to myself, –tells Alexander Gavrilov, –well, they 
have decided to get rid of him. But it was his birthday! He is a 
human being, your comrade and even companion-in-arms as you 
say. You have been together for so many years; he is the Member 
of the Politburo, the First Deputy Chairman of the Government. 
But Gorbachyov did not send his congratulation and the 
surrounding kept silence. Konarev was the first to congratulate 
him on that day, an exceptional man. However, later when we 
passed him some documents Aliev mentioned as if by chance that 
Gorbachyov called him to his car phone on the previous day and 
congratulated. But it is very likely that there was no such call, we 
will never know the truth now. 
On that Monday Geidar Alievich felt unwell. The doctor came, 
checked him and said it was necessary to take him to hospital at 
once. Aliev refused. 
– I have no right not to take you to hospital. You have your 
responsibilities–I have mine. I vigorously insist on your 
hospitalizing. 
Geidar Alievich attempted to walk to the ambulance car 
himself, but gave up in the corridor. He was carried farther on the 
stretcher. 
 
 
In hospital the leaders of Azerbaijan–Bagirov, Seidov, visited 
Aliev. The Minister of Railways Konarev dropped in. What about 
his companions-in-arms from the Politburo? Were they not 
acquainted with common human feelings? Was their world ruled 
by gains exclusively? It seemed to be the case. Only Nikolai 
Ivanovich Ryzhkov came to see Aliev in the hospital. He 
remembers: 
– Years later Aliev confessed to me: To my shame I thought 
that Nikolai Ivanovich came only to make my pill a bit sweeter. I 
remember that I saw off someone of foreign Premiers, called the 
hospital to find out if there were no medical procedures at that 
time and decided to come. He was very glad and later confessed 
that misjudged my intentions. 
Gorbachyov set a goal: to clear up the room around himself. 
And Ligachev helped him actively. They smoothed the ground 
step by step. It was not good. It was dishonorable. 
Nikolai Ivanovich has a story that got stuck in his mind. 
– The flat for Aliev’s son or daughter was necessary. I hardly 
knew his family, I met his wife a couple of times, my wife, 
Lyudmila, knew her better. In short, someone, either his son or his 
daughter needed a flat. And we made a decision–to give a flat in 
 185
the new house next to the current “President” hotel, it was 
“Oktyabrskaya” hotel earlier. It was the Central Committee house, 
the Central Committee Administration and the Sovmin exchanged 
flats and generally worked together in this sphere. In a word, the 
flat was allocated and suddenly Aliev came to us: “We got the 
refusal”. I called Kruchina to the Central Committee 
Administration: “Nikolai Ivanovich, what are you doing?” He was 
confused. “Listen, it is dishonorable. Aliev was the Member of the 
Politburo only yesterday, he is still the First Deputy Chairman of 
the Council of Ministers, and his family has already packed to 
move. We came to Moscow together with you, together worked in 
the Central Committee.” “Of course, Nikolai Ivanovich, I 
understand, don’t I?” “What then?” I immediately called 
Smirtyukov. In the end the matter was settled... 
– It must have been someone besides Kruchina and 
Smirtyukov that put obstacles. 
– Surely... There was one more occasion. It was after Aliev’s 
dismissal, we sat for three hours and talked in a very candid 
manner. I said, that there were some papers in my safe... I looked 
through them... 
– Nikolai Ivanovich, I know who wrote them. You have such 
papers, so does Gorbachyov, and Yakovlev... It is revenge of 
dishonest people. 
 
 
During that long and warm conversation over cups of tea 
Nikolai Ivanovich asked his interlocutor about that famous ring. 
Everybody who saw TV report from Baku on the last visit of the 
General Secretary remembered how Leonid Ilyich admired the 
ring. 
– Geidar Alievich, there were rumors that you handed over a 
ring with a diamond to Brezhnev. He sat in the Presidium and 
twisted this ring. All the spotlights were on him and we saw 
shining rays. 
– Nikolai Ivanovich, it is gossip, –Aliev answered. –What did I 
need it for? – He took out a magazine. In the cover there was 
Brezhnev’s plane. Geidar, Brezhnev and other officials walked off 
the stairway. Behind them there was the head of the security, the 
General. –I entered the plane as it was customary for the host, 
invited Brezhnev: “Leonid Ilyich, come, please.” It was a tradition 
then. Do you really suppose that I thrust a ring to him inside the 
plane? Look carefully: the ring was already on Brezhnev’s finger. 
He arrived with it. Could I be as idiotic as to invite the guest to 
step on Azerbaijanland, thrusting a gift on him at the same time? 
 186 
– In general the conversation was very frank, –concludes 
Ryzhkov. –I believed him, and a couple of days later I went to 
Gorbachyov with this file. We met almost every day, occasionally 
two-three times a day. The General Secretary saw the file and said 
cheerfully: “I have the similar one.” “Mikhail Sergeyevich, I 
talked to Aliev.” –“Well?” –“I think we should put these papers in 
the furthest corner and forget about them.” I did so to my file–I 
did not have any actions taken on them. I don’t know what 
Gorbachyov did to his file. 
The General Secretary did not forget about these papers. A big 
case was prepared. ‘The trial will be better than that on Rashidov,’ 
Gorbachyov’s assistant Chernyaev quotes his words. There was 
no trial. There could not be any trial, as “the facts turned out to be 
nonsense.” Yakovlev came to this conclusion after numerous 
inspections and commissions. Pugo, the Chairman of the Party 
Control Committee, reported to him: ‘there are no grounds to take 
institute proceedings. 
Alexander Nikolayevich Yakovlev eagerly calls upon 
Bolsheviks to recant for their real or supposed sins in public. But he 
does not recant himself for his sins, for example, for harsh treatment 
of Aliev and his family, as if he had nothing to do with it. 
“You see, Artem, I am glad that Zarifa did not witness the 
disgrace I was forced to suffer when I was dismissed from the 
Politburo.” 
Geidar Alievich said this to Artem Borovik, the talented 
journalist that died in the air crash. Vagif Mustafaev recorded 
Artem’s evidence. In the same film Borovik told as Geidar 
Alievich called Shevardnadze (the MGIMO (the Moscow State 
Institute of International Relations.–Translator’s note), where 
Ilkham worked, was under his command as the Minister of 
Foreign Affairs) and asked: “Leave the man alone. Why do you 
bludgeon him on the head?” “Yet Ilkham was dismissed,” 
continued Artem Borovik. “And he supported the father and the 
family at that time. This is family that has been beaten and 
suffered a lot. 
...After Aliev’s dismissal the journalists inquired Ryzhkov: 
– You worked with him; he was a bad man, wasn’t he? 
– And if I tell that he was a good man, will you not write that? 
You are not interested in it, are you? I told everyone then and I 
will repeat again that I will not throw stones at this person. Yes, 
we worked together. And he worked well. 
Ryzhkov remembers one episode at the ‘Vnukovo’ airport: 
 187
– I was sitting over a cup tea waiting for departure. A strange 
Azerbaijanian man came to me: “Nikolai Ivanovich, let’s have a 
glass of Champaign. I would like to have a drink with you to our 
Geidar. You are the only person who did not throw a stone at him, 
did not follow the other’s example.” 
But this meeting took place much later. Meanwhile 
Gorbachyov shuffled his cards–he changed his surrounding for the 
second or for the third time.  
 
 
Once it was turn of Yevgeny Maximovich Primakov, the 
Member of the Politburo of the CPSU Central Committee, and 
later of the Presidential Council. The Academician occupied the 
same office in the Kremlin that was previously occupied by Aliev. 
Telling about the events of 1991, Primakov writes: 
“After the 28th Congress of the CPSU I focused on work at the 
Presidential Council. I did not only deal with external economic 
activity but supervised some issues that were beyond its frames. My 
relations with Mikhail Sergeyevich were perfect, I could raise rather 
sharp problem before him, which, in my opinion, required solution. 
But raising those issues created certain tension. I will admit that I 
was mostly worried, even irritated, with lack of determination when 
it came to strengthening the power of law.” But let us emphasize 
that it was the very essence of Gorbachyov. To Primakov’s 
considerations he responded in a way like that “in the hard period of 
transition to a new society he wanted to avoid civil commotion–
they could have been provoked by decisive measures aimed at 
bringing order to the country as a whole.” Primakov thought that 
Gorbachyov’s words were true only partially: “Or to be more 
accurate the intentions were justified but nor the possible results of 
refusing to take such actions, which finally was proved by the 
putsch arranged by the GKChP (The State Commission on the State 
of Emergency–the Translator’s note.)’  
This tense conversation between them Gorbachyov finished 
with the phrase: “I feel that you don’t fit into the mechanism.” 
 
 
Many years before Stalin uttered Gorbachyov a similar phrase 
about his recent companions-in-arms: they fell out of the cart at 
the steep turning point... Those fell out, these did not fit... It was 
Joseph Vissarionovich Stalin in particular that Mikhail 
Sergeyevich did not want to look like for the world. However 
considering all the difference of their characters and actions both 
of them got rid of their opponents. Though those of Stalin’s 
 188 
finished their lives in camps at best, while those of Gorbachyov’s–
were merely caught by infarctions like Aliev or Ryzhkov. 
Nikolai Ivanovich met Gorbachyov face to face many times, 
trying to persuade him that his economic course was ushering the 
country towards the dead-end.  
– At the last meetings of the Politburo shouting and dirty 
words were heard, –remembers he. –We stood wall against wall. 
We cursed each other to the face. After one such meeting I called 
Gorbachyov: it cannot go on that way. The invited people come to 
the Politburo meetings, they spread rumors all over Moscow, how 
we seize each other’s breasts here. We are humans and it is 
impossible to get to sleep after such Politburo meetings. Mikhail 
Sergeyevich suggested meeting on the following day, on Saturday. 
Though I always worked on Saturdays, he did not. So we met... 
When we finished our talk I understood that Raisa Maximovna 
was in the next room. 
– I got assured that our positions conflict on the principle 
basis. Medvedev was with him, Yakovlev was with him... They 
were the people who did not do anything in their life, they did not 
even read the books that were signed by their names, and they did 
not drive a rusty nail.”  
 
 
Geidar Alievich Aliev, as our interviewees suppose, coped–
and coped well!–with all the huge work load that he carried on in 
the Sovmin and in the Central Committee. Two golden stars of the 
Hero of Socialist Labor (the second in Andropov’s time) were 
adequate evaluation of his work. He often quoted Chekhov’s 
words: ‘Work is essential all the rest will get enclosed.’ And in 
hospital as soon as he felt better he resumed work. He invited 
Ministers, Heads of Services that he supervised to the meetings. 
His assistants jot down his assignments and returning to the 
Sovmin they noticed their colleagues’ sympathetic looks.  
– We were looked at like the drowned, –Alexander Gavrilov 
inferred. 
Filipp Denisovich Bobkov saw anything during his long life in 
securities and in big politics; he knew how liking and disliking 
were formed at the Olympus, which complicated conspiracies and 
which unions were designed–who made friends against whom, 
who was drowned or according to modern terminology–was got 
wet. His opinion on Gorbachyov’s attitude towards Aliev is flat: 
– It was absolutely negative attitude. Utterly! In contrast to 
Andropov’s attitude towards Aliev, which was very nice. 
Andropov was not afraid of strong people with independent mind, 
 189
he appreciated them and promoted. While Gorbachyov was scared 
with such people and tried to get rid of them–Aliev, Romanov, 
Yeltsin, Ryzhkov, Batalin... 
After Yeltsin’s excommunication from the Politburo 
Gorbachyov offered him the post of the First Deputy Chairman of 
the Gosstroi–a Minister post. Yeltsin did not expect such a gift–
the USSR Minister! And he agreed at once. Gorbachyov 
remarked: “But I will not let you in politics again.” He considered 
himself to be all-powerful yet: ‘I will not let!’ He moved people 
like chessmen on the chessboard. But he was losing the country at 
that moment. 
Did he think about the country, though? Yet he liked to repeat 
the words from a popular song: “Long live the native country...” 
...Yuri Petrovich Batalin recollects one of his last meetings 
with Aliev in Moscow: 
– It was after his dismissal in hospital in Michurinsky Prospect. 
We exchanged warm greetings as usual, started talking. Geidar 
Alievich’s sight was far from the best at that time–he got much 
thinner and looked exhausted. We went aside and took seats. He 
uttered a phrase that I remembered. I cannot quote it exactly but the 
meaning was as following: they haven’t done with me, I’ve 
managed to survive and I’ll get out. By the way he spoke it, it was 
clear that he did not only mean his physical condition. According to 
rumors they intended to dispose of him, but could not. 
It is time to wonder: Whom did Aliev hinder so much even 
after his dismissal? Moscow arbiters of our fate? Aliev saw 
Gorbachyov and Yakovlev’s genuine guises and opposed them. 
But in their case the matter was most likely limited to unobtrusive 
control of security services: listening-in and some similar things. 
Might it be forces that strove for power in Azerbaijan? Aliev often 
told, including his Armenian friends in Moscow–in particular, the 
Deputy Minister of Construction Enterprises for Oil and Gas 
Industry Arakelian: “If I were in Azerbaijan at that time, neither 
Karabakh nor Sumgait would have happened.” 
– That is true, –adds Yuri Petrovich Batalin. –I am sure of it. 
Aliev was able to stop the war in Karabakh. The negotiations 
started. I can understand how difficult those negotiations were. But 
regardless of how long they were they were better than the war. 
 
 
The writer Albert Likhanov turned out to be in hospital in 
Michurinsky Prospect at the same time with Aliev.  
– The connoisseurs of political relations considered it 
dangerous for themselves to contact Aliev then, –tells Albert 
 190 
Anatolyevich. –But I decided to see him. Ilkham was with Geidar 
Alievich at the moment and he seemed disappointed with 
something. Ilkham stood up and left tactfully and we started 
talking and gradually got so involved in the conversation that 
talked till late evening. 
Likhanov was stunned with the ward, where Aliev was put 
(“tiny ward” in his words), it was very small and miserable. 
– Even I had a better ward. And one of the ruling authorities 
that I also dropped in had a luxurious suite with its own kitchen 
and buffet. I got very offended on Aliev’s part. 
In that long winter evening Aliev was very openhearted. 
– He remembered Nakhichevan, his family, how he began, 
how he made his life. It was obvious how these recollections 
carried him along, –remarks Likhanov. –Then we came to the 
current events... Aliev said, that he was delivered a blow and 
named Gorbachyov immediately. He said, how he, Aliev, was 
betrayed, which was characteristic of our whole history, though... 
He spoke fearing nothing without any reservations although, of 
course, there were listening devices there. 
After that talk we arranged going for a walk in the evenings. I 
remembered him shocked by injustice, but undefeated... Geidar 
Alievich was a very strong person, a brilliant organizer.  
All his life he was faithful to the cause, to the Party. And he 
was offended for no reason. He worked with total devotion. 
 
 
One of the tsars of Alexandria asked Euclid if there was an 
easy way to learn geometry.  
“There is no tsar path in geometry”, –answered Euclid. 
– There is no tsar path in governance either, –Aliev liked to 
add. –It is necessary to study. And the one whose ambitions 
exceed his knowledge and abilities always suffers a defeat. 
 
 191
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 7 
“I AM NOT A STONE OR IRON, I AM A MAN” 
 
 
October 19, 1987, Moscow 
 
In the Kremlin the session of the USSR Supreme Soviet 
opened. In the Presidium there were heads of the Supreme Soviet 
Chambers, the Government, the Members of the Politburo. 
“From time to time someone might come in, someone might go 
out, –remembered Geidar Alievich about that day. –Gorbachyov sat 
in front of me. I saw him stand up and go out. A bit later Ligachev 
stood up, nodded to Ryzhkov to follow him to the room of the 
Presidium. We used to gather before the meeting and have some tea 
in intervals there. Some time later they invited me.  
Gorbachyov started the conversation with me, saying that in 
his opinion I had to leave the Politburo and the Sovmin. I 
answered that I didn’t see any reasons why I should leave and that 
I didn’t think it was right. But if they considered it necessary I 
would not object. “Then you have to get us know if you leave by 
your own will or due to illness.” 
During the interval I went home. My son and daughter were at 
home. I explained the situation to them. They were very kind! 
They said: “Father, don’t worry, it’s life...” 
In the evening I came to Gorbachyov to say that I was leaving. 
‘Yes, I am leaving and you may say that I am leaving because of 
the condition of my health. He stood up, embraced me, kissed and 
said: ‘Thank you very much, Geidar Alievich!’ 
They knew each other for nearly two decades by that time. 
They met at the Plenary Meetings of the Party Central Committee, 
at the sessions of the Supreme Soviet... In 1972 Geidar Alievich 
had a rest with his family in Pyatigorsk. Once out of the blue 
Gorbachyov called and said he would like to visit him, to see how 
he enjoyed his holiday. He came and invited him to Karachaevo-
Cherkessia. The First Secretary of the Stavropol Territory 
Committee of the CPSU did not endow with such attention all the 
Secretaries and Ministers who came for rest in his patrimony.  
 192 
Special attention to the top authorities, of course: Brezhnev, 
Andropov, and Kosygin... Once Mikhail Sergeyevich said as if by 
chance a phrase that he prepared long in advance:  
– It is impossible to form the Politburo of elderly people 
exclusively. Any good forest should have undergrowth. 
Andropov liked this flattering image with a hint. And when 
Gorbachyov–not without his help–was elected to the Politburo, 
congratulating his new colleague, Yuri Vladimirovich 
remembered the saying: 
– Well, “undergrowth” goes ahead! 
And Aliev supported this choice of Andropov: “I had a 
positive opinion of Gorbachyov. Although, –continued Geidar 
Alievich, –after election for the post of the General Secretary of 
the CPSU Central Committee he changed very much. It was not 
only my opinion, many other Members of the Politburo thought 
the same”. But it was a long way to this election yet. 
During that trip to Karachaevo-Cherkessia they get to know 
each other better, made friends. “I liked Geidar Alievich”, –
remembered Gorbachyov the start of their acquaintance. –He was 
a very intelligent person who could carry out a dialogue both at 
the very high level and at the very simple. And I was fond of such 
approach too. So we hit it off.” “It was beginning of our friendship 
and our kind relations”, –added Aliev. 
...The Plenary Meeting of the Central Committee followed the 
session of the Supreme Soviet. On October 22 the newspapers 
published the communication: “The Plenary Meeting satisfied 
comrade G.A. Aliev’s request to relieve him of the duties of the 
Member of the Politburo and let him retire because of the 
condition of his health.” 
It was not a surprise for those who were consecrated to the 
Kremlin secrets. Aliev like Kosygin a few years before was 
“cleansed” by the doctors: Geidar Alievich, you’d better retire, the 
health doesn’t allow you to experience such pressure any more. 
Very tactful by nature the patient could not bear their pressure any 
more: Your task is to treat me and how I will live further, if I will 
work or nor is no concern of yours! 
On leaving hospital he gradually returned to the working 
rhythm. He studied materials of the Teachers’ Congress that was 
conceived with his participation; he sent his notes for the Meeting 
of the Central Committee devoted to the radical transformation of 
the economy management. At the end of June the radical 
transformation (less could not become these leaders’ objective) 
was discussed at the Plenary Meeting of the CPSU Central 
Committee. Kunaev was removed from the Politburo; Zimyanin 
 193
was relieved of the duties of the Secretary of the Central 
Committee. Alexander Nikolayevich Yakovlev was elected the 
Member of the Politburo. Aliev just hemmed: What a pace! In 
January he was elected the Candidate-member of the Politburo, 
half a year later–the Member... 
In early September Aliev came back to work. There was 
everyday routine–meetings in the Central Committee and in the 
Council of Ministers. On September 18, the Members of the 
Politburo of the CPSU Central Committee G.A. Aliev, 
N.I. Ryzhkov, and N.N. Slyunkov visited the exhibition 
“Chemistry-87”. Aliev noticed by various details how 
Gorbachyov’s attitude towards him changed. “I felt it was 
changing gradually, –he said in the documentary film “Story of 
One Envy” by Vagif Mustafaev. –Before that we had warm 
relationships. 
 
 
Story of One Envy 
 
Gorbachyov stated in this film, candidly looking in the camera, 
that Aliev’s resignation “was connected with the condition of his 
health. And I have to say it was a great pressure of the republic. 
Great pressure... By his position, being in Moscow, he was a 
hindrance for the republic. And I came to this conclusion. 
I don’t think that there was any bloodthirstiness or squaring of 
accounts, which was even less possible. We treated him very 
kindly. Nobody trampled him down or humiliated. I am not 
interested in and it is not my business what is said around. I am 
sure my conscience is clean.” 
The reader is already aware how Aliev was dismissed. Having 
read how he was dealt with you can make your own conclusion on 
whose conscience is clean and whose is not. First question that 
Mikhail Sergeyevich asked Mustafaev was how many series he 
was going to make about Aliev. 
– Twelve. 
– Twelve! –the ex-General Secretary and the ex-President 
marvelled. –Gensher (the former Minister of Foreign Affairs of 
the FRG. –Auth.) and I shot only one film about me. 
– It is your problem, –replied the film director tiredly. 
He pressed Gorbachyov for three years to get his agreement to 
participate in shooting. At last he received a call from Moscow: 
‘Mikhail Sergeyevich has given consent. He waits for you. You 
have ten minutes for shooting.’ 
 194 
Mustafaev and his cameraman made for Moscow immediately. 
He hardly left the plane when there was a call on his mobile 
telephone: “Mikhail Sergeyevich can not meet with you.” 
Can you imagine the film director’s feelings... He approached 
the Azerbaijanian Embassy when at the monument to Nizami one 
more calls reached him: “Mikhail Sergeyevich has consented!” 
...We entered the building of ‘Gorbachyov-fund’ in 
Leningradsky Prospect not far from the city air station. The 
aquarium caught the eyes.  
– Here we will shoot, –said Vagif. 
In the first stills it is reserved and even impassive conversation 
on topics of general interest. But then Mustafaev directly asks 
why the General Secretary removed Aliev. “Gorbachyov gets 
nervous, –remembers Vagif, –anxiety passes to the cameraman, 
and camera starts shaking in his hands... And there are lots of 
questions we have to ask yet.” 
One of them was connected with Ilkham, Geidar Alievich’s 
son, the lecturer at the Moscow State Institute of International 
Relations (the MGIMO). He was forced to resign. Gorbachyov 
said, that he first heard of that. 
“Story of One Envy” was shown at the cinema festival in 
Yekaterinburg, the film received the Grand Prix. When 
Gorbachyov said that he first heard about this episode in the 
MGIMO, a loud female voice sounded all over the auditorium: 
‘He lies everything, this Gorbachyov!” 
And fish behind his back fawned and fawned. 
According to the Head of his Personal Security General 
Medvedev the General Secretary was characterized with weak will 
and inconsistency. He constantly shuffled his political 
surrounding, abandoning both the left and the right. And Geidar 
Alievich got in that stonemill. 
Vladimir Medvedev was the General of the USSR KGB, for 
many years he was the Head of L.I. Brezhnev’s (for 14 years) and 
M.S. Gorbachyov’s (for 6 years) Personal Security, for two years 
and a half he served at the Reserve Department of the Ninth 
Directorate of the KGB that was responsible for security of heads 
of high-ranking delegations. In this capacity he twice prepared 
Geidar Aliev’s visits–the first was to Vologda and Cherepovets, 
the second–to Vietnam.  
Of course, Aliev remembered Vladimir Timofeevich from their 
previous encounters, including the one in Baku where the General 
came together with Brezhnev. On listening to the protocol report 
on the visit preparation, he asked in a friendly way, how he was 
doing and how he liked his new job. 
 195
“I knew that Aliev was in good standing with Brezhnev, –
remembers General Medvedev. –I also knew that he was elected 
to the Politburo of the Central Committee by Yuri Vladimirovich 
Andropov’s recommendation. 
Aliev was going to visit the metallurgic plant in Vietnam. 
Vladimir Medvedev was the first to go along the route of the Head 
of the Soviet delegation. In the pile of scrap metal near the open-
hearth furnace he noticed some shells. The hosts refused to take 
them away, saying they were not dangerous. 
“When Geidar Alievich arrived, –tells Medvedev, –I certainly 
reported him on the shells and asked if it was possible to cancel 
the visit to the plant. But it is not in Aliev’s character to cancel 
anything. “It is out of the question, –he answered. –People are 
waiting for us there, we have to go.” He was always like that. By 
the way his attitude towards his own security was–I would not call 
it careless with bravado, no–it was of minor importance to him.” 
It will be interesting to give here one more evidence of this 
kind–that of the journalist Elmira Akhundova. Among the others 
she accompanied the President in one of the foreign business trips. 
Shortly before in July 1995 only the lucky chance saved the plane 
in which Aliev returned after visiting Bulgaria and Rumania. 
Some people were openly afraid of a new terrorist attack. And 
then right in the salon of the plane when he had answered Elmira’s 
questions, Geidar Alievich added: “Don’t get scared, nothing will 
happen to me. Allah saves me because he knows–my people need 
me yet.” 
It is pity that even Allah could not protect this man from the 
Party crafty designs. 
We have yet to tell how deeply and accurately Geidar Aliev’s 
personality was assessed by Nursultan Nazarbaev, to remember 
how grew ripen and exploded Karabakh... But now let us turn 
back to the 27th Congress of the CPSU, where Geidar Aliev, the 
personal pensioner of the national standing, was elected the 
Member of the Central Committee. The biography profile listed 
his party and state positions up to the last one (by that time): 
“From October 1987 to November 1988 the Counsellor of State at 
the USSR Council of Ministers.” 
It was a post of honor. The forces came back. He as usual 
came to work by 8:30 to his small office but he felt more and 
more acutely: no one needed his advice there. 
He remained the Counsellor of State at the USSR Sovmin and 
the Member of the CPSU Central Committee for a short time. 
Then he was relieved of these “loads” as well. In the opinion of 
the authoritative and wise politician Alexander Sergeyevich 
 196 
Dzasokhov, the President of the Republic of North Ossetia-
Alania: “Aliev was treated unfairly.” 
Once after the dismissal Geidar Alievich asked the Head of 
‘his’ Secretariat to select some materials for him. In reply he heard 
an abusive phrase: “ You don’t work here any more.” 
Then Alexander Gavrilov volunteered to sort out the necessary 
papers. But the vigilant Head was on him at once: 
– Who do you prepare that for? 
– For Aliev. 
– Remember: he does not work here any more! 
Yet Alexander Timofeevich disobeyed his boss. ‘It would be 
inhuman otherwise,’ he judged. 
It was a small touch of decency against the background of 
grovellers’ baseness. 
He had to move to another country-house–“it was some 
wooden hut”, –Likhanov remarks angrily. –Well, Geidar Alievich 
did not provide for his own mansion, so he had to settle down in 
“a wooden hut”. The security was withdrawn–never mind. But 
why did they call off the housemaid that cleaned and cooked–he 
was after the infarction, after the wife’s death. They humiliated 
him abominably, pettily. 
A noteworthy situation at the Kremlin Palace of Congress 
comes to my mind. Party Secretaries, Ministers, big Military 
Bosses flooded the lobby during the interval... They formed small 
groups, greeted one another loudly, embraced the ones they did 
not see for a long time. But they carefully bypassed one person 
diverting eyes from him. It was Geidar Alievich Aliev, not the 
Member of the Politburo, not the First Deputy Chairman of the 
Sovmin any more. Only yesterday this public twisted around to 
pay their respect, to fly by as if by chance before the eyes, to 
remind of themselves: there is such Dobchinsky-Bobchinsky. 
Having seen enough of this humiliating scene, Viktor 
Polyanichko could not bear it any more and invited one of the 
authors of this book: 
– Vitya, let’s go and have a talk with Geidar Alievich. 
We came to him and saw how his eyes flashed gratefully. 
That occasion at the Palace was just a beginning of 
estrangement, just a prelude of baiting Aliev had to go through yet. 
Then he did not know yet, that his pupils would betray him, 
promotes, and friends from the closest circle. “I think the most 
frightening thing that can happen to a person is to get deceived in 
people, –he told. And the following phrase escaped his breast: –... 
You know, there was much injustice performed in relation to me. 
But I am a human being, I am neither a stone nor iron, I am a man!” 
 197
It was the emotional outburst, maybe, a single one for years of 
severe and unjust disfavor, when his wounded soul opened itself. 
Geidar Alievich told nobody else about it. The strong have to hold 
their grief inside, burning their hearts out. And only cardiograms 
know what megawatts of will these picks and curves have been 
paid with. 
Repeating time and again about new thinking in fact 
Gorbachyov acted in a traditional way: he had done with his 
predecessors. Khrushchev overthrew Stalin, Brezhnev–
Khrushchev, Gorbachyov –Brezhnev... Every leaving epoch 
received a black mark: cult of a personality, voluntarism, and 
stagnation... Yes, it was necessary to reject some old practices, 
learn lessons from the past in order to prevent new mistakes. But 
to destroy everything indiscriminately–it is too much.  
 
 
Harsh Treatment 
 
In the Soviet times there was a popular Stalin’s formula: the 
personnel decides everything. Gorbachyov started to get rid of the 
personnel–Kunaev, Aliev, Shcherbitsky, and then in April 1989 he 
removed over a hundred comrades from the Central Committee 
and designated, as it was revealed very soon, renegades in their 
places.  
In Baku Bagirov was dismissed–only because once Aliev 
recommended him. He recommended him exclusively due to 
Kyamran Mamed ogly’s business and personal qualities. He had 
an extensive work and party experience: a mechanic, an engineer, 
a Dean, a Deputy Chief Executive of the Trust, the Head of 
Construction and Utility Department of the Council of Ministers 
of the Azerbaijan SSR, the First Secretary of the Sumgait City 
Party Committee, the Secretary of the Central Committee... In 
general opinion, he was an honest, decent man of firm principles. 
He would not allow himself to offend Aliev even with suspicion. 
But Aliev recommended him. And the case was being fabricated 
against Aliev. 
Inspired articles from the central press were immediately 
reprinted by Baku periodicals–in the Russian and Azerbaijani 
languages. In spite of the widely proclaimed glasnost and 
pluralism of opinion it was no way to reply to accusation and 
libel. In Baku Aliev’s brothers–Gasan, Agil and Djalal were 
persecuted. Agil Aliev, the Head of the Political Economy Chair 
of the Medical Institute, the Doctor of Economy, was sacked from 
the Institute on the day of his birthday, on 10 December 1988. A 
 198 
couple of years before Agil Aliev was honored at the same 
Institute, many kind and respectful words were said and 
memorable addresses were handed over. Now they are kept in his 
office as a good reminder of honor and disgrace. For two years the 
well-known scientist, the author of numerous scientific articles, 
researches and treatises could not find a job. 
Academician Djalal Aliev, the outstanding biologist, wrote in 
his book, published in 1999:  
“The last decade ploughing the field of our life with a heavy 
plough made me an old and experienced man absolutely certain of 
how ephemeral our ideas may turn out in relation to stability of 
the society whose integral part we are and in relation to 
inevitability of the truth’s victory over the lie, and certain of how 
fragile people and the peoples” wellbeing is, if due to their folly, 
flippancy or naivety they entrust their destiny to adventurers and 
hypocrites who are ready to sacrifice anything for the sake of their 
own gain and vanity. 
As many others I was involved in politics without any 
intention to deal in it. Now I have realized the justice of the 
statement that if you are not going to deal in politics it will deal 
with you.’ 
Politics got the Academician in the laboratory, reached him in 
the experimental field where he together with his colleagues 
cherished new sorts of wheat. The scientist courageously came to 
defence of his brother’s honor, of the entire family’s dignity. He 
sent dozens of letters to all the authorities–to the General Office of 
Public Prosecutor of the USSR and the Presidium of the Supreme 
Soviet, to editorial offices of central and republican newspapers, 
to the Central Committee of the Azerbaijan Communist Party, to 
the CPSU Central Committee, to the Politburo... 
In return he received just formal replies. Only Smena magazine 
(No. 19, 1988) apologized before Geidar Aliev. 
“The article “...And One Night” (Smena, No. 15, p.18) said 
that being in Baku L.I. Brezhnev accepted a luxurious ring from 
Aliev. As the editorial office does not possess any documentary 
evidence concerning this episode, we bring apology to G.A. Aliev 
and our readers.”  
 
 
Karabakh 
 
On February 18, 1988, Gorbachyov appointed Georgy 
Khosroevich Shakhnazarov, a political scientist, for the position of 
his new secretary. Practically on the same day Armenian writer 
 199
and publicist Zoriy Balayan forced himself to be received by him. 
“I knew him by interesting articles in the Literaturnaya gaseta, –
Shakhnazarov writes in his book “Price of Freedom”, –so I 
responded with pleasure to his suggestion of a meeting, without 
suspecting that he would speak about Karabakh. But my guest was 
worried only with this. Looking closely into a thin tanned face 
with narrow extraordinary black–even for a man from the South–
eyes, one could understand that reunification of Karabakh and 
Armenia became for this man not just a dream but the cause of his 
life and death. 
Further Shakhnazarov complains: “Nothing could persuade 
them of the necessity to strive for compromise decisions. The hour 
struck, now or never! –This slogan rendered the task formulated 
by the national self-consciousness, whose spokesmen were 
Balayan, Ter-Petrosyan and their companions-in-arms.” 
Doesn’t it concern the assistant to the General Secretary of the 
CPSU Central Committee, “Russian Armenian from Karabakh, 
born in Baku” as he wrote about himself? Doesn’t he have to be 
among the first to make his countrymen “to strive for compromise 
decisions”? No, he gave the General secretary Balayan’s request 
to receive him together with the woman-poet Silva Kaputikyan. 
“This meeting took place on February 26 and was of great 
importance for the subsequent events”, –points out Georgy 
Shakhnazarov. 
In Azerbaijan as well as all over the country people knew 
about this meeting from TV news. They expected that the General 
Secretary would receive the representatives of Azerbaijan 
intelligentsia as well. But he did not do that. General Bobkov was 
in Karabakh at that time. He tells: 
– I assured myself how much Aliev did for development of the 
Autonomous Region, for strengthening national relations. And 
even the first outbursts did not end up in a conflict. I will give two 
simple examples. 
On 22 February 1988 I had to be on the road from Stepanakert 
to Agdam. There was a crowd of instigated people. An old woman 
met them halfway and threw an Azerbaijan scarf under their feet. 
They stopped. They turned back. What does it say about? 
The second example. On the same day in the same district 
Armenians shot two Azerbaijan men. Just imagine what could 
have happened if people in surrounding places had known about 
it? We addressed Azerbaijan people, assembled the most 
respected people. “Let’s’, –I say, –step over this sorrow, over this 
loss.” They agreed with us. They buried the perished without 
inflaming sparkles of hatred out of this accident. 
 200 
In Stepanakert during one of the rallies some instigators 
brought coffins. An actress of the regional theatre, an Armenian, 
unfortunately I don’t remember her name now, was standing next 
to me. She stood against those instigators with desperate bravery. 
The provocation did not work. 
It most likely was Knarik Pogosyan–she was written about in 
reports from Karabakh. At the same tine the ‘Socialist Industry’ 
told about the fact when the workers of the aluminium plant in 
Sumgait saved their comrades-Armenians from pogrom-makers. 
The Chief of the plant security Ismail Aliev brought entire 
families of workers and specialists to the plant–there they were 
under secure protection. Among those saved in that way was uncle 
Kostya with his family–at the plant everyone called master-caster 
Konstantin Aikazovich Martirosyan so. And he called Ismail his 
own brother. 
Karabakh came out on the first pages of central newspapers 
and on the television screen in February 1988. The authorities of 
the Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Region made a decision to 
withdraw from the Azerbaijan SSR. It turned out to be a fuse that 
put on fire a whole chain of ethnic conflicts. 
“Demographic Encyclopaedic Dictionary” issued in Moscow 
in 1985 (the first year of Gorbachyov’s rule and the last peaceful 
year in the Soviet Union) represents the Nagorno-Karabakh 
Autonomous Region as follows: 
“It is situated in the south-east part of the Little Caucasus in 
the Azerbaijan SSR. The territory is 4.4 thousand sq. km. The 
population was 170 thousand people by 1983. The centre is the 
town of Stepanakert.” (Renamed in 1923 in honor of Stepan 
Shaumyan, the member of the RSDRP since 1900, the Chairman 
of the Baku Soviet of People’s Commissars, executed by shooting 
among the 26 Baku Commissars.) 
Since the middle of the 18th century, the dictionary reminds, 
this territory, previously being under different Turk powers, 
became a part of the Karabakh khanate, founded in the territory of 
the central part of Azerbaijan. In 1805 the Karabakh khanate got 
under the authority of Russia. By the time when the conflict 
started alongside with Armenians, many Azerbaijanians, Russians 
and people of other nationalities lived in Nagorny Karabakh. 
Economy, social infrastructure, culture of the Autonomous 
Region developed together with those of Azerbaijan. Plants and 
factories, water reservoirs were built, the Pedagogical Institute 
with teaching in the Armenian language was opened. In general 
the Autonomous Region exceeded Azerbaijan and Armenia in 
term of social-economic indices. Of course, there were problems 
 201
like everywhere else but they were solved to mutual consent of all 
the people living there. For example, two airlines were opened 
Stepanakert-Baku and Stepanakert-Yerevan and by the initiative 
of the First Secretaries of the Central Committees Aliev 
(Azerbaijan) and Demirchyan (Armenia) they were served in turn 
by Azerbaijanian and Armenian pilots. 
 
 
June 28, 1988, Moscow  
 
At the height of summer heat the 19th All-Union CPSU 
Conference opened in Moscow. Exhausted after their addresses, the 
delegates looked for some rest in the shade of the Kremlin’s white 
birch trees, smoked and did not mince words in criticizing the 
General Secretary. The country was in turmoil while that conceited 
wood grouse could not stop commenting on “how to deepen and 
make the revolutionary perestroika irreversible…” He regarded the 
three previous years as a turning point of sorts–but what for? 
“Owing to the efforts of the party and the working people we’ve 
managed to stop the country’s slide to crisis in the economic, social 
and spiritual spheres. The people have now a more clear 
understanding of their past, present and future.” The General 
Secretary turned a deaf ear to those who had different opinion. 
Speaking from the same rostrum on the following day, Yuri 
Bondarev compared perestroika to an airplane that had been 
launched having no idea whether there was a landing field at the 
point of destination or not. And that was exactly the case. 
“It’s only accord that will help us to build a landing field at the 
point of destination,” Yuri Bondarev went on. “Only accord. 
However, just recently I heard the following reply of a young 
mechanic to my question about any changes in his life. “Has 
anything changed–you ask me? There is a kind of new thinking 
we have in our state farm: ‘Who was a fool has now grown wise–
shouting slogans; those who were clever seem to have become 
quite stupid–keeping mum, going in fear of newspapers. D’you 
know now the difference between man and a fly? You can kill 
both by striking with a newspaper. I said so–and they say I’m an 
enemy of perestroika.” In this extremely venomous grassroots 
humor I could feel the man’s irritation and anger disenchanted as 
he was by fictitious reforms at his work and I could also feel that a 
part of our press used perestroika as a means to destabilize the 
situation, revise our convictions and our morals. Abdurakhman 
Vezirov, the newly-elected first secretary of the CC of the 
Communist Party of Azerbaijan, also spoke at the conference on 
 202 
the same day saying that perestroika of Azerbaijan involved great 
difficulties what with the holdovers of the past. 
– Distortions in the personnel policy, with promotion of its 
clan and area privileges, subservience, abuse of power have had 
an eroding effect on the socio-political and moral situation in the 
republic.” 
You could clearly feel Gorbachyov’s political line in the first 
secretary’s speech. Geidar Aliev would like to give a rebuff to the 
opponents, but who would offer him an opportunity to address the 
audience? Who would offer him to take control of the situation? 
No one. They hoped to put things to order by tightening the 
screws. 
Now, let’s have a look at the following three documents which 
were once top secret. 
First, a memo to the CPSU CC “On Urgent Measures to Establish 
Law and Order in the Azerbaijan SSR and the Armenian SSR”. 
“The development of events in the Azerbaijan and Armenian 
Union Republics around Nagorny Karabakh acquire an 
increasingly dangerous nature. Strikes are growing in scale and 
the number of unsanctioned meetings and demonstrations shows 
an upward trend. The speeches and actions of their participants 
are growing increasingly more aggressive and uncontrolled, and 
transform into popular unrest. 
“In the obtaining situation it is impossible to put an end to 
these anti-social actions by available legal measures. 
“In this connection it would be necessary as a temporary 
measure to adopt a Decree of the Presidium of the USSR Supreme 
Soviet offering the opportunity to the forces entrusted with the 
maintenance of public order to isolate the organizers, instigators 
and active participants in such illegal actions. 
“The draft resolution of the CPSU CC on this matter is 
appended. 
 
“November 23, 1988 
A. Yakovlev 
V. Chebrikov 
G. Razumovsky 
A. Lukyanov” 
 
In his sprawling handwriting Gorbachyov wrote on the letter: 
“In favor” (RGANI, f. 89, op. 4, d. 5, pp. 1-5). 
The second document has the same date, November 23, 
Resolution of the CPSU CC “On Urgent Measures to Restore 
Public Order in the Azerbaijan SSR and the Armenian SSR”: “To 
 203
approve the Draft Decree of the Presidium of the USSR Supreme 
Soviet on This Matter (Appended)” (RGANI, f. 3, op 102, d. 
1058, pp. 22-26). 
And finally, the draft Decree on Urgent Measures the motley 
foursome insisted on: 
“1. To grant the right to the officials of the bodies of internal 
affairs and of the internal troops, authorized by the USSR 
Minister of Internal Affairs to detain for a period of 30 days in 
administrative order in the areas or populated localities where 
curfew has been imposed persons inciting by their actions 
national strife or provoking disruption of public order or 
encouraging anti-social actions and also creating obstacles to 
individuals and officials to exercise their legitimate rights and 
discharge their duties. 
“2. To establish that persons detained in accordance with 
Article 1 of the present Decree are be kept according to the rules, 
introduced in keeping with the law for special reception centers of 
the USSR Ministry of Internal Affairs or in other premises 
determined by the USSR Ministry of Internal Affairs. 
“This Decree shall take effect from November 24, 1988.” 
So the draft became a Decree. 
One of us, a Baku resident had a first-hand experience of these 
events; another flew from Moscow to Baku for a visit. Here are a 
few pages from his diary 
 
 
Baku Diary 
 
November 28, 1988. 
Never before have I flown on a business trip across my native 
country with such an oppressive feeling. Never before have they 
seen me off like that at the editorial office. In the editorial office 
of a newspaper arrivals and departures are only natural. “Flying 
again, old boy?”, they would drop in passing. “Where to?” And 
rush along without waiting for an answer. While now–it’s 
different. Those who have visited the conflict zone regard it as 
their duty to share their impressions, while others are eager simply 
to talk “about Karabakh”. 
I try to put through a call to Baku in the minutes left before the 
departure. What is taking place there? My acquaintances among 
journalists, party activists whom I was lucky to talk to on the 
phone are at a loss: it’s something unprecedented. Hundreds of 
thousands throng the square day and night. The plants are on 
strike. Djavanshir Melikov, Socialist Industry correspondent in 
 204 
Azerbaijan, who flew to Baku a day before, adds: the oil refining 
complex is operating. The troops have been brought into the city. 
At first sight everything is calm at the airport. 
– Will you perhaps have a look at the departure hall? –
Djavanshir who has met me asked. 
The hall is filled to capacity. Women, children and old people. 
Bundles and bags. And–silence, stunning for such a multitude of 
people. Sullen silence–ready to explode. What makes these people 
depart? I don’t know. So far I feel that I’m not in a position to ask 
them. I must see for myself what has happened with the city I like 
so much in the past year. Why did Kyamran Bagirov, who has set 
about his work so energetically, leave abruptly his post? What 
sensitive points are sore now? What new troubles have surfaced? 
Knots, especially such sensitive ones as national, should be 
untied very carefully, with caution. The more so in the lands 
where the old and recent squabbles look like fires under a thin 
layer of ashes. If someone tries to revive the almost extinguished 
fire–it will flare up again. 
They say that some four hundred or five hundred people have 
converged on the vast square. You can feel even physically that 
they catch eagerly every word uttered from the rostrum. The 
square is a barometer of sorts of public opinion. They urge the 
people to protect forbidden Topkhana where the Armenians are 
planning to build holiday-inns and apartment houses. To stand by 
Karabakh. Everybody should go on strike. In the evening I also 
often heard the words addressed to the Party Committee: 
– Shame on the Nariman District Party Committee, which has 
forbidden the people to go on strike. 
And the crowd echoes it loudly: “Shame! Shame! Shame!” 
Well, I should study first hand the situation at the District Party 
Committee, which received such publicity on the square. 
 
November 30. 
– I regard these appeals as approval of our work, –V.Kasumov, 
first secretary of the Nariman District Party Committee said to me. 
Vagif Kasumov has been active in the past 12 hours. In the 
morning he stood at the entrance checkpoints of the electrical 
engineering plant. As a former worker and an experienced 
manager he decided to address the people on his own. He tried to 
convince some of them and make others feel confident once more 
and help still others to separate the truth from lies, to see the light 
amid the avalanche of rumors. 
– An extraordinary situation shows at once the people’s real 
value, –Karimov says. –In a few days you’ll learn who is who. 
 205
Over 50 enterprises of the Nariman District, one of the 
Republic’s largest, have launched the housing construction. And 
now all this has to be suspended. 
The reasons are quite understandable. The Azelectromash 
production association, whose products are supplied to thousands 
of consumers across the USSR and in 40 foreign countries, has 
lost a million rubles of profit and it will lose another million 
rubles in fines. And the losses will increase by tens hundreds of 
times on the scale of the entire district and city. The social 
development fund of the Nariman District has lost 400,000 rubles, 
which means that 20 less apartments will be assigned to those on 
the waiting list. 
It’s eight o’clock in the evening. Members of the bureau of the 
District Party Committee, party committee secretaries and 
directors of enterprises have gathered at the first secretary’s office. 
Not for any reports or briefings–they analyze the situation as they 
see it, exchange their observations and discuss tendencies. The 
picketers, who were trying to block the way to the plants, were 
given a rebuff. All enterprises in the region have resumed 
operation, true, not always at full capacity. 
 
December 1. 
I have an appointment today to be received by Viktor 
Petrovich Polyanichko, second secretary of the CC of the 
Communist Party of Azerbaijan. He has arrived in Baku quite 
recently, less than a month ago, and prior to that he spent four and 
a half years in Afghanistan. We met some thirty years ago, in our 
student days when we lived in the student hostel in Stromynka 
Street as students of the department of journalism of Moscow 
State University. I remembered him as a tall and energetic lad 
wearing his old military-type blouse. A superior man always 
attracts interest, and you try not to lose sight of him. That was 
how I felt about Polyanichko. I heard about his work in Orenburg, 
at the construction of the ore-dressing complex, described as a 
shock construction project, he supervised the work of the 
Komsomol headquarters sometimes from Moscow and at other 
times from Chelyabinsk… We met again in Ural when he held the 
post of first secretary of the Regional YCL (Young Communist 
League–Komsomol) Committee and I acted as Komsomolskaya 
pravda’s own correspondent. It’s a pity that there were not many 
such Komsomol and party workers as he was. 
It was 10:30 p.m. when the meeting participants left the office 
of the second CC secretary. Viktor appeared at the door and 
nodded to Djavanshir and me saying “Come in, boys.” Leaving 
 206 
his big table with heaps of paper, files and newspapers, he sat next 
to us and treated us to tea and candies. We had no time for 
recollections that evening, we switched at once to the current 
situation, as they used to say in old times. 
– The situation is difficult but we are in control. The problems 
of Karabakh and of the rally on the square will be a thing of the 
past, while we Communists will have to face the people. That’s 
what should be explained to everybody. 
A sharp long-distance call interrupted the conversation. 
– Dashkesan? Listening, Rauf Velievich. Thank you! That’s 
the best information I’ve got today. 
Viktor returned to the table and paused. 
– Would you like some more tea?–I caught some hidden 
thought in his eyes, and suddenly he added vehemently quite out 
of context: I had no vacations for the past four years and a half, I 
even can’t imagine how they are vacationing now. If I have a 
minute to spare I get into a corner and read a book. Not about war, 
of course. I am fed up with war… 
We were silent for some time for fear of breaking this moment 
of sudden confession, well aware that it wouldn’t have happened 
in a different situation… 
The door creaked. Afrand Dashdamirov, head of the CC 
propaganda and agitation department, entered the office. 
– Boys! Have a pity on Viktor Petrovich! 
There were a lot of problems to resolve, urgent and very urgent 
among them. But Viktor was in his element talking about the 
funeral of an Afghan comrade, a party worker, in Herat. 
Nadjibullah spoke at his grave to the accompaniment of 
explosions, with the mines landing ever closer. Viktor asked 
Nadjibullah to retire under cover, but he would not agree. And as 
soon as the funeral ceremony was over and the cars drove away 
for some 100-200 meters, the next mine hit the grave. He will 
never forget those years. 
– Well, what are the news, Afrand Firidunovich, –Polyanichko 
asked rising to meet Dashdamirov. 
– The refugees are arriving in droves. It’s the most important 
thing today. 
As we drove from the CC building to the hotel the car was 
stopped by military patrols five times. At the last post, having 
inspected my editorial certificate, the young lieutenant asked me: 
– Please, tell the truth, boys. 
December 2. 
“Refugees”, this word seemed to have come from the old 
uneasy wartime reports to our days. Azerbaijanians are leaving 
 207
Armenia. Armenians are leaving Azerbaijan. Long lines are 
formed in Baku at Aeroflot ticket offices; the airport and the 
railway station are crammed with people. The whole families with 
all their belongings are fleeing and sometimes they even have no 
time to collect what they need. And ever more absurd rumors are 
spread outstripping them. 
I came up to the Aeroflot ticket offices the day before. A small 
square space was fenced in at the entrance, with a military and a 
militia patrolmen and voluntary controllers inside it. The lists are 
with multi-digital numbers. Just like everywhere in Baku in these 
days, as soon as you start a conversation with somebody people 
surround you. There is tension in the air but the people try to 
speak calmly keeping in check those who get excited. 
Who makes these people leave their homes? Who is spreading 
rumors? Threatens them? 
The people are fleeing not from a natural disaster. The disaster, 
which makes them break friendly ties, is even more terrible than 
caused by nature. 
– That’s our common grief, –is the way the situation was 
assessed by Alexander Stepanovich Skorobogatov, a Russian 
turner from the Volga area for whom Azerbaijan has become a 
second native land. Next to him sitting in the administrative office 
were engineer A. Sukyasov, head of administration T. Eminov, 
and turner P. Kiselev... 
– In wartime a Russian and an Armenian, an Uzbek and a 
Tatar were fighting in the same ditch. –Skorobogatov said. –We 
had the same enemy–the Nazis. And what’s happening now? 
Someone would like us to regard one another as enemies. Who 
wants it? Is it I? Or you? You know, our work collective has 
rejected strikes. We are working just as before. But I take it to 
heart so much that I don’t even want to go home. Just look at the 
workers’ faces–they look so depressed. I take to heart these 
refugees’ affairs as if they were my relations–Armenians and 
Azerbaijanians, all of them. This stupid migration agitates the 
people here and there. And the way out, I believe, is only this: let 
our authorities say firmly: comrades, stop, look back! There is no 
need for you to divide anything. Think about your children who 
will live on this land. Next to each other. 
M. Manucharov, one of the leaders of the Krunk movement, 
who is director of the Stepanakert Building Materials Plant, was 
arrested in Nagorny Karabakh. Ten of his associates were arrested 
together with him. 
– These people have transformed the Building Materials Plant 
and the Civil Services Bureau into a source of unearned income, –
 208 
said A.F. Katusev, deputy Procurator General of the USSR. –The 
degree of each man’s guilt will be determined by court. We have 
now enough proofs for arraigning them on charges of 
misappropriation. I must stress that Manucharov and his 
associates made money on the people’s grief by stealing 
expensive building materials, by taking bribes for the installment 
of monuments. This was their amoral credo: “If you wish to 
become rich make use of the people’s grief.” 
So can you measure in terms of money the refugees’ tears and 
grief? Whom shall we present this bill to?” 
The USSR Supreme Soviet urges the working people of 
Armenia and Azerbaijan to show wisdom and self-control, to put 
aside their mutual complaints and accusations. 
Will people heed these words? Will Kubinka* heed them? 
 
December 3. 
A narrow dirty street. Low poor houses, poor vision windows, 
annexes, and superstructures. Some of them are propped by piles 
overhanging the pavement, like big wooden boxes for starlings. 
Steep stairs lead to the “wooden box for starlings” from the street. 
Children are bustling near almost every wicket gate. 
– Who wants churek (unleavened bread)? Want churek? 
Warm press cakes, right from the stove, are on hand packed in 
a cardboard box, in paper sackcloth. 
–D’you want Marlboro? Want Vodka? –another small boy, 
obviously of preschool age, shouts after passersby. On hearing 
“No”, they rejoin their friends light-hearted as ever until another 
passerby appears. 
– Want beer? Want Marlboro? 
The children play and work carefully fulfilling the assignment 
of the adults. Does the city realize the consequences of this open 
lesson offered every day by Kubinka? Small crowds of young 
people gather and dissolve; unkempt persons are loafing about at 
the crossroads… What kind of buyers are they waiting for? What 
are they offering? 
Strikes, as we know, are staged abroad. We’ve heard about the 
staunch British miners, French longshoremen and how the 
authorities broke the resistance of American aircraft dispatchers… 
Of course people went on strike also in our country. But that was 
in old times. The textbooks of history tell us about the strike by 
workers of Morozov’s enterprises. And as a result of the strike in 
                                                 
* A district in the central part of Baku. 
 209
Baku early in the 20th century the widely known “Fuel Oil 
Constitution” was adopted which protected oilmen’s rights. 
“After the October Revolution which created a proletarian state 
there was no longer any sense in going on strike as a means of 
fight to uphold the interests of the working class,” asserted a 
certain encyclopedia. “A strike is one of the basic forms of class 
struggle of proletariat in capitalist countries representing 
collective refusal to continue work on the previous terms,” adds 
another. 
But whose interests were upheld in the process of the 1988 
strike in Baku? And what nature it had according to the scientific 
classification–political or economic? Was it partial or general? 
And probably it was “a strike of crossed arms” or was it a strike of 
“diligence”? Life has defeated conceptual systems. 
…The people converged on Lenin Square as if for a work shift. 
Here and there one could see poles with the names of plants, 
factories and institutions of higher leaning. People gathered 
according to these inscriptions. At the height of the working day 
the works were empty, while the square was overcrowded. 
– Why have you come here? –I asked them. 
Sometimes they refused to answer. But more often than not 
they talked. Reminded of their constitutional demands–Nagorny 
Karabakh, the demonstrative confrontation between the authorities 
of the autonomous area and the republican authorities, unlawful 
construction carried out in the preserve of Topkhana. They were 
well aware of the number of refrigerators (air conditioners, lamps, 
boring valves, shoes, etc.) their plant had failed to manufacture. 
They spoke easily about it and it occurred to me that such people 
could not care less about our calculations of the lost millions of 
rubles. But what was their goal when they spent nights around 
their fires scanning the slogans of Karabakh and the Topkhana 
preserves, which were predominating at the start. Gradually other 
voices were added to them. There were over 200 items on one of 
the lists of demands received by the CC of the Republic’s 
Communist Party such as assignment of apartments, admission to 
institutions of higher learning, measures to improve ecology. The 
workers of the Azelectromash association expressed their protest 
against the fact that the chief engineer acted as chairman of the 
work collective council. But they have elected him themselves 
quite recently… Or had they been probably pressed to do so? Now 
a worker has been appointed to the post. The post office workers 
on strike demanded that their dining room operate in the second 
shift too. It’s quite simple, isn’t it? Should you throw down the 
postbag to attain this goal? Couldn’t their chiefs, trade unions, 
 210 
public control, party committees and, finally, the people 
themselves think about the people’s vital needs? Or could 
someone have made a clever use of the real difficulties, national 
sentiments, and patriotism? 
They told me at the machine-building works named after 
Lieutenant Schmidt about two workers, known for their honest 
attitude to their work. They both had big families, so they 
sometimes worked overtime and, as a result, their earnings were 
100-200% higher than average. In the period of the strike both of 
them feared to turn on the machine tool. Their earnings were 200 
rubles less as a result. And the workers at the plant lost 213,000 
rubles in terms of their wages. If we deduct the losses from the 
funds of social development and material incentives, fines for 
disrupted deliveries, we get the final result of the strike for just 
one work collective: they lost 1,370,000 rubles and 91 apartments. 
Meanwhile there were 750 people on the waiting list. 
Forty-nine enterprises with continuous production process as a 
rule operate in Baku on Sundays. But on this Sunday over 100 of 
them operated. A part of their earnings the work collectives 
transferred to the refugee fund. The people everywhere collect 
clothes, footwear and crockery, with scores of collection centers 
operating in Baku. 
One of them is located in the builders’ House of Culture. 
Tables laden with apples, tangerines, sandwiches line the walls of 
the lobby. On the second floor voluntary assistants are sorting 
children, men’s and women’s clothes. Obviously their assistance 
is a manifestation of compassion and charity. 
A thin young woman, Aziza by name, is holding packages 
close to her breast. She, her husband Fazil and their children fled 
from the Masiss District in Armenia. A five-year-old boy and a 
three year-old girl are clutching at their mother’s skirt. 
– Will you go back as soon as the situation improves? 
– Iokh, Iokh, Iokh, –No, no, no, –Aziza Ismailova said 
tremulously. 
 
December 5. 
In the workshops I could see lists of people who transferred 
their money for refugees–Azerbaijanian, Russian, Armenian and 
Ukrainian family names. 
Yesterday all enterprises started operating early in the 
morning. However, in the afternoon the situation in the city again 
deteriorated. Crowds of people stopped the traffic. Suddenly 
meetings and clashes began cropping up. I saw two Russian 
soldiers together with an Azerbaijanian militiaman lead away an 
 211
elderly Armenian woman from the enraged crowd. She was 
offered a seat in the hall of the Baku hotel and there she sat as if 
made of stone with hear head lowered in dismay. I saw unshaven 
young people raving at the entrance to the shoe factory, but 
soldiers blocked their way. I saw columns of people marching 
under black flags, with passersby rushing away from them and 
cars clinging to the edge of the pavement… Our car did the same, 
I must admit. Earlier we tried to pass through several lanes–but 
did not succeed. Crowds everywhere. Finally, Akif, the driver of 
the car belonging to the correspondents’ center, resigned and 
stopped the car. A taxi stopped behind us. Its driver was at once 
drawn outside. “Why haven’t you joined the strikers?”–they asked 
and hit him on the face. His fashionable cap dropped to the 
ground. A tousled unshaven lad ran up to our “Volga”. Akif told 
him something in Azerbaijani and the lad ran on. 
Why has this angry crowd come out in the streets? Why did 
they raise these black flags? 
On Sunday night the authorities proposed that the participants 
in the unsanctioned meetings leave the square. No reply. The 
entreaties were followed by orders to remove the tents from the 
square, for small groups of young people stayed there round the 
clock. No arms were used in the process. There were neither 
victims nor wounded. 
Nevertheless, the rumors of some victims spread across the 
city. Processions carrying black flags were formed at the 
crossings, ministries, at the building of the CC CP of Azerbaijan. 
But who and how helped the people to learn the truth on that 
difficult day? The “envoys” in work collectives were taken to the 
place of the developments: you say that you have seen with your 
own eyes four cadavers at the neighboring plant? Let’s go, show 
them to us. You say that the Lenin Square is strewn with dead 
bodies? Let’s drive there together and have a look… 
The troops carried great responsibility. They did their utmost 
to avoid conflicts, to avert a great disaster. 
Those who tried to occupy the plant grounds or stop motor 
transport were given a rebuff today. More often than not by the 
workers themselves with militiamen. That was how Monday, 
December 5, came to a close when Baku streets and squares were 
astir, when the Baku television broadcast concerts of classical 
music and old films, when the plants operated… 
 
December 7. 
As was agreed the day before, at three o’clock, D. Melikov and 
I arrived at the Azelectrosvet production association. At the same 
 212 
time our colleagues in Yerevan were due to arrive at the Luis 
plant. Those were fraternized enterprises and we planned to hold a 
joint reporting on their contacts. 
– Let’s start with a telephone call to Yerevan, –General 
Director V. Djalilov proposed, –let’s talk with our old friend 
Veniamin Akopovich Tumasyan. He is an excellent man, a Hero 
of Socialist Labor; he often paid visits to us. 
We ordered a telephone call to Luis plant. Several minutes 
later the General Director’s secretary told us that there was no 
telephone communication with Yerevan, they say an earthquake 
had occurred there… 
At first I thought that it was a bad joke. But one can hardly 
joke like that. Soon after we received confirmation: that was a 
bitter truth. 
However, we knew nothing about the details. We talked about 
the life of the Azelectrosvet work collective in those days, about the 
way it regenerated the work rhythm overcoming the demagogues’ 
resistance. Ali Azizov and Ivan Pakhomov, top-class vacuum 
turners, masters of natural gifts, were among those who went on 
with their work. In due course they had assembled an automatic 
system to which they referred jokingly as “an iron woman”. As a 
result, no manual operations were necessary for the complicated 
and hazardous process. Their Armenian colleagues showed interest 
in the system and sent their specialists to Baku. Azizov and 
Pakhomov spent two weeks explaining the details to them. 
Ali Azizov and Eldar Shiriyev, secretary of the Azelectrosvet 
party committee, made a telephone call to the Sotsialisticheskaya 
industriya correspondent center early in the morning on Thursday 
with a request to describe in the newspaper columns how stunned 
their work collective was by the disaster, which had hit the 
fraternal people. “A telegram of condolence has been sent by the 
plant to our Armenian brothers”, –Shiriyev added. “We start 
collecting funds for assistance to them. We won’t leave them in 
the hour of trial!” 
“The people of Azerbaijan are ready to give every assistance to 
you for overcoming the perilous consequences of the earthquake,” 
said the telegram of the CC CP of Azerbaijan, Presidium of the 
Supreme Soviet and the Council of Ministers of the Republic sent 
at the address of the CC CP of Armenia, Presidium of the 
Supreme Soviet and the Council of Ministers of the Armenian 
SSR. The morning newspapers carried the telegram. And in the 
late hours when they were printed, a trainload of fuel was sent 
from the Baku railway station to Armenia, for they were in dire 
need of it at that time. 
 213
Azerbaijan construction workers sent a column of machinery. 
They were in a hurry to help, but they had to return. Why? This is 
what the workers said. 
Mikhail Areshev, a Tatra driver: 
– A column of cranes and heavy-duty trucks was formed in 
Azerbaijan on the border of the two republics. We were driving in 
the rear. We were escorted by an armored personnel carrier, which 
drove in front, with militiamen and road-traffic inspectors at the 
sides. Why they had sent such an escort became clear after we 
entered the territory of Armenia. The drivers of the cars, which 
outdistanced us, threatened and insulted us and shook their fists at 
us. It took a whole night to reach Leninakan. The road between 
Spitak and Leninakan had collapsed, so our column stopped: we 
had to let pass the approaching cars. Suddenly unknown thugs 
with spade handles in hand attacked us–get out of here to 
Azerbaijan, we don’t need your assistance. As luck will have it, 
our column drove on soon after. 
– In the morning the column approached Leninakan, –gas-
cutter welder Vladimir Lozovan went on with his story. –The 
cranes were at once taken away. We were told to wait. But as soon 
as the military left, thugs in cars surrounded our vehicles. By the 
numbers of our plates they could see that we had come from 
Azerbaijan. 
“If you start work we’ll kill you!” One of them said to me: 
“You’re lucky to be Russian, if you do not work we will do you 
no harm.” 
We asked a militiaman to show the way to the commandant’s 
office. He joined us in the car and we drove on. But as soon as he 
learned that we were from Baku, he asked us to stop: 
“I must get out here…” 
We stopped and a crowd surrounded us. We said: “Dear 
people, we’ve come with an open heart to you, we’re carrying 
containers with fuel and there are welders among us. They are 
badly needed here, you are in trouble, aren’t you?” But they 
would not listen–something wrong in their heads. They snatched 
sticks and stones… So we drove back. 
– I can’t figure out, –welder Rafik Kuzakhmedov ads, –how 
it’s possible to try and profit from such a disaster! Can’t they see 
that all their hatred is nothing as compared to the breath of one 
rescued Armenian child? 
One more attempt of Azerbaijanians to help the Armenian 
people in the hour of trial ended in tragedy. An Il-76 military 
transport plane crashed on December 11, 1988, on its flight to 
Leninakan airport (Armenia) and nine crew members and 
 214 
78 passengers who were going to take part in the elimination of 
the earthquake consequences died. All of them were 
Azerbaijanians. 
Regrettably, nationalism is blind. We often recollected 
Hertzen’s wise words in those days: exclusive sense of nationality 
will never do you any good. The outstanding Azerbaijanian writer 
Akram Ailisli expressed the same idea when he pondered on the 
developments in the two republics, with the squares in Baku and 
Yerevan packed with people demonstrating their ardent 
“patriotism”. 
“Many of us realize”, he said, “that patriotism is a good thing, 
but it is wrong to demonstrate it. It’s absurd, amoral and very 
dangerous. But what’s to be done if many, even prominent figures 
of science and culture here and there very often in the era of 
glasnost (openness) are busy exclusively in shedding bitter tears in 
connection with their great love for their people? They compete in 
lecture halls and in the press, in TV programs trying to outdo one 
another in paying compliments to their nation. There are 
embittered losers and quite prosperous figures among them. At 
this time of trial for Armenia my heart also aches for the people 
who have lost their lives there. It would be terrible for me to know 
that even one of them bore a grudge in his wounded heart against 
someone of my nationality and has taken it to the place no one 
ever returns from. Grief has united us. Let us go together even 
after we bring to life the destroyed cities by our joint efforts.” 
 
December 31. 
The gate creaked and it was quiet again. The wind blowing 
from the close mountain spurs was whirling dry leaves in the yard 
and swung the lone clothes peg on the clothes-rope. It seemed as 
if the mistress of the house had just removed dried blouses and 
would come back. The washstand on the veranda was full of water 
as if had been just filled; a toothbrush and soap lay on the shelf. A 
stick is propping the gate. And where is the master of the house? I 
read about him and his house in Vyshka, a Baku newspaper. 
“Movsesyan Gaik Andreyevich, my brother, just like myself, is 
a veteran of the Great Patriotic War, he fought at the front. He 
resides in the Shirvanzadeh village of the Shemakha District,” 
Nina Andreyevna Movsesyan wrote. “He suffered from an 
accident early this year: due to a disrepair of electric wires his 
two-story house was burnt down and all his property was gutted 
by the fire. It’s a disaster. You can’t put it otherwise. But my 
brother is not alone in his misfortune. Arshak Grigoryan, his 
neighbor who is a disabled war veteran, invited his family to share 
 215
his house for the next three months. Garib Rashidov, another 
neighbor, did his best to help my brother. In less than three 
months my brother’s family moved in a new house built free of 
charge.” 
The author of the letter described kind assistance of I. 
Iskenderov, first secretary of the Shemakha District Party 
Committee, V. Airapetyan, Chairman of the Dimitrov State Farm 
and S. Grigoryan, Chairman of the Village Council.  
“I express gratitude to all these people for their genuine 
friendship,” N. Movsesyan wrote in conclusion. “I believe that the 
new house built in my brother’s village will serve for ever as one 
more monument to our life together.” 
It happened in the summer of 1988, we were eager to believe 
that quarrels and disagreement would become a thing of the past 
and a new friendly life would continue, joint work will go on both 
at the construction of a new house for Gaik Movsesyan and in the 
vineyards in the vicinity… 
Black burnt trusses can be seen under the fence and the 
impressive house built of age-old durable stone looks with its 
broad windows at the vistas in front of it. But the house is empty 
behind them. The master of the new house is absent. All 
Armenian yards are empty. 
What force has separated the neighbors? What was the bone of 
contention between them and Garib Rashidov, his brother 
Abdurakhman? They have nothing to divide. They have lived on 
this land ever since their birth–and used it in common, the graves 
of their grandfathers are nearby. One of the monuments bears the 
names of war veterans who fought at the front and fell in battle, 
Azerbaijanians and Armenians among them. Of course they 
divided work, did not only their own work but also that of their 
comrades. Their worn hands with blackened fingers knew no rest, 
no bast will wash them clean with the earth left in their skin. 
These hands built walls, laid a roof. The neighbors came regularly 
as if for a shift to build a new house for a war veteran, their 
compatriot. 
When will light be put on again in it? When will they come 
back to their native villages, cities and settlements, these 
Azerbaijanian and Armenian migrants? There are as many 
answers as destinies, I believe. 
The residents of the Shirvanzadeh village, it seems to me, have 
found the answer. Without looking back at their mutual 
grievances, they take care of the empty houses and the livestock 
like good neighbors looking forward to their future life together. 
 216 
Rashidov brothers and I are making way to the memorial. 
Photographs from family albums have been carefully fixed in the 
wall of memory. You can see open faces under forage caps, 
military-type blouses with peg-tops. Samed Rashidov and Abdul 
Rashidov are also here, two of the seven brothers who fought at 
the front and fell in battle. There are 37 names on the obelisk, both 
Azerbaijanian and Armenian. They fought for their Motherland 
side by side. 
– I wish all who have left would come back, –Garib Rashidov 
sighed sorrowfully. –Here it is, we’ve found the telephone number 
of Gaik and Violetta, our director. Call them, please, you, too, and 
tell them that the whole of our village asks them to come back. 
They say in Azerbaijani “garib akhsham”–meaning evening in 
foreign parts. I can feel in these words age-long sorrow of the 
people who have left their native land. There are probably such 
words in Armenian too. No matter how you try to decorate the 
migrants’ house, it is alien to them. 
Where are you going to see the New Year in, Gaik 
Andreyevich Movsesyan? I could not contact you on the phone. 
But if you happen to read these lines, you must know that six 
families have already come back to your village. Violetta 
Airapetyan and Sergei Grigoryan have come back. I. Iskenderov, 
first secretary of the Shemakha District Party Committee, told me 
over the phone that they were met very cordially. Buses have been 
sent to various districts in Armenia to bring back your other 
compatriots. And the Azerbaijanians who have moved to 
Shemakha gradually inclines to the idea of going back home. 
Children’s voices are heard at the school. Light is put on in the 
windows of your neighbors’ house, and the stove for bread 
baking–tendir–is probably warm enough. I saw this tendir when it 
was cool, but carefully cut dry twigs lay next to it, prepared by 
Rashidov brothers. The hearth will begin to burn, you will take 
out soft bread and its aroma will warm your heart. And you will 
break the loaf together. 
That was how the 1988 diary closed–with hope. Regrettably, it 
was a vain hope. 
The country was sliding into an abyss… 
 
 
“I Spared No Effort to Be Received by Gorbachyov” 
 
Geidar Alievich Aliev, a personal pensioner of All-Union 
importance (there was such an official formula) still was a 
member of the CPSU Central Committee. Practically dismissed 
 217
from affairs, he nevertheless was trying to prompt something to 
the authorities, give advice, and share his recommendations. 
– I spared no effort to be received by Gorbachyov, but he did 
not receive me. At that time I was already a pensioner. His 
assistants told me that they had reported about my request to him 
but he was busy. They always said the same: he is busy, we have 
reported, so you should wait for his invitation. I waited for a day, 
two, a whole month–nothing. I made one more telephone call. Of 
course, he did not receive me. I tried to contact Ligachev. He did 
not wish to receive me either, but one day I simply paid a visit to 
the CC very early in the morning and took my seat in his reception 
room–that is, I simply came there and sat down. Ligachev arrived. 
I told him in detail about the situation in Nagorny Karabakh as I 
saw it. He listened to me for a long time but I did not receive any 
sensible answer–all my efforts to be of some use were in vain. 
– Did you offer a concrete plan of action to Ligachev? 
– Well, in general I told him about the situation … that most 
drastic measures should be taken. “And we are taking measures,” 
he said. And that was it. That is, there is no need in my 
participation or in my advice. Then I went to Razumovsky. 
Incidentally, he was in no hurry to receive me, though I was a 
Politburo member, and he was only CC secretary. I spoke at 
length, he seemed to be listening but I could not say whether my 
advice had been brought home or my efforts were fruitless (an 
abstract from dialogues with TV anchor Andrei Karaulov). 
 
“Top Secret. 
“CPSU CC. 
On Measures in Connection with the Exacerbation of the 
Situation in Nagorny Karabakh and around It. 
“The developments in Nagorny Karabakh and around it may 
lead to mass-scale armed clashes between the Azerbaijanian and 
Armenian population in the Nagorny Karabakh Autonomous Area, 
the Nakhichevan Autonomous SSR and throughout the territory of 
Azerbaijan. Measures to be taken for ensuring public order and 
the population’s security by the internal forces and militia units 
may prove insufficient. 
“In this connection even now an opportunity should be 
envisaged to use Soviet Army units for protection of the 
population. In case of such a disastrous turn of events, it would be 
expedient to prepare proposals also on introducing an emergency 
situation in separate localities of Azerbaijan and Armenia. 
“In this connection it would be expedient to entrust the USSR 
Ministry of Defense (comrade Yazov D.T.), the USSR Ministry of 
 218 
Internal Affairs (comrade Bakatin V.V.) and also the Chairman of 
the USSR Supreme Soviet (comrade. Lukyanov A.I.) with the task 
of preparing in advance respective proposals for submitting them, 
in the procedure established by the law, for consideration by a 
USSR Supreme Soviet session. 
 
August 29, 1989 
N. Slyunkov 
V. Chebrikov 
 
In another memo to Gorbachyov’s address, the CPSU CC 
Secretary and the KGB Chairman proposed that “automatic and 
sniper arms be removed from militia district and city departments 
and precincts in Azerbaijan and Armenia … that anti-hail and anti-
aircraft guns and rocket installations, located on the territory of 
Azerbaijan and Armenia, be accepted for maintenance by 
Transcaucasian Military District units.” They proposed many 
others, in general, reasonable measures such as “revelation and 
neutralization of nationalist and extremist armed formations created 
for aggressive actions” (RGANI, F. 89, Op 10, D. 42, pp. 1-4). 
By that time over 300,000 refugees had fled from the two 
republics. The Kremlin was no longer able to manage the events 
in the Union. The General Secretary counted only on the army. 
 
 
January 21, 1990, Moscow 
 
Excited people were gathering near the building of the 
Permanent Mission of the Azerbaijan SSR in Moscow, 
Leontyevsky pereulok, from morning. They had been attracted by 
the news from Baku: troops had been brought in the city; there were 
victims among the peaceful population. What’s happened? Most of 
the people distrusted official information. All of them were waiting 
for some kind of reasonable explanation. It was then that Geidar 
Aliev proclaimed his stand for everyone to know. He arrived at the 
mission from Barvikha where he was undergoing a course of 
treatment: “There is no time for it now!” He was no longer silent. 
Aliev’s address was recorded by scores of TV cameras and 
microphones. 
“Dear Comrades, Ladies and Gentlemen! 
“As you know, I have stood for many years at the head of 
Azerbaijan’s party organization, was elected a CC CPSU 
Politburo member, was first deputy of the Chairman of the USSR 
Council of Ministers. I’ve been a pensioner for over two years, I 
 219
have survived an extensive infarction and retired on pension for 
health reasons. In December 1982 I left for Azerbaijan and today 
it is the first time I have crossed the threshold of the Permanent 
Mission of the Azerbaijan SSR in Moscow after that. The tragedy, 
which occurred in Azerbaijan, has made me to come here. I 
learned all about it yesterday evening and naturally I could not 
feel indifferent toward it. I’ve come here, to the Permanent 
Mission, which is a small islet of Azerbaijanian land in Moscow, 
to express my condolences to all Azerbaijan people in connection 
with the tragedy, which involved immense victims. Second, I’d 
like to express my stand on this matter. I would like Zohrab 
Ibragimov, Azerbaijan’s permanent representative in Moscow, to 
convey my words, my deep sorrow and sincere condolences to the 
Azerbaijan people. Regrettably I have got no other opportunity 
now. 
“As to the developments in Azerbaijan, I regard them as 
illegal, alien to democracy, utterly contradicting the principles of 
humanism and construction of a law-governed state in our 
country. There are certain reasons behind the current situation in 
Azerbaijan. I shall not dwell in detail on them that would require a 
lot of time. The conflict between the two nations, i.e., between 
Azerbaijan and Armenia, has been in progress in the past two 
years, it flared up in connection with the developments in 
Nagorny Karabakh and around it. A sufficiently long period for 
the political leaders of Azerbaijan and Armenia, the country’s top 
party and government leader to settle the issue and put an end to 
the internecine strife, conflicts between the nations and to provide 
conditions for each person to lead a free life regardless of his 
nationality in our common federative Union of SSR. 
“However, I believe that in the past two years no sufficient 
measures were taken in this sphere. If the required measures had 
been taken, primarily by the country’s top party political leader at 
the start of complications in Nagorny Karabakh, we would not 
have observed the escalation of tension and losses on both sides in 
the past two years or the military action which was taken in the 
early hours of January 20, 1990, which involved human losses.” 
Aliev pointed out that there were opportunities in Azerbaijan 
for a political settlement of the situation. “However, they were not 
used, and large contingents of Soviet Army and of the troops of 
the USSR Ministry of Internal Affairs were brought in Baku. Now 
we are well aware of the move’s tragic consequences. I believe 
that the logic of the people who have made this decision was 
politically erroneous. A gross political error was made. They were 
simply ignorant of the real situation in the republic or of the 
 220 
Azerbaijan people’s mentality; they did not maintain sufficient 
contacts with various strata. They could not imagine that all this 
would lead to such a tragedy.  
“They should have foreseen this and taken the necessary 
measures, calculated what’s more important and necessary. 
Meanwhile, it was reported that there were considerable losses 
among the servicemen. After all, was the Russian lad to blame if 
he had been sent on the basis of an erroneous decision to suppress 
the so-called riot in Azerbaijan? 
“A large contingent of troops has been brought in Azerbaijan. 
Incidentally, I know the exact number of the troops deployed in 
Azerbaijan. Even before quite a considerable number of troops 
were stationed there: the 4th Army, the Caspian Navy, a 
paratrooper division, anti-aircraft troops, internal troops of the 
Ministry Internal Affairs. Was it necessary to bring in more 
troops? If necessary, the troops stationed there could be used. The 
Azerbaijanian leaders who have adopted such a decision should be 
brought to account for it, primarily Vezirov who fled from 
Azerbaijan. Those who have supplied false information to the 
country’s top political leadership should also be brought to 
account. I believe that the country’s top political leadership did 
not have sufficient and objective information at their disposal in 
due time. The country’s leadership was misled and such decision 
was adopted as a result. 
“All those who are behind this tragedy should be punished.” 
On the same day Geidar Aliev sent a telegram to the address of 
the CC of the CP of Azerbaijan, to the Supreme Soviet and the 
Council of Ministers of the Republic: 
 
“To the people of Azerbaijan! 
“It is with great sorrow that I learned about the tragedy which 
befell our people in connection with bringing in Baku of a large 
contingent of Soviet troops which resulted in many human losses. 
In these tragic days for us I express profound condolences to the 
families and near and dear ones of the deceased, to all 
Azerbaijanian people. 
“I condemn this action, regard it as anti-human, 
undemocratic, illegal. In this hour of trial I urge you to show 
discretion, solidarity and unity. 
“Please, publish my telegram in the republican press, 
broadcast it over the radio and television and read it out at the 
funeral meeting. 
Geidar Aliev 
January 21, 1990, Moscow” 
 221
Pravda Fires a Shot 
 
Two weeks later, on February 4, 1990, a day before the 
opening of the plenary meeting of the CPSU CC, Pravda fired a 
shot at him in the form of an article headlined “Aliev at His 
Worst, or Lamenting for a ‘Sweet’ Life”. Again nothing but lies 
and falsification. 
On the same day Aliev sent telegrams to the address of the 
CPSU CC and to the Pravda editorial board: “I feel deep 
indignation in connection with the article entitled “Aliev at His 
Worst, or Lamenting for ‘Sweet’ Life”, which is of an openly 
slanderous and provocative nature. Please, make it incumbent on 
the newspaper’s editorial board to give me an opportunity to come 
out with refutation.” 
What refutation?! Glasnost was only for one-way traffic. Even 
regardless of the fact that V. Efendiyev, Dr. Sc. (Medicine), who 
signed the article, actually did not write it. Telegrams to this effect 
were sent to the addresses of the CPSU CC, Pravda and G. Aliev: 
 
 
“Dear Geidar Alievich! 
“The article carried by Pravda on February 4, 1990, and signed 
by my name (italicized in the original.–Author’s Note.), which is of 
a purely political nature and reflects the developments of the end of 
January 1990, is not known to me, not written by me, nor is it signed 
by me (italicized in the original.–Author’s Note.). Certain theses 
referring to public healthcare, medical personnel training and the 
socio-economic situation in the country in the period of stagnation, 
outlined by me in its time, have been used in it. 
“Sincerely yours, 
V.M. Efendiyev 
Dr. Sc. (Medicine) 
05.02.90” 
 
Pravda carried the article signed by Efendiev’s surname on 
February 4. On February 5, a plenary meeting of the CPSU CC 
was opened. The date of publication was naturally selected with 
an obvious purpose: the delegates will have time to read it and 
have their say. Albert Belyaev, editor-in-chief of Sovetskaya 
kultura newspaper, who had served as a CPSU CC functionary for 
two decades, was quite eloquent. The article “Alievshchina”, he 
said, “stunned everybody. It is such people who undermine trust in 
the party.” Belyaev proposed to put down that the plenary meeting 
believed that the party leaders’ haughty behavior; rudeness with 
 222 
respect to their comrades and use of their position for selfish goals 
was incompatible with party membership.  
Hear, hear. The more so as the similar or other words were 
used in the party statute to express precisely the same idea. The 
requirements of the statute the people undertook to meet when 
they joined the party, with Aliev, Belyaev and those who had 
recommended to the latter to condemn “the Aliev style” among 
them. Aliev did not accept Gorbachyov’s economic, social and 
national policy, and that is why no efforts were spared to crush 
him morally. 
 
 
– As first deputy of the Chairman of the USSR Council of 
Ministers, –Geidar Aliev explained to me, –I received 
photographs of the people queueing for wine in Moscow. A 
nightmare! As we received information about the people’s mood 
and the content of their conversations in these lines with criticism 
of the country’s leadership, we informed Gorbachyov and 
Ligachev about them, but they only laughed softly and said that all 
this was only for the time being, they will stop talking in this way 
eventually. They simply ignored this! No reaction. 
The period that followed 1985 was marked by a destructive 
trend in the economy and social sphere. The people’s living 
standard deteriorated, their life became worse than ever. The 
moral and psychological atmosphere was extremely complicated, 
conflicts between nations were an everyday occurrence, the Union 
of Soviet Socialist Republics was on the brink of collapse, 
entangled as in was in ungovernable processes. And all this 
Gorbachyov wished to present as perestroika. Now it was “at a 
sudden turning point”, later “at a turning point”, then “at a special 
turning point” and, finally “perestroika has entered the stage of 
serious trials”, and so on. 
What can one say? I can recall that in the postwar period it was 
only on one occasion that there were difficulties with bread 
supplies–under Khrushchev’s rule. And now bread is in short 
supply. And where? In the capital. I can’t recall any time when 
tobacco was in short supply in the postwar period. Now they are 
probably trying to explain the situation with tobacco shortage. 
How can this be explained? The fact is that the country produced 
considerably less tobacco before, but there was no crisis. 
…Relations between nations are currently extremely 
complicated. Gorbachyov and his associates are trying to put the 
blame on the past, on Stalin, on the period of stagnation, but they 
keep mum about the errors of the past two-three years, although 
 223
it’s quite clear that all conflicts between nations cannot be 
attributed to past history alone–that’s unobjective and dishonest. 
There were of course errors in the period of Stalin’s rule and later, 
but if you are to count them in each concrete period, there were 
certainly more of them in the past few years… 
And Gorbachyov is all the time contradicting himself. In his 
report of February 5 (1990. –Author’s Note.) at the plenary 
meeting of the CPSU CC he dwelt at length (although the report 
was not so long) about the developments in the NK Autonomous 
Area. Again no clear-cut ideas were suggested apart from the fact 
that this time, you see, he was firmly convinced that the issue of 
the autonomous area should be settled with Azerbaijan preserving 
its integrity. But why didn’t he say so two years ago, one may ask. 
Consequently, he was of a different opinion then, somewhere in 
between–in favor of neither side, the implication being this: you 
are free to fight and we’ll wait and see who wins. Is that a proper 
stand? If we have a federation, a union state, then it is the union 
state that should have at once expressed its opinion. That was one 
more error in the national policy. But you should bear in mind that 
before perestroika there were no problems whatsoever in relations 
between Armenians and Azerbaijanians in Trans-Caucasia; in the 
14 years of my work as first secretary of the CC of the CP of 
Azerbaijan I visited Nagorny Karabakh every year, and sometimes 
even on several occasions, and not a single resident of this 
autonomous area had ever raised the question of the area’s 
separation from Azerbaijan with its transfer to Armenia. No one, 
you see?! Certain nationalist moods were sometimes expressed in 
Armenia, with some individuals hatching such plans, but they 
were not supported by the area’s population (abstracts from 
dialogues with TV anchor Andrei Karaulov). 
Could Geidar Aliev have presented a slightly overoptimistic 
picture in asserting that there were no problems in relations 
between Azerbaijanians and Armenians before perestroika? 
– There were no conflicts between nations in Azerbaijan in 
those years, –Army General Philipp Bobkov asserts, and he must 
know, for at that time he held the post of first deputy KGB 
Chairman, so he was informed even about the facts which were 
never mentioned in the press. 
We read once more that old report Aliev referred to with the 
General Secretary’s verbiage about the conflict around Nagorny 
Karabakh, about attempts to “cut this tight knot”. Really, nothing 
of substance, just talk about indefinite “certain forces in both 
republics and the NK Autonomous Area”, about shadow economy 
dealers, anti-perestroika, corrupt forces which had managed to 
 224 
snatch leadership and steer the deluded people in the destructive 
direction. So what steps were taken by the authorities to 
extinguish the fires and save the country? 
In line with his old habit, Geidar Aliev started his day with 
looking through newspapers. He read the speeches made at the 
plenary meeting, underlined the lines of interest to him. 
Korniyenko, first secretary of the City Party Committee in 
Kiev read out extracts from a letter sent by a communist worker to 
Gorbachyov’s address: “Where are we going? Isn’t it high time 
for you, Mikhail Sergeyevich, and for the country’s leadership as 
a whole, before it’s too late, to ponder on the destiny of the 
socialist state, on the working people’s destiny and take urgent 
measures?” 
“The people’s distrust in the party leadership is not yet at its 
peak, but we are already not far from a fatal point,” Yuri 
Arkhipov, secretary of the Party Committee of the Leningrad 
production association “Izhorsky zavod”, sounded the alarm. 
Soviet Ambassador to Poland Brovikov spoke about 
“hypertrophied-ambitiousness and personal errors of our party and 
state leaders, with the proclamation of the society’s total 
democratization in the absence of discipline and order in the 
country. Discipline will survive without democracy, while 
democracy is unthinkable without discipline, for it will be 
inevitably transformed, to be more precise will degenerate, into 
socio-political chaos. 
One must be deaf not to hear these voices of anxiety, Aliev 
thought. But may be they–Gorbachyov and Yakovlev–simply do 
not wish to hear them? 
 
Moscow Blockade 
 
On May 17, 1990 Nakhichevan communists elected Geidar 
Aliev as a delegate to the 32nd Congress of the Communist Party 
of Azerbaijan, which was due to open on June 8. Geidar Aliev 
bought an air ticket for June 1 in order to pay a visit to his native 
city of Nakhichevan before the congress… 
“Hardly had I made a reservation for the Moscow-Baku 
flight,” he recollected, as telephone calls started. First called 
Slezko and Gerasimov, Pugo’s deputies in the Party Control 
Committee under the CPSU CC, with recommendations to discard 
the idea of the trip by referring to strained situation in Azerbaijan, 
and my arrival would only add oil to the fuel. Next, they started 
bargaining. They had, they asserted, certain compromising 
material about Aliev at the Committee. If he agreed not to make a 
 225
trip to Baku, they would hand the material over to the archives, 
but if he does, they would be used… On May 30 Pugo himself 
made a telephone call exactly for the same purpose. My answer 
was: ‘Isn’t it strange enough–for a long period of time you never 
thought about me, although these were hard times for me when I 
was sick and underwent treatment at the hospital, and now that 
I’m well again and wish to visit my native town all of a sudden–
here you are. You have no right to forbid this trip to me.” 
In Baku Geidar Aliev was going to stop at the place of Djalal, 
his younger brother who had always stood at his side. 
 
 
Djalal Aliev recollects: 
“On May 29 a person widely known in the republic contacted 
me on the telephone and said he wished to see me. We met at the 
appointed time in a small garden near the Academy of Sciences 
and he warned me about the danger threatening Geidar Aliev if he 
went on that trip. “Make an urgent telephone call to your brother. 
Tell him not to go to Baku, otherwise he will be assassinated at 
the airplane’s gangway”, –he said without mincing words. If 
someone else had said so, my reaction would have been different, 
but a man who was quite influential at that time, so I could not 
exclude the possibility of such an outcome supplied the 
information about the threat. I was in a difficult situation as the 
life of my dear man depended on the decision to allow or prevent 
his coming to Baku. I had to make decision instantly and made a 
telephone call to Azhdar Khanbabayev, director of Azerneshr 
Publishers, to agree on our meeting. 
“On the next day, May 30, at 10:00 a.m. we put through a 
telephone call to Moscow having discussed the issue at his office. 
We had to wait for quite a long time. Now I realize that it was not 
accidental. It was only after numerous attempts by Azhdar in the 
course of four hours to contact Moscow on the “hot” line and his 
appeals to high-ranking officials of the Ministry of 
Communications that we succeeded. For fear of attempts at Geidar 
Aliev’s life I naturally could not adopt a simple decision and was 
astonished by Azhdar’s determination, for he did not waver for a 
moment. He told my brother that there was no need for him to 
attach importance to all this fuss and threats, that intellectuals 
were full of determination and would meet Aliev at the airport. 
Brother asked me, I remember, to take steps to avoid excessive 
fuss; the best thing would be for Djalal to meet him alone. But 
Khanbabayev insisted that he would meet him by all means… 
 226 
“In the evening of the same day I had to talk once more with 
Azhdar and made a call to his home. An unknown woman lifted 
the receiver. Weeping she told me that Azhdar had been heavily 
wounded and taken to hospital. Without regaining consciousness 
Azhdar died in the hospital a few hours later.” 
This is how Geidar Aliev recollected this event. “Of course I 
started comparing facts: on May 30 at 12:00 a.m. he had a 
telephone conversation with me and at 09:00 p.m. he was 
murdered. So far as I knew he was a calm and decent man, he had 
nothing in common with any dirty business, took no interest in 
politics, for many years he had worked at Azerneshr, the largest 
publishing house in Azerbaijan, he was respected in intellectual 
circles. Hence the question: why was he murdered exactly on that 
day and for what reason?” 
– I’d like to know, do you believe it possible that the country’s 
authorities or, say, Azerbaijan’s leadership fears you so much that 
the consequences of their fear, if any, may assume any form? 
– You know, it’s difficult for me to speak about whether they 
are afraid of me or not, but I have experienced the negative 
attitude of the country’s certain leaders in the past three and a half 
years. Regrettably, Azerbaijan’s former leaders too without any 
objective reasons attacked me, and even now a trip to my native 
land has been transformed into a big problem (an extract from 
dialogues with TV anchor Andrei Karaulov). 
Aliev was actually locked in Moscow. He did not attend the 
congress of the Communist Party of Azerbaijan. It may well be 
supposed that at the congress he might have been restored to his 
leading post and elected as a delegate to the 28th CPSU Congress. 
Geidar Aliev flew to Baku on July 20. First he planned either 
to return to his old apartment or to get a new one, as whole 
districts were built when he was at the helm. But he was refused to 
be registered in Baku. Now he could go solely to his native town 
of Nakhichevan. In a couple of days that remained before his 
departure he wished to pay visits to his relatives, brothers and 
sisters, to those of his friends who had not betrayed him and of 
course pay tribute to those who lost their lives on that black night 
in January… 
Young faces were looking at him from the monuments–14, 18, 
20, 28 years old: Ilkham Alakhverdiyev, Fariza Alakhverdiyeva, 
Vera Bessantina, Ilgar Ibragimov, Agabek Novruzbekli… They 
were so young, they could have lived happy lives, have children 
and grandchildren… But that was not to happen. On the day of 
remembrance in prayer the mother looking older than her years 
 227
will visit the grave and the father will stroke the monument as if it 
were his son. 
Geidar Aliev walked slowly from one to another monument 
looking attentively at the faces in search of a familiar face. No, 
they were little boys when he left the republic. They played 
football, bathed in the Caspian which was their favorite sea, it is 
shining below but it isn’t easy to get to it… His heart ached for 
those lads, girls and elderly people–there were many of them here, 
too–for it was impossible to bring them back. 
 
 228 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 8 
THE RIGHT TO BE WITH HIS PEOPLE 
 
 
July 22, 1990. Nakhichevan 
 
Geidar and Djalal Alievs flew from Baku to their native town 
by a post fight. Quite romantic! The brothers smiling looked 
through the packs of newspapers and magazines, parcels and bags 
full of letters the plane was crammed with. 
Djalal Aliev recollects: 
“In Nakhichevan no one knew about the arrival of Geidar 
Aliev. We drove to the city in a Lada car owned by an 
acquaintance. An elderly man, who had caught a glimpse of my 
brother in the car, said: “Just imagine–such a man in such a car!”  
“We arrived at our parents’ old house from which quite 
recently we accompanied our sister Sura-khanum on her last way. 
The news of Geidar’s return at once spread throughout the city. 
People kept coming to our yard and the narrow street was packed 
to capacity.  
“Closer to the evening we went to pay tribute to Gusein 
Djavid’s tomb. Nakhichevan residents greeted Geidar 
enthusiastically. Geidar was quite upset at the sight of the great 
poet’s untended tomb. Next we made our way to the central 
square where a crowd of about 80,000 had gathered by 6-7 p.m. 
“Many of them held Aliev’s pictures in their hands, some of 
them with one star and others with two: they must have drawn 
them from the old stocks at book storehouses. 
“Geidar did not conceal his emotions: after three years of 
actual isolation and persecutions he received such a warm 
welcome in his native land.” 
Dovlat Mamedov, whom Geidar had known since their student 
days at the pedagogical technical school. Some of our mutual 
acquaintances had told Geidar about Mamedov’s visits with 
protests to the editorial offices which continued to compromise 
the man who, as they believed, had fallen out of favor. 
– Thank you, Dovlat! –Geidar said softly. 
 229
– What for? I’ve done what I had to, –was the reply of the old 
teacher, a war veteran. “Grandpa, where’s the mistake?”, they told 
me at the editorial office with self-assurance as if they represented 
universal authority. “And where’s truth in your articles full of 
slander?” I objected. But they refused to publish a refutation.” 
– It doesn’t matter, –Geidar said. –Don’t worry. Life will soon 
disprove all that. 
Never before had such a large crowd gathered on the square. 
People had filled the balconies of the houses around it and even 
stood on the rooftops. 
Geidar greeted his compatriots taking a megaphone. He was 
not prepared to make a speech. He rather addressed those standing 
next to him, but such silence reigned on the square that even those 
in the most remote corners could hear him. He did not speak much 
but it was precisely the words that the Oriental saying equates to a 
sword. On his way home Geidar looked animated: “So the people 
really have not forgotten me.” 
The crowd had dissolved and only relatives remained–Geidar, 
Djalal, their niece Sanifa and her daughters. Djalal was trying to 
tune the old TV set without success, but Geidar told him smiling 
that it was more difficult to manage this technology than work in 
the field. 
– I was longing to listen to various “voices” here, –Aliev 
admitted later, –but we did not have a proper radio set at home, 
luckily, our neighbors offered a VEF radio set once manufactured 
in Riga.” 
Now it is only from rare photographs and recollections that 
you may picture the Aliev family’s old house. These photographs 
show Geidar standing in the doorway, or Sanifa who as her 
Granny Izzet-khanum in her childhood pouring water from a 
pitcher for her uncle…  
– He has long liked to wash his face and hands with water 
from the well in our yard. I used to pour water from a pitcher and 
Uncle Geidar splashed with pleasure cool small jets on himself, 
for that was his habit, as our relatives said, from childhood. Uncle 
was in general fond of all things that reminded him of the native 
home. He was fond of the dishes prepared in her time by his 
mother, my Granny: dyushbereh, much like Russian meat 
dumplings, pies kutaby, and dolma… He also liked fruits from our 
garden. We sent them to Baku and Moscow for many years on 
end. For him Nakhichevan fruits were simply unique. 
Sanifa Sultanova, Geidar Aliev’s niece, is a manager of the 
Nakhichevan Registry Office. She is widely known in the 
Republic also like a poetess. Svetlana Mirzoyeva, a Bakinsky 
 230 
rabochy correspondent, told me about her. As a journalist 
Mirzoyeva met Geidar Aliev at that time perhaps more often than 
any of her colleagues. She carefully collected the recollections of 
the people with whom he maintained friendly relations, whom he 
helped, especially men of art and literature. She wrote a very 
interesting and emotional book modestly signing her name only at 
the end–as in the newspaper. She placed Geidar Aliev’s portrait 
on the cover with his words: “Art was a part of my life…”. 
 
 
The reader, we hope, has noticed that on his first day in 
Nakhichevan Geidar Aliev paid tribute to Djavid’s memory by 
visiting his grave. What was he thinking about standing there with 
his bent head? What lines was he repeating? Maybe these: 
 
In looking for support 
In the boundless space 
The soul was tortured 
Beating against the skies… 
 
A day or two later Geidar Aliev paid a visit to Djavid’s 
Museum. When did he visit it last time? It was probably in 1982, 
when preparations were in progress in the republic to celebrate the 
centenary of the poet, playwright and philosopher Gusein Abdullah 
ogly Rasizadeh, who was born in Nakhichevan on October 24, 
1882, who died on December 5, 1941, in Siberian exile. What an 
irony: a herald of freedom, a poet who in his lifetime was described 
as the Shakespeare of the East, died on December 5, the day of the 
Stalin Constitution. Had he overstrained himself in cutting timber, 
couldn’t stand Siberian frosts? Or had his heart broken from 
spiritual suffering? The soul was tortured… 
Museum of Djavid (Eternal–in Azerbaijani) is located in his 
parents’ old house. Photographs, documents, household articles of 
the early 20th century: a kerosene lamp, a samovar which somehow 
got here from Russia, a phonograph, fine armudu–small pear-like 
glasses for drinking tea… Dishes and pitchers are displayed in the 
niches (here they are called built-in cupboards since old times), and 
each one of them has its own designation, its name. 
Displayed under the glass is the original order of the Taishet 
District Soviet of People’s Deputies of November 21, 1982. Here 
is the document in full: 
“According to the resolution of the bureau of the Nakhichevan 
Regional Committee of the CP of Azerbaijan of October 12, 1982, 
to permit Comrade Djafarov Gamid Gora ogly, secretary of the 
Nakhichevan Regional Committee of the CP of Azerbaijan, to 
 231
remove the remains of the outstanding poet and playwright of 
Azerbaijan Gusein Djavid Rasizadeh for interment in his native 
town of Nakhichevan. 
 
“Chairman of the Taishet 
District Executive Committee 
V.A. Smirnov”. 
 
 
Most probably Mushkinaz hanym Javid would top in the 
saddest list those women capable of immortalizing the heaviest 
sores and grieves in their moralities. Women, mothers in the East 
or in the West have always survived tragic fates. At the same time, 
Mrs. Mushkinaz had run a course of her life, combating an overall 
regime. There was expected a time her name would be famous as 
mighty thinker in Turan civilization Huseyn Javid’s spouse. Her 
memory would have been honored. However, it would have taken 
a long time. At least, until Javid had to prove himself in the 
right…. This dates back to hard timeso during World War II. In a 
time, when her son Ertoghrul joined the army, after her lovely 
Javid, who had been loyal to his ideas to the death, died on 
December 6,1941 in Eastern Siberia. Indeed, although he was not 
in an army, which the sons of “public enemies” were in, but 
served in Georgia, most likely, in a construction battalion. 
Ertoghrul Javid that was Great Uzeyir Hajybeyov’s student had 
first proved his talents in music before being drafted. Without 
question, Ertoghrul’s creative activity would be many-branched. 
Since according to archival documents related to him, he was 
willing to try himself in scenario. Additionally, his artistic 
paintings are available till present…                 
The destiny plays tricks with her. The time fights against 
Mushkinaz Javid. Times are hard for them. Ertoghrul Javid 
catches tuberculosis. Mushkinaz Javid was seeking to sell 
everything available in the home on account of want, in order to 
take care of her daughter and son. Even when she wants to sell the 
ring in her finger given by Huseyn Javid as a keepsake to her 
before Ertoghrul joined the army, Son protests, saying that “It is 
the keepsake from Father. Don’t touch it! Later on, however, 
when Ertoghrul’s health conditions were worsened, he was 
vomiting blood caused by tuberculosis, Mushkinaz Javid took off 
her ring and handed that over to a relative of hers. While she was 
saying “Sell it. My child is pinning from illness and hunger,” she 
was shedding tears; her grief was tearing at her heart.  
 232 
Fortunately, Mushkinaz Javid managed to witness the Javids 
times through fighting with her destiny, undergoing the loss of 
Great Javid - the grief of her only son….  And on November 
16,1976, she joined the great majority, entrusting the cultural and 
moral heritage of the Great Javids as well as her daughter Turan 
hanym to our care. She was 75 years old at that time. The grave of 
Ertoghrul Javid, who passed away at the age of 24 on October 
14,1943 in Nahchivan, had been alone by that time. He had been 
lying in wait for his parents.        
Strange coincidences do occur: Ertoghrul Javid was born on 
October 22,1919 in Baki. His sister Turan Javid was born on 
October 2,1923. Now in Baki, Azerbaijan, October is called the 
month for the Javid family. In fact, Huseyn Javid himself was 
born on October 24,1882. Turan Javid, who had made 
irreplaceable contributions to Javidism, passed away some time 
later following October – on November 12,2004.       
Mushkinaz hanym Javid was a great mother. She lives and will 
live in a sad epos that conveys a character of mother.  
On the eve of Huseyn Javid’s centennial, Father and Son met 
again after a long absence. The corpse of Mushkinaz Javid was 
buried next to their graves as well. Turan Javid, who died at the 
age of 81, was also buried there in accordance with her behest.  
Currently all of them lie in a mausoleum in Nahchivan, on old 
Azerbaijan soil.  
The Javids became the common property of the Azerbaijan 
people, and were the most valuable pages of this spiritual treasure. 
It is common knowledge that our National Leader Heydar Aliyev 
has had significant contributions in full retrieval of this treasure 
back to our nation.    
Geidar Aliev’s idea was that a snow-white mausoleum should 
be erected on their grave. However, in the summer of 1900 his 
hay-day was yet to come. But he was confident that it would 
come. And it came sooner than he expected–in October 1996. 
– Yesterday (October 29, 1996. –Author’s Note.) we paid 
tribute to the memory of Gusein Djavid, a great writer, poet, 
playwright, scholar-philosopher of Azerbaijan people, –Geidar 
Aliev said at a meeting with the people of the Nakhichevan 
Republic, –by attending the ceremony of opening his mausoleum. 
That was a great event of science and culture, and it is not only 
our holiday, i.e. of those who have gathered here, but it is also a 
holiday of all Azerbaijan people. Yesterday this holiday attracted 
the entire population of the autonomous republic. Tens, hundreds 
of thousands of people filled the streets and squares around the 
 233
Gusein Djavid Mausoleum. They congratulated each other with 
pride and great elation. 
– That was a great holiday for me, too, for at long last the 
decision made by me 14 years ago was implemented by me. 
… Adjemi ibn Abu Bekr, an outstanding architect who 
designed the mausoleums of Yusuf ibn Kuseiir and Momineh-
khatun would have been proud, we believe, of such a masterpiece. 
Those mausoleums were built at the turn of the first millennium. 
And the magnificent Djavid Mausoleum joined them at the turn of 
the second millennium. 
 
The world had changed–it’s new completely, 
Instead of wine blood flows profusely, 
The world betrays its former vows, 
Its ruins, palaces and hovels look much alike, 
Who rolled in riches is a beggar now, 
Who hated you before today’s a bosom friend… 
(“Yesterday and Today”) 
 
In 1990 there were food shortages in Nakhichevan, just as 
everywhere in the Soviet Union. News traveled from one neighbor 
to another: our acquaintances have slaughtered a cow, go to them, 
you will probably be lucky to buy some beef from them. 
Sometimes Sanifa’s sons-in-law were on time for the sale and then 
their favorite bozbash was prepared at home. 
Geidar Aliev felt very unhappy that he could not attend his 
sister Sura’s funeral for at that time he was practically locked in 
Moscow. But on the day after his arrival he visited her grave and 
laid flowers at the fresh mound and stood in silence at his father’s 
grave…. 
In his first days in Nakhichevan Aliev missed the press badly. 
Sanifa subscribed to local newspapers, but those sent from Baku 
and Moscow was put on sale in stalls in the afternoon and 
sometimes on the following day. Then he switched on the radio 
set he had received as a gift from his neighbor. 
Baku newspapers kept mum about Geidar Aliev’s return, while 
Moscow publications carried the news immediately–
Komsomolskaya pravda, Izvestiya, Argumenty i fakty. Letters 
poured in to Nakhichevan. Those who did not know his address 
wrote simply: to Geidar Aliev, Nakhichevan. Some of them sent 
sincere congratulations on his homecoming, others asserted that 
Azerbaijan was in need of a leader of that scale and still others, 
who had learned that he did not have a home of his own, invited 
him to their spacious and light apartments located in the city 
center, while they were ready to live with their relations. 
 234 
These people remembered his kindness. One of Baku 
residents, Sanifa recalls, paid a visit to their place with keys to his 
apartment: “Please, come and live with us.” A peasant from the 
Negram Village offered his newly built and well-furnished house 
as a gift. 
Negram is a big village, where in the early 20th century 
Mamedkulizadeh, a brilliant prose writer, lived. It nominated 
Geidar Aliev as a candidate for a deputy to the Supreme Soviet of 
the Azerbaijan SSR. Offers were made from other districts as 
well, but he had made his choice in favor of Negram. And on 
September 30, 1990, he became people’s deputy of Azerbaijan 
and deputy of the Supreme Soviet of the autonomous republic. 
 
 
Back to the Roots 
 
… Deputies had gathered in a comfortable hall on the ground 
floor of a small building resembling a school. Geidar Aliev was 
among them. But he was not allowed to stay in the hall –old and 
respected deputies invited Geidar Alirz ogly Aliev to take a seat in 
the presidium and preside at the meeting. He took this place of 
honor on a slightly elevated stage to the loud applause of the 
audience. His fellow countrymen believe in his lucky star and his 
wise words addressed to the long-suffering people. What has 
future in store for Nakhichevan? Whom have they to side with? 
Where have they to look for support in this unexpected war, in the 
siege unthinkable for the Union? 
This force, Aliev was convinced, was the history of the people, 
of Azerbaijan as a whole, of Nakhichevan–return to spiritual 
sources. Russia, he said and often repeated later, had proclaimed 
its state sovereignty before all other union republics, thus 
launching the process of collapse of the Soviet Union… On 
Geidar Aliev’s proposal the words “Soviet Socialist” were deleted 
from the republic’s name, with mejlis to replace the former 
Supreme Soviet. The autonomous formation restored its tricolor–
the blue-red-green banner of the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic. 
 
 
In the autumn of 1990 Baku journalist Elmira Akhundova was 
approved as Literaturnaya gazeta’s own correspondent for 
Azerbaijan. An interview to be received from Geidar Aliev was 
among her first assignments. It should be reminded that a couple 
of years before the newspaper carried a crushing article about him 
by making use, it seemed, of the “compromising” material which 
 235
Ryzhkov disdained to use in his time. Geidar Aliev then wrote a 
well-grounded refutation and took it to the editorial office, despite 
the infarction he had suffered not long ago. But they did not 
publish his refutation. 
“On learning that Geidar Aliev often pays visits to the 
Regional Party Committee,” Elmira Akhundova recollects, “I 
made a telephone call to the first secretary’s reception and 
requested his assistant to ask Geidar-muallim if he could spare 
time for an interview with the LG’s own correspondent. I was 
confident that my name would say nothing to Geidar Aliev, for I 
was a beginner in journalism and had little experience of work in 
the big-time press. However, counter to my expectations, I was 
informed that Geidar Aliev sincerely respected Elmira Akhundova 
and would be happy to meet her any time suitable to her. To say 
the truth, his reply astonished me and I even thought that he might 
have taken my modest person for some of the more venerable 
Azerbaijanian journalists. 
“I am talking in detail about the prehistory of this meeting only 
because it serves as another testimony to a very remarkable trait of 
this politician–his astounding memory. Several days later I flew to 
Nakhichevan and met Geidar-muallim, who reminded me of an 
article I published in Bakinsky rabochy some time before. It 
turned out that it was owing to this article that we met. This is 
what Geidar Aliev told me. I recorded his words on the dictaphone 
and I am reproducing them literally: 
– When in Moscow in the summer of 1990, I was looking 
through the press and an article in Bakinsky rabochy attracted my 
attention. If I am not mistaken, it was headlined, “We’ve All 
Come from the Past”. It was its logic, objective nature and 
doubtlessly good style that attracted me. I naturally got interested 
in the author’s name. Elmira Akhundova signed the article. I 
searched my memory for the journalist with this name, probably I 
met her before. 
– After I have read your article, the past vividly came back to 
me–the years when I worked in Azerbaijan and when each 
interesting event, even if it was of little importance in the sphere 
of literature and art, was received by me with great enthusiasm. I 
have always followed closely our press, was happy when some 
interesting material appeared in the newspaper testifying to the 
author’s creative, scientific or intellectual potential. I often called 
the editorial offices of Bakinsky rabochy, Vyshka, Communist, 
talked with editors, expressed my opinion of one or the other 
article and inquired about their authors. I invited some of them to 
get personally acquainted. That is why I knew all Azerbaijanian 
 236 
journalists rather well. However, I couldn’t recollect anything 
about you. 
– I liked your article very much, especially in a situation when 
the press in Azerbaijan and other republics was over-infatuated 
with nihilism, pursued the course of all-out negation and presented 
a one-sided picture of our past. I read the article with pleasure and 
recommended to read it to my relations. And, you know, I felt 
relieved. That is why when you rang up and introduced yourself as 
a Literaturnaya gazeta correspondent saying that you’d got the 
editorial office’s assignment to interview me, I had a dual feeling: 
on the one hand, I felt certain distrust of the Literaturnaya gazeta 
management. I have grounds for that. The newspaper has recently 
carried quite a few tendentious articles expressing some or other 
groupings’ interests, which are far removed from real life. And on 
the other hand–your name. You know, I now treat meetings with 
journalists with caution, for I’ve “burnt my fingers” on several 
occasions. Some of them, having talked with me and received 
answers to the questions of interest to them, took liberty of 
distorting my ideas. However, I have recalled your article in 
Bakinsky rabochy and thought that such a person can hardly 
permit herself such a dishonest approach. 
“Shall I add that this opinion was very flattering for me. But at 
the same time it was rather binding. I promised Geidar-muallim 
that I would not betray his trust and would do my best for the 
interview to be published in the newspaper in full and without any 
distortions. Incidentally, my word of honor contributed to a 
certain extent to the fact that our interview was never carried by 
Literaturnaya gazeta. Aliev sharply criticized in it the errors of 
the Union top political leadership, in particular, Mikhail 
Gorbachyov’s errors in implementing perestroika reforms, with 
the result that the vast state found itself on the brink of national 
disaster. This interview is topical even today, and at that time it 
would have produced the effect of a bombshell, for Gorbachyov 
yet ruled the roost as President and almost a year divided him 
from dismissal. Geidar Aliev refused to shorten or “smooth down” 
certain pronouncements, and I accepted his stand.” 
 
 
Now we must admit the historical fact–Geidar Aliev’s return to 
big-time politics was not by far a triumphant march. He had to 
clean the Augean stables of lies and slander, convince those in 
doubt and attract associates. 
Witnesses recollect a situation when deputies of Azerbaijan’s 
Supreme Soviet, who gathered at their first meeting in 1991, 
 237
sought to “hurt as much as they could the man before whom they 
have quite recently stood at attention”. Poet Bakhtiyar 
Vagabzadeh was the only one of 340 people’s deputies who 
reminded his colleagues that the same walls kept the memory of 
how Aliev had been greeted by a storm of applause. “You needn’t 
muster courage to kick a fallen oak,” he said. “You’d better heed 
the experienced politician’s advice.” 
What was Geidar Aliev speaking about then? What was it that 
agitated him? What was his advice? 
“Various rumors have been circulating about my return to 
Azerbaijan and election as people’s deputy. In reply to this I 
declare that I have come back to my native land of course not to 
regain power or settle accounts with somebody, but exclusively in 
order to share my own people’s grief, discharge my civic duty and 
join the fight for freedom in this difficult and complicated period 
for the republic. No one can deny these rights to me as an 
Azerbaijanian. 
“I’d like to bring to the notice of the Supreme Mejlis certain of 
my thoughts and proposals on the current situation in the Soviet 
Union and Azerbaijan. 
“First. In the past few years the country, Soviet society and the 
state administration system have been in the throws of a political 
and economic crisis. Relations between nations have been 
exacerbated to the utmost. The Soviet Union is on the verge of 
collapse. 
“Reasons behind it: it is no doubt impossible to discount the 
effect of errors and miscalculations made at the various stages of 
our development on the current situation. However, serious, 
glaring and unforgivable errors made in all walks of our life in the 
period we described as “perestroika” are the principal ones. 
“Regrettably all this is being hushed up, and the official circles 
and mass media subject to excruciating criticism solely the past. 
“One may bold assert that the changes launched in our country 
in 1985 were not based on long-term scientific, political and 
economic strategy. So the hasty, sometimes contradictory 
measures naturally have not produced positive results… 
“In the past five years Gorbachyov has been profuse in his 
promises to the people, however none of them have been 
translated into reality by him. As a result, vacuum divides the 
words and deeds and there is an abyss between the political 
leadership and the people. The people now distrust the leadership, 
they are not sure of the morrow. The Communist Party no longer 
wields authority. 
 238 
“Second. The current situation in the country is also typical of 
Azerbaijan. Just as before, the republic’s leadership blindly 
pursues the center’s line in Azerbaijan in an effort to implement 
all instructions from above. And here are the results: the situation 
in Azerbaijan is deteriorating to the point of being unbearable. 
“This is attributable to the problem of Nagorny Karabakh 
invented by Armenian nationalists. For more than three years our 
republic, the Azerbaijanian people have been subjected to constant 
aggressive attacks on the part of Armenia. As a result, 
Azerbaijan’s territorial integrity has been violated… 
“We must determine where, by whom, and what kind of error 
was made, how it happened that the people proved so helpless as 
to abandon their land. All that should be cleared up. V. 
Polyanichko has said here that Gorbachyov is contributing to the 
process of Nagorny Karabakh’s loss. I must admit that I am of the 
same opinion. We need to expose in full the treacherous stand of 
the country’s leader Gorbachyov in relation to Azerbaijan on this 
issue, and this should be reflected in our history … the perilous 
course of events could have been averted, with Armenia left as 
Armenia and Azerbaijan as Azerbaijan. That could be done only 
by a wise man guiding the Union. But Gorbachyov lacked this 
kind of wisdom, while the Azerbaijanian leaders could not muster 
enough courage, conscience and valor to uphold their people’s 
interests and honor…” 
And for him, Geidar Aliev, the notions of Motherland, land, 
the people’s dignity and honor were inseparable.  
A month later, on March 7, 1991, the session of Azerbaijan’s 
Supreme Soviet discussed the issue of the republic’s participation 
in a referendum due to be held in connection with a new Union 
Treaty prepared by Gorbachyov. Various viewpoints were 
expressed. Most of the deputies believed that it was necessary to 
take part in the referendum, to protect the Soviet Union. Then 
deputy Aliev took the floor. 
– The destiny of Azerbaijan’s future is the matter at issue, –he 
said. –That is why I would also like to express my ideas and 
proposals here. 
– Azerbaijan has been a part of the Soviet Union ever since 
1922. Our people have traversed a complicated historical path and 
scored great successes. We met with deprivations and hardships 
on the way. No one can deny it. 
– We were all born, brought up, educated and formed in the 
period of this Union’s existence. All of us, at least most of us, had 
boundless faith in this Union, we were loyal in our service to it, it 
was with this Union alone that we associated our people’s bright 
 239
future. My colleagues who stood together with me at the helm of 
the republic and I worked hard to consolidate the Union and did 
our best to cultivate the feelings of loyalty to and love for this 
Union in the Azerbaijan people’s hearts. However, the political 
processes, which were underway in the world and the country, 
have altered our attitude to the past, our worldview… 
And further, analyzing economic and political contacts 
between the center and the republic, Gorbachyov’s policy, Aliev 
drew a conclusion: the Union was breaking up. And the draft new 
Union Treaty was inadequate. 
– In a word, I am against joining the new Union and against 
holding a referendum for these purposes without any conditions. 
That is a unanimous opinion of my electorate and deputies of the 
Supreme Mejlis of the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic whose 
deputy I am. I am in favor of complete independence, economic 
and political sovereignty of Azerbaijan. Azerbaijan people have 
already stepped onto this path… 
– Certain people are trying to prove that our republic cannot 
possibly exist separately from the Union, independently. The 
idea is widespread in the country that the republics incorporated 
in the Union would be unable to exist separately from the Union 
for they are closely bound up by their economic and 
technological ties. 
– These assertions hold no water. First, Azerbaijan has every 
opportunity to act as an independent state. Second, each state of 
the world maintains mutual economic, trade and technological 
relations with other states in the spheres they require, takes part in 
world economic integration, and all that does not deprive them of 
their sovereignty. That is why the economic contacts of the 
republics within the Union cannot serve as an obstacle on their 
way to independence. In my opinion, if Azerbaijan becomes an 
independent state, it will be able to maintain bilateral, equitable 
and mutually advantageous relations with each of the Union 
republics and even with the Union as such if it survives… 
– Azerbaijan people must unite and protect as the apple of their 
eye their sacred native land. The Azerbaijan Republic should 
pursue the course of economic and political sovereignty, work for 
complete independence. 
– I urge the people’s deputies, all Azerbaijan people to pursue 
this goal and assure you that I will not deviate from this path. 
 
 
“Is anything new in Nakhichevan? –was a question asked then 
by politicians in Baku and Moscow, Tehran and Paris, Ankara and 
 240 
New York. Diplomats, journalists, public leaders and statesmen 
kept coming to Nakhichevan for a meeting with Geidar Aliev… 
Chairman of the Nakhichevan Republic’s Parliament received 
Konstantin Totsky, deputy chief of the headquarters of the 
Transcaucasian Border Area, among others. 
Nine years later Colonel General Totsky, director of the 
Federal Border Service of Russia, would recall at a meeting with 
the President of Azerbaijan their dialogues in Nakhichevan. 
– In 1991 I had the honor to be received by you in 
Nakhichevan. You gave me valuable advice then on many issues. 
The situation was far from simple then. You took a very sensible 
stand on it and set concrete tasks. At that time it was difficult 
enough to appreciate this. Now, after all these years, all of us have 
accumulated certain experience and it has been brought home to 
us that this is the way it should be. There is a concrete territory, 
people, power, so it isn’t Moscow alone that should establish rules 
on the border. All this was honestly delimited by you. There are 
nationwide rules and local problems, which should also be taken 
into account. 
Rafael Guseinov, a consultant of the CPSU CC international 
relations department, also arrived in Nakhichevan. Incidentally, it 
was the first time since 1975 that an Azerbaijanian held a post in 
the CC staff. Prior to that he worked as a journalist with 
Komsomolskaya pravda. Aliev met him in Baku back in the 
period when Rafik (which is the way friends called Rafael 
Guseinov) was an editor of Molodezh Azerbaijana newspaper. 
Aliev met the guest from Moscow with alertness and was 
surprised to learn that it was Ligachev who had sent him, but 
thanked him for attention. He said that he did not need anything, 
but he only wished his Baku apartment to be returned to him. 
However, in Baku Geidar Aliev was regarded as persona non 
grata. Even dangerous. 
 
 
July 19, 1991, Moscow 
 
That was a day of Communist Geidar Aliev’s application for 
withdrawal from CPSU membership to the party organization of 
the Cabinet of Ministers of the Union. You can imagine his 
feelings when he wrote this application, his thoughts about his 
path in the party, his father’s parting words, but let’s read an 
exacting edited text. It revealed his bitter pain experienced after 
treachery, the people’s pain, the entire great country’s tragedy. 
 241
Just a few minutes divided it from the disaster but the helmsmen 
were blind. 
Geidar Aliev handed over his application to the party 
organization, where he had been registered since 1982, when he 
was transferred to Moscow. Documents of this kind should be 
read from the first to the last line rather than retold. 
“I bring to your notice that I have adopted a decision on 
withdrawal from the CPSU. 
“I would like to warn you at once that this is not a tribute to 
‘the current fashion’ but a result of the hard road of 
disenchantment and revaluation of values I have traversed at a 
price of great suffering in the past few years. 
“The main reasons behind this decision are as follows. 
“First. The problem of withdrawal from the CPSU arose 
already on January 20, 1990, in connection with military 
aggression against the Azerbaijan people carried out by the 
political leadership of the center and the CC of the Communist 
Party of Azerbaijan. As a result of the developments in January, 
hundreds of innocent peaceful residents died and were mutilated, 
including old people, women and children.  
“Having condemned this anti-human, anti-constitutional and 
illegal act in my speeches, I hoped that the CC CPSU, the CC of 
the CP of Azerbaijan would conduct investigation of this crime 
and reveal the guilty. I waited patiently with great difficulty 
curbing my emotions. And in response to these speeches a mass-
scale slanderous campaign was launched against me by party 
publications, with Pravda to be the first among them. All my 
attempts to publish material in the same mass media with a 
grounded refutation of invented allegations against me ended in 
failure. Glasnost proclaimed as the main gain of perestroika 
proved to be a one-way traffic. 
“Numerous requests by people’s deputies of the Supreme 
Mejlis of the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic, various groups 
of individuals and prominent figures to find those guilty of the 
tragedy in January and to punish them are stubbornly rejected by 
the communist leadership of Azerbaijan. 
“A year and a half has elapsed. Not only nothing has been 
done to disclose this monstrous crime whose perpetrators have 
long been known, but also on the contrary, all measures are taken 
to conceal it in the hope that with the passage of time the tragedy 
would be forgotten. However, history has repeatedly proved that 
neither years nor decades will erase from the people’s memory 
and make them forgive murderous crimes against their people. 
 242 
“Second. As a result of the center’s hypocritical policy, the 
conflict situation has been a reality in the Nagorno-Karabakh 
Region of Azerbaijan for more than three years, triggered off as it 
was by the efforts of Armenian nationalists with the connivance of 
the CC CPSU. The region has been as a matter of fact removed 
from Azerbaijan’s state administration.  
“Azerbaijan’s state sovereignty, territorial integrity have been 
grossly violated in defiance of the Constitution. Undeclared war is 
in progress between Armenia and Azerbaijan, there are human 
losses on both sides almost every day. And all this within the 
Soviet state with its “humane” ideology. 
“I am convinced that had the party leadership wished, the 
conflict between nations, which flared up in connection with the 
so-called issue of Nagorny Karabakh back in 1987-1988, could 
have been averted at the start with measures to prevent the 
deepening confrontation and carnage bringing great privations 
and suffering in their train both for Azerbaijanian and Armenians 
people. That means that the center needed this conflict. 
“Third. In the period of democratization of entire society, 
proclamation of political freedoms and pluralism, the broad 
democratic movement which swept Azerbaijan in 1988 for 
protection of the republic’s territorial integrity and society’s 
democratization is being stubbornly suppressed through the 
efforts of the CC CP of Azerbaijan under the CC CPSU guidance. 
Many persons were repressed for political reasons in those years. 
“A year and a half Azerbaijan’s capital with its population of 
two million has lived in an emergency situation. It was in this 
context that the so-called “democratic” elections were held to the 
republic’s Supreme Soviet and a referendum with the obvious 
positive result in favor of the Union’s preservation. It would be 
naive to believe that one may hope for any kind of democracy and 
free expression of the people’s will in an emergency situation. 
Democratic organizations repeatedly raised the question of foul 
play, i.e., the absolute majority of the republic’s electorate had 
not taken part in the referendum and its results had been 
manipulated. However, Azerbaijan’s communist leadership did 
not deem it possible even to consider these appeals. 
“I have come out, and do so now, against a new union treaty 
imposed by the center. You cannot have several states’ 
sovereignty within one sovereign state, with all freedom, powers 
and functions following from this notion. 
“Genuine political and economic freedom and independence 
should be granted to all union republics for their national state 
revival. This would in no way obstruct economic integration and 
 243
the republics’ traditional cultural relations, on the contrary, that 
would promote their improvement and development on a bilateral 
and multilateral basis. 
“As a people’s deputy of Azerbaijan and of the Nakhichevan 
Autonomous Republic, I repeatedly raised in my addresses all 
these issues, proposed that the Communist Party of Azerbaijan, 
which no longer wields authority with the people, renounce its 
monopoly of power, provide conditions for free and equal activity 
by all political forces, for the development of democratic society, 
political pluralism and glasnost in full volume. 
“However, all these appeals and my proposals are not only 
ignored by Azerbaijan’s communist leadership but provoke a 
response in the form of new well thought out and organized 
attacks against me. Editors of newspapers and journalists who 
publish my addresses in Azerbaijan are relieved of their duties 
and subjected to persecutions. 
“On the basis of the foregoing, I decided to resort to the most 
drastic measure and announce my withdrawal from the CPSU, 
although that was an extremely difficult decision for me. I grew up 
in the family of communists and all my conscious life was bound 
up with the Communist Party. I joined the Bolshevik Party at the 
age of 20 in 1943. 
“ I sincerely believed in the ideals of the Communist Party and 
took an active part in the implementation of its plans. Now this 
trust has been destroyed. 
“The endless declarations of a renovated party, of a renovated 
Union of Republics is nothing but a new lie to mislead the people. 
“It is necessary to tell the people honestly and openly that the 
communist experiment, socialist choice have not justified 
themselves, the Union of Republics, created and supported by 
force has lived its day. 
“I can imagine the difficulties I will face after this statement, I 
can foresee all kinds of attacks and moral badgering. Sensible 
analysis of the path traversed by the party has led me to this stand 
set forth by me. And I realize the extent of my responsibility. 
“On leaving the ranks of the CPSU I express my respect to all 
honest and decent communists who still believe and hope. 
 
Geidar Aliev 
July 19, 1991, Moscow”. 
 
 
Geidar Aliev adopted a courageous decision. He could 
visualize the future–a gift denied to the gentlemen at the top, he 
 244 
was well aware of the vector for the developments. The August 
Putsch took place a month later. 
 
 
The Putsch 
 
The ceremony of Boris Yeltsin’s inauguration as President of 
Russia was held at a formal meeting of the RSFSR Supreme 
Soviet. Relationships between the Union and Russian authorities 
were extremely exacerbated. 
Who was to govern almost two-thirds of the country–the 
Union or Russia, personally Yeltsin or Gorbachyov? The Union 
parliament passed laws but the Russian parliament ignored them. 
Speaking at one of the grand assemblies, Mikhail Bocharov, 
Yeltsin’s closest adviser (at that time it was planned to promote 
him to the post of prime minister), repeated many times in his 
address the words “Russia’ sovereignty”. Then Fyodor Burlatsky, 
a politologist who in his time was Andropov’s, Brezhnev’s and 
again Andropov’s adviser, asked him a simple question: 
– Well, you are breaking-up the USSR, what’s next? What 
about the Russian Federation? And if Tataria, Bashkiria, 
Chechnya, Ingushetia proclaim their withdrawal from the RSFSR, 
what will you do then? 
Bocharov was confused and muttered: 
– Then we’ll open talks with them. 
Aliev put away the newspaper with this story. He had long 
known Burlatsky and read his books with pencil in hand. Of 
course Fyodor was quite right, but he would hardly make those 
cubs change their views.  
On August 15, 1991, Moskovskiye novosti weekly published 
the draft Union Treaty Gorbachyov had been keeping secret. The 
General Secretary, according to ex-USSR KGB Chairman 
Kryuchkov, put through a telephone call from the Crimea, where 
he had departed for rest, fulminated and demanded that those 
guilty of the leak of information be found and punished. But that 
was of no interest to anyone. The country was on the verge of a 
political tsunami. 
On August 19, 1991, at 04:00 a.m. Moscow time, the USSR 
learned that an emergency situation had been introduced in certain 
localities of the USSR for a period of six months. The causes and 
goals of this measure were set forth in the Statement of the Soviet 
Leadership. It stressed that the Constitution of the USSR and the 
laws of the Soviet Union had indisputable priority throughout the 
territory of the USSR. 
 245
Item 3 of this Statement contained information on the setting 
up of the State Emergency Committee of the USSR (GKChP). It 
adopted an “Appeal to the Soviet People”. 
On the same day President Yeltsin read out his address from 
the top of Tank No. 110 of the Taman Division (on General 
Lebed’s orders tanks had been sent to the Russian government 
building to protect new leaders) and urged Russian people for 
resistance. Next, Yeltsin’s decree was published which described 
the actions of GKChP organizers as a coup d’etat. Two days later 
the coup was suppressed. Next came the turn of the Communist 
Party of the Soviet Union. 
Aliev watched in his Nakhichevan office the live TV broadcast 
from the Kremlin, when Yeltsin was signing the Decree on the 
Suspension of the CPSU Activity as millions of TV viewers 
followed the ceremony. It was a hot day in August, a plane tree 
could be seen through the open window, he could hear two young 
women discussing what they had to buy for a new school year. He 
partly closed the window.  
Yeltsin invited Gorbachyov to take the floor. Mikhail 
Gorbachyov started his address. Just at that moment Yeltsin 
received a message from Moscow Mayor Gavriil Popov who 
informed him that the CC CPSU buildings had been captured. 
Inspired by the news, Yeltsin interrupted Gorbachyov. In the 
presence of deputies, while millions of TV viewers were 
watching, he demonstratively signed the Decree on the 
Suspension of the CPSU Activity. And sneered: 
– The decree shall take effect from the time of its signing. 
That was the time of his triumph, his revenge, but not the last 
one, for the CC CPSU plenary meeting in October when 
Gorbachyov gave Yeltsin a public lashing, for the 19th party 
conference, for his former humiliations. Yeltsin rejoiced, although 
he could hardly appreciate the meaning of his actions. 
The meaning of what had taken place was obviously unclear to 
Gorbachyov, who made a weak attempt to protest, since this 
action, he said, might stir up a wave of anti-communist hysteria 
which would be dangerous and unjust. Yeltsin waved his hand in 
reply: enough of that, Mikhail Sergeyevich. One of the deputies 
made his way to the microphone and shouted hysterically 
“communists should be swept out of the country”.  
Gorbachyov tried to reason with him: 
– Are you going to drive 18 million communists, or 50-
70 million people–with their families, out of the country? If you 
describe yourselves as democrats, act as such! 
 246 
Geidar Aliev muffled the TV sound. The developments in 
Moscow fight for power served as a proof in favor of his proper 
choice–Azerbaijan’s independence. 
A session of the Supreme Soviet of Azerbaijan was held on 
August 29. Just as everywhere in those critical days in August, 
passions ran high in the hall. People’s deputy Geidar Aliev took 
the floor: 
“Esteemed People’s Deputies!” He started his address looking 
calm outwardly. “The country has reached a critical point in its 
political and economic crisis, the crisis of state power… In this 
period the position of our republic, of the Azerbaijan people is 
especially complicated and difficult. The Azerbaijan Communist 
Party governing in the republic and its gross, irreparable errors are 
the main reason behind this reactionary policy…”  
There is a note in the records of proceedings at this point: 
“Voices of protest in the hall”. “My request is to give the floor to 
each deputy at this session,” Aliev said to his colleagues with 
reserve. And continued after a brief pause. “As a result of this 
policy, the republic’s communist leadership has practically 
approved the coup d’etat of August 19-22, the State Emergency 
Committee, and in this way the Azerbaijan people landed in a very 
difficult position…” 
Deputy Aliev demanded that the emergency situation, which 
had been in force in Baku for a year and a half, be lifted and the 
stand of the leadership of the Azerbaijan Republic determined on 
the State Emergency Committee. The Communist Party of 
Azerbaijan, he said, should immediately give up its leading 
position. He asked Chairwoman of the Supreme Soviet Elmira 
Kafarova and President Ayaz Mutalibov why a political 
assessment of the January 20 tragedy had not been given. 
This is what follows in the record of proceedings: 
“Elmira Kafarova: It was given at the session held on January 
20. 
Geidar Aliev: If that was done, then who is to blame for this 
armed aggression? Today they say that it was Yazov, Kryuchkov, 
Bakatin, Girenko, and Gorbachyov. That’s right. And who of the 
Azerbaijan leadership is to blame? Their names are known too: 
Vezirov, Kafarova, Mutalibov and other members of the Central 
Committee of the Communist Party of Azerbaijan. Yes, if some 
other people are also guilty, it should be found out. And if other 
forces are to blame such as democratic forces, the Popular Front, 
political assessment should also be given to their activity. Stability 
in the Republic cannot be attained until this is cleared up. If 
political assessment has been provided for this, I would like Ayaz 
 247
Mutalibov to tell us why when Gorbachyov coordinated the 
appointment of 3 ministers with the leadership of 9 republics, 
Ayaz Mutalibov did not object to Bakatin’s appointment to the 
post of chairman of the State Security Committee. If he did so, 
why didn’t he mention his objection in his address? Why did it 
happen that Vezirov, one of those behind the tragedy of January 
20, has been elected as a member of the preliminary committee 
from the Azerbaijan Republic to prepare a Congress of People’s 
Deputies? Who has nominated him to the post? If the leadership 
of the Azerbaijan Republic did that, it should bear responsibility 
for that to the Azerbaijan people. And I’d like to state this 
outright. 
“Presidential elections should not be held in Azerbaijan until 
these questions are cleared up–on this point I absolutely come 
out in support of the opinion voiced here by the delegates in 
their addresses. Next, since communists account for the absolute 
majority of the Supreme Soviet of Azerbaijan, people who have 
worked in the authorities of the Communist Party, elected as 
deputies to Parliament, and the Communist Party of Azerbaijan 
are at fault in many respects, I believe that Parliament of the 
Azerbaijan Republic should be disbanded and new elections 
held. 
“By speaking so sharply I think that after my address people, 
specially prepared for the purpose, will shower me with 
accusations. I’m used to such attacks. So, don’t bother. I’ve said 
what I wanted with clear conscience.” 
Vladimir Dal described conscience as the heart of hearts, which 
responds with approval, or condemnation of each action. This heart 
of hearts of a great number of politicians is as a rule empty. Geidar 
Aliev did not just talk about conscience and morals from high 
rostrums, which in our days is a must for the politician’s image, he 
acted from positions of conscience. Corresponding Member of the 
Republican Academy of Sciences Ramiz Rizayev, a prominent 
Azerbaijan scientist in the sphere of petrochemistry, stressed this 
trait of Aliev’s character. His intolerance of injustice made him join 
the Popular Front in the late 1980s. In September 1991, Rizayev 
flew to Nakhichevan in order to meet Aliev. He was led along the 
veranda overgrown with grape to the mud hut inside which it was 
cool even at the height of summer heat in Nakhichevan. They talked 
for almost four hours. Seeing off his guest Geidar Aliev asked him 
to visit him more often. 
The year 1991 was drawing to a close. On December 8, 
Yeltsin, President of Ukraine Kravchuk and Chairman of 
Byelorussia’s Supreme Soviet Shushkevich, who met in 
 248 
Belovezhskaya Pushcha, gave green light to the dissolution of the 
USSR. The Transcaucasian republics, which were among those 
who created this Union in 1922, were not invited. At the close of 
December the red flag was lowered from the Kremlin at night 
(they were ashamed to do so by day). The Kremlin’s new master 
at once put out Gorbachyov, the first and last USSR President, 
from there. 
And Azerbaijan fought its own battles. The Popular Front was 
out to win power. Popular Front leader Abulfaz Elchibei won the 
country’s presidential elections. The destinies of these two people, 
who were both born in Nakhichevan, were entangled curiously 
enough. Two decades before Aliev saved him from prison. 
Elchibei was also committed to his people and its independence, 
he spoke the right words. But what about the deeds that followed? 
The report of Elchibei’s inauguration, prepared by his press 
service, closed in a businesslike way: “This is the beginning of the 
first workday of the President of the Republic.” It took place on 
June 17, 1992. A year or so later he fled from Baku. But this will 
happen later. For the time being Elchibei ruled in Azerbaijan. 
Incidentally, he kept Geidar Aliev’s picture in his office, though 
not in sight. 
 
 
Nakhichevan in Siege 
 
Please, take a look at the map in the Appendix. The 
Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic and Azerbaijan proper are 
separated by Armenian territory. In Soviet times this border was 
in effect conditional. But later it coincided with a frontline, 
blocking the way to trains, cars and people. 
Siege for Nakhichevan residents was not an abstract literary 
notion. It determined their lifestyle. 
No electricity. Kerosene lamps took the place of electric 
lamps. By force of habit one used to stretch his hand for the 
switch, but to no avail, so one could only swear in impotent rage. 
No gas in the kitchens–again “hissing” of primus-stoves.  
And now just imagine that you and your children live on the 
third, fifth or seventh floor, and you have to fetch water from a 
water cart and warm yourself near a small stove. This is how 
Geidar Aliev described those days in his recollections: 
“Neither food nor oil was delivered to us. No electricity was 
supplied. Cold and famine reigned in the city. Newborns died in 
hospitals. People started cutting fruit trees for fuel, so 70 per cent 
 249
of them were cut down to warm houses. But I have survived and 
the people survived. 
“My life was modest, frugal and difficult, just as that of my 
people. But we have survived and managed to be happy. People 
from Baku often paid visits to me trying to convince me to return 
to politics. But I was against it. I did not wish to be involved in the 
Popular Front’s policy which led to a disaster…” 
The siege of Nakhichevan, which bordered not only on 
Armenia but also on Iran and Turkey, could have been broken. 
But the Baku authorities held a different view: the worse, the 
better.  
“Soon I was subjected to pressure on both sides, as if gripped 
in a vice–Mutalibov’s communist regime and the Popular Front”, 
–Geidar Aliev went on. “Incidentally, for the first time in 
Azerbaijan, Popular Front members held the leading posts in 
Nakhichevan precisely on my proposal. Two PF activists served 
as my deputies. Moreover, I appointed a PF member to the post of 
prime minister. True, later it transpired that he was a swindler, so I 
had to dismiss him. After that my contacts with the Popular Front 
were disrupted. 
They worked under a delusion that their man was free to act as 
he wished. And that was also his idea. But after I had punished 
him for swindling, he sought to retaliate by some kind of schemes. 
However, that was tantamount to suicide in Nakhichevan. The 
people nearly tore him to pieces. He had to flee in a freight car–no 
passenger cars traveled via Armenia. 
In October 1992, the Popular Front even made an attempt at a 
coup in Nakhichevan. Armed PF formations captured the militia 
and television buildings and were ready to assault Parliament with 
me inside. But a crowd of 15,000 gathered in front of the building 
and protected it. I put through several telephone calls to Elchibei 
and later transferred to him the materials of investigation of this 
incident. No reaction.” 
To be more precise, there was a certain kind of reaction. 
Elchibei tore unlucky plotters off a strip. The assault of mejlis was 
a failure, just as two attempts at Aliev’s life. 
That was how Elchibei worked to break the Nakhichevan siege. 
A politician of a different caliber could hardly succeed. That was a 
time when Aliev’ s authority in the world came in handy. 
“I established friendly personal relations with Iranian and 
Turkish leaders,” he recollected of the years in Nakhichevan. “The 
President of Iran sent his plane to Nakhichevan, I flew to Tehran 
and agreed on assistance. We built electric transmission lines and 
electric power was supplied from Iran. Just as fuel and food… 
 250 
President of Turkey Demirel offered me a credit of $100 million 
and also sent his plane, so I paid him a visit in Ankara. I built a 
highway to Turkey, a bridge across the river and made 
arrangements for supplies of goods. But, most important, I 
managed to avoid an armed conflict with Armenia. The situation 
was very critical, at times extremely critical, but I found a way out 
to avoid bloodshed..” 
TV sequences have been preserved of heavy-duty trucks 
loaded with flour, sugar, dry milk and meat, i.e., humanitarian aid 
from Iran, rumbling across the bridge spanning the Araks. It’s a 
pity that Samed Vurgun has not lived to see that... In 1948 the 
poet saw in his mind’s eye a builder of the destroyed bridge: 
 
At the Araks he’d wept long, say, for ages 
As he looked at his ravaged creation… 
Oh, who knows how long 
The pedestrians missed its solid plates? 
The old man looks wistfully at the road… 
But it’s deserted… 
May 10, 1993… Geidar Aliev celebrated his 70th birth 
anniversary. He did not want any boisterous festivities and was 
going to spend the day among his relations. His son arrived from 
Turkey the day before… But he simply could not fail to meet 
askers, soldiers who had been permitted to leave the frontline for a 
day or two?! Could he refuse to meet veterans of the Great 
Patriotic War from Baku who had been deprived of their sacred 
holiday of May 9? Ilkham was listening attentively to his father. 
– Nakhichevan residents celebrate Victory Day just as before, 
–responded the chairman of the autonomous republic’s Supreme 
Mejlis. 
– This holiday will come back to Baku with you, Geidar-
muallim, the people revere it. 
Journalist Svetlana Mirzoyeva had come from Baku. Her gift 
was an old, slightly faded amateur photo of the famous ballerina 
Gamer Almaszadeh,–that wizard of dance, a young girl Zarifa and 
her brother Tamerlan. 
Geidar Aliev looked warmly at it: 
– Zarifa was the love of my life… 
Later, casting aside his worries, he spoke about encounters 
with great painters, masters he met in his life. 
– Poetry, theater, music, painting, sculpture, all this means 
much more to me than just contacts with the captivating, 
fascinating world, more than ever new impressions and rest. Art 
served as a source of strength for me, it’s a source of optimism for 
me, it makes me happy. In my encounters with artists I get 
 251
thorough knowledge and deep sense of the beauty of life, of 
human relations. 
Prominent artists regarded Geidar Aliev as their colleague, co-
author. The well-known singer Muslim Magomayev, who 
happened to hear Aliev singing at a concert at home, expressed his 
admiration of Aliev’s voice. Old timers in Nakhichevan remember 
even now how they went to the city theater to listen to Geidar’s 
singing... Yes, he might have become an artist, actor or architect. 
But life’s dictate was different. In his role of a politician he could 
be of the utmost use to his people. 
 
 252 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 9 
NINETY-THREE 
 
 
May-June 1993, Nakhichevan–Baku 
 
The chronicle of events, kept day by day by journalist Ali 
Gasanov, now the head of the staff of the Milli Mejlis of the 
Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic, does not include this 
episode: the kerosene lamp was removed from Aliev’s office. The 
press secretary gave orders for the lamp to be left at his office. He 
even locked it up in the cupboard. He did not of course intend to 
use his chief’s lamp if electric power was cut once more. As a 
thoughtful man, he hoped to see it on display at the Aliev Museum 
of the future.  
Incidentally, that’s what happened eventually. And here is 
what can really be found in the annals of the chronicle: in June 
1993 Nakhichevan was connected to the Iranian power network. 
Moreover, a gas line was built from Tebriz to the besieged 
republic. 
The Nakhichevan market was the first to react to the news: 
the prices of kerosene lamps dropped, solely the most distrustful 
people bought them acting in the manner of the hero of 
Azerbaijan folklore Kafir, i.e., the local lore equivalent of 
Doubting Thomas. 
Shortly before Geidar Aliev’s 70th birth anniversary, a 
journalist of Bakinsky rabochy, asked him for an interview. Aliev 
received him, answered his questions willingly but remarked 
before his departure that the interview would be hardly published. 
He hit the nail on the head. May 10 and 20 passed followed by 
June without any news from Bakinsky rabochy. It carried the 
interview as late as June 10 under the headline “I Believe in 
Azerbaijan’s Happy Future”. 
Someone may regard such a delay in publication as a matter of 
no importance. Is there any difference after all if an interview 
granted by a provincial politician, the leader of an autonomous 
republic, of one of the country’s regions, was published a month 
earlier or later? But the fact was that Azerbaijan in May 1993 and 
 253
in June of the same year looked like two different countries. That 
was due to the events in Gandzha* (in Soviet times, after Kirov’s 
assassination, the city was renamed into Kirovabad, and still 
earlier, from the period of tsarist campaigns in Transcaucasia–into 
Yelizavetgrad). 
Gandzha lived through turbulent times in the period of its age-
long existence. But it was quite unprecedented for the people to 
fire at their own kin and kith… 
 
 
Colonel Guseinov’s Tanks 
 
…Operation for the neutralization of Military Unit No. 7097”, 
as it was described officially, under the command of Colonel 
Suret Guseinov, was launched on June 4, at 06:00 a.m. The units 
of the presidential guards, of the National Defense Ministry and 
internal troops, attacked it. There were casualties of 68 
servicemen and civilians. The tanks crushed twelve soldiers who 
were fighting back the attack. The government units were defeated 
utterly, with 1,200 men taken prisoner, including 180 officers. It 
could well be that they sided with Suret Guseinov of their own 
free will, for, just like him, they did not wish to fight for the 
corrupt regime. 
After a report of the parliamentary committee upon its return 
from Gandzha, deputies argued for two and a half hours whether a 
live broadcast had to be permitted on the national television or 
not. President Abulfaz Elchibei and Chairman of Milli Mejlis (it 
was described as the Supreme Soviet in the Russian-language 
press) Isa Gambarov believed that a live broadcast would only 
exacerbate the situation in the republic. Most of the deputies 
objected to them, so on June 8, at 19:30 television started its live 
broadcast. 
Take note of this date. 
Geidar Aliev was then in Nakhichevan. Elchibei got into 
contact with him some two or three times daily on the phone and 
implored him to fly to Baku and save the country from chaos. 
Colonel Guseinov’s tanks were approaching Baku sowing 
terror. 
Elchibei sent his plane for Aliev on two occasions–to no avail, 
the crew returned without him. 
                                                 
* It is Azerbaijan’s second biggest city after Baku for its population; it is 
a major industrial and cultural center. 
 254 
– I spoke with Elchibei over the phone and refused to go to 
Baku, –Aliev recollected later. –On June 9 Guseinov’s troops 
were stationed 100 kilometers from Baku. His people regarded it 
as an insult and said: “If we come to Baku we’ll hang criminals on 
lamp posts!” Again Elchibei sent a plane for me and he begged me 
to come. I agreed. 
“I must admit, I was afraid to fly to a catastrophe, but I 
realized that I must fly, for the people’s destiny was at stake. 
Upon arrival, Elchibei and I talked for several hours. He offered 
me the post of prime minister still occupied by his associate 
Panakh Guseinov. I refused. All of them had joined Elchibei and 
were listening to me. I told them all I thought about their criminal 
rule. Isa Gambarov lost his patience and said: ‘We were looking 
forward to your advice but you are reading out our indictment!’ 
Well, that was the case.” 
That was not their first encounter. They had an eight-hour 
discussion in February. “Such a policy is doomed to failure,” 
Geidar Aliev then said frankly to Elchibei, who parried in this 
way: “We are learning to govern. Let those who lack experience 
accumulates it. If they fail we’ll either dismiss or replace them. –
you experiment on people? –the old man objected to his 
authoritative interlocutor. 
Aliev’s article carried by Bakinsky rabochy–we remind you 
that it was published on June 10–seemed to serve as a sequel to 
that dialogue. 
Geidar Aliev addressed the public from the columns of one of 
the most popular newspapers in the republic as a politician bearing 
responsibility for the entire country–and that was the way he had 
always acted, rather than as the head of an autonomous republic. 
Geidar Aliev was speaking about the most important, urgent 
problem: how to stop the hostilities, how to rehabilitate the 
ravaged economy… 
“Sovereignty, national independence is Azerbaijan’s most 
valuable gain. But there consolidation by no means conflicts with 
the establishment of business, economic and cultural relations 
with neighbor states, countries of near and far abroad. Who has 
benefited from the rupture of economic relations? None of the 
republics of the former USSR–even such powerful states as 
Russia, Ukraine and Belarus. And how long will it take us to 
establish new relations? Each country, with Azerbaijan among 
them, will certainly suffer in the process of its search carried out 
blindly, haphazardly, to its own detriment. 
“A certain part of Azerbaijan’s population migrates from the 
country. Some of them depart for the cities of the former USSR 
 255
and others even go abroad–to the USA, Israel, Germany, and so 
on. Baku is gradually losing its image of a city of international 
culture, which has always been beneficial for its residents. 
“I’d like to assert definitely that Azerbaijan owes its gains in 
various walks of life to that multinational cultural and social 
climate which has been generated for almost a hundred years. 
“And it’s quite unpardonable that it is precisely Russian-
speaking Azerbaijanians who are leaving Azerbaijan. They are as 
rule excellent specialists, graduates of Moscow and Leningrad 
higher educational institutions. 
“Incidentally, the Yeni Azerbaijan (New Azerbaijan) party led 
by me comes out actively for the restoration of the former climate 
of trust, friendship and interaction by peoples of different 
nationalities.” 
At that moment the reporter reminded Aliev that when 
withdrawing from the Communist Party he promised not to join 
any party ever again. 
“That’s right,” Aliev retorted, “but Yeni Azerbaijan has put 
forward so many ideals in harmony with my own concepts of life 
that I decided not simply to join it but act as its chairman. By 
virtue of its truly democratic goals this party attracts an increasing 
number of members from among men of arts science and 
technology, peasants and workers. 
“And, last but not least, Yeni Azerbaijan sets itself the task of 
uniting people of most varied strata in the face of immense danger 
in the form of our enemy, the hostilities in Karabakh, ruin as a 
result.  
“Yes, I’ve lived a long and difficult but, I believe, happy life. 
All I’ve gone through–negative and positive aspects, joys and 
disappointments–is my wealth, my property. I’ve come back to 
politics in order to do my best for the people, for Azerbaijan, not 
to dig up what was negative or settle accounts with someone. 
“I’m a realist and I am well aware of the extremely difficult 
situation in Azerbaijan. But I can look ahead and trust in the 
people’s strength, for even in these conditions they have been able 
to overcome their hardships, and they will be able to restore what 
has been destroyed and set about building a new life. After all 
they were able after the Great Patriotic War, which had taken a 
toll of hundreds of thousands of young lives, to heal its wounds 
and start all over again. I believe in Azerbaijan’s happy future.” 
The same issue and the same column of the newspaper which 
carried the beginning of this conversation, published reports of 
fighting in Gandzha and information about the report of the 
government committee which studied the situation on the spot. All 
 256 
this was further discussed at an extraordinary session of 
Parliament, with the result that ministers were dismissed and the 
President fled at night, much in the style of cool westerns. But 
we’ll describe all this in proper order. 
Supreme Soviet Chairman Isa Gambarov handed in his 
resignation on June 11. A group of deputies proposed that Geidar 
Aliev be elected chairman. He refused and asked them to suspend 
the session for a few days in order to meet Suret Guseinov. 
“I have never met him before and flew to Gandzha to talk to 
him. We talked all through the night. In the morning he took me 
around the city and I could see the traces of fighting, destroyed 
buildings and charred houses. I saw the consequences of the 
crime. I came back to Baku, accepted the proposal of the Supreme 
Soviet and was elected chairman on June 15. I took this step with 
the sole purpose–to put an end to civil war. 
“On June 16 Suret’s troops clashed with the Popular Front’s 
military formations. A battle followed, with casualties. I had to 
stop that fratricidal war, for innumerable lives have been lost over 
the period. Suret and I agreed that his troops would not enter 
Baku, no battles would be fought in the capital. You know what 
happened next. The result was–a committee for investigation into 
the events in Gandzha and its conclusion: The Popular Front 
represented by its leaders has committed a crime. Next, a mejlis 
session was held. The main culprits were stripped of their 
immunity as deputies and arrested. That was how I came back to 
Baku.” 
 
 
President Elchibei’s Flight 
 
Abulfaz Elchibei, a scholar who had abandoned historical 
manuscripts for the sake of big-time politics, flew from the capital 
at the dawn of June 18. Really incomprehensible are Allah’s 
ways! The amazed people learned about the President’s flight 
from the morning news releases. The President explained his 
flight to his native town of Nakhichevan by his desire to prevent 
fratricidal clashes in the capital and stabilize the situation in the 
republic. 
In keeping with the Constitution of Azerbaijan, the chairman 
of Parliament assumed the powers of the head of state. 
Announcing this on the national television, Geidar Aliev stressed 
that he by no means justified Abulfaz Elchibei’s move, for it was 
the President’s duty to uphold his people’s interests even at the 
most critical moment. 
 257
An extraordinary meeting of Milli Mejlis was convened on June 
21. In his opening address Geidar Aliev said that no personnel 
reshufflement was planned, for that was impossible in the absence 
of President Abulfaz Elchibei. However, the President had no 
intention to return until Suret Guseinov’s insurgent detachments 
withdrew from Baku. “We should discuss today whether or not 
Elchibei is in a position to govern the republic. If not, we should 
take some steps,” the Supreme Soviet chairman said. 
Acting Foreign Minister Rovshan Djavadov informed the 
deputies that Suret Guseinov’s insurgent formations had 
approached Baku without any resistance. They were stopped at the 
Lokbatan Settlement (a Baku suburb) and on the Shemakhinskaya 
Highway 75th kilometer as a result of negotiations. 
The minister’s voice sounded with increasing sternness: “The 
insurgents maintain contacts with criminal elements, and this is 
fraught with the threat of losing control over the situation on the 
approaches to the capital. It is not ruled out that tomorrow it 
would be too late for the Parliament to gather…” 
– And what about the President? –the deputies asked with 
anxiety. 
– He rang me up, –the minister replied, –and said that he 
would not go to Baku but would issue all necessary orders from 
Nakhichevan. 
– We cannot accuse President of the Azerbaijan Republic 
Abulfaz Elchibei of having left his people to the mercy of fate and 
left for Nakhichevan for the sake of his security, –declared State 
Secretary Ali Kerimov. –The President left the capital in order to 
avoid bloodshed. 
He was at once interrupted: some deputies accused Elchibei of 
cowardice and others were insistent in their desire to know how 
the Supreme Commander-in-Chief would “perform his duties and 
monitor the aspects of military strategy and tactics staying outside 
Baku”. 
– The President has long elaborated a strategy and it should be 
only carried into effect today, –the state secretary tried to protect 
his chief. He believed that certain deputies wished to lure Elchibei 
out of Nakhichevan exclusively in order “to dismiss him 
immediately”. 
Chairman of the Supreme Soviet Geidar Aliev read out the 
report of Iskender Allakhverdiev, Chief of Administration of the 
Border Troops of Azerbaijan’s National Security Ministry, on the 
fact that Colonel Aliakram Gumbatov, ex-deputy Defense Minister, 
was busy setting up “an independent Talysh Republic”. Just as 
Guseinov, Gumbatov had been hastily promoted to the rank of 
 258 
colonel. In peacetime he was employed at a garage in Lenkoran. 
After the advent to power of the Popular Front he made his way to 
the Defense Ministry but he was fired from it soon after. Having 
lost his job, he knocked together an armed detachment in Lenkoran, 
which terrorized the city and its suburbs. Gumbatov planned his 
“republic’s” incorporation into Iran. His career was cut short by the 
court, which sentenced him to life imprisonment. (He was pardoned 
by President I. Aliev’s decree in 2004.) 
 
 
Powers Handed Over to President Geidar Aliev 
 
An appeal was approved unanimously at a meeting of Milli 
Mejlis on June 21 for President of the Azerbaijan Republic 
Abulfaz Elchibei to come back to Baku and set about performing 
his duties. The draft appeal was elaborated on June 20 with the 
participation of the ministers of defense, national security, internal 
affairs, head of Parliament Geidar Aliev, his deputies Tamerlan 
Karayev and Afieddin Djalilov, former first secretary of the 
Nakhichevan Regional Party Committee of the Communist Party 
of Azerbaijan. The deputies adopted an appeal to Colonel Suret 
Guseinov for an end to be put to the confrontation and for peace 
negotiations to be opened with the authorities. 
That was a real war, not something like balancing on the verge 
of it. It swept through Azerbaijan as a whole, and God knows 
what would have remained of it, had Geidar Aliev not been 
present in Baku in those days. 
On June 24 Milli Mejlis adopted a historical–no exaggeration 
here–relation: 
1. To approve the fact that Abulfaz Gadirgulu ogly Aliev 
(Elchibei) shall no longer perform the duties of President of the 
Azerbaijan Republic. 
2. To hand over the powers of President of the Azerbaijan 
Republic to Chairman of the Supreme Soviet of the Azerbaijan 
Republic Geidar Alirza ogly Aliev. 
Now his official titles were as follows: acting President of the 
Azerbaijan Republic, Chairman of the Supreme Soviet of the 
Azerbaijan Republic. 
– I am well aware of my responsibility at this critical hour of 
trial for the Azerbaijan People, in the period of exacerbation of the 
socio-political situation in the republic… I will apply all my 
experience as a statesman and politician for the country to 
overcome its crisis in many spheres... And we shall, just as before, 
 259
pursue unswervingly democratic policy chosen by the Azerbaijan 
Republic… 
Aliev had in front of him a sheet of paper with the theses of his 
address, but, just as usual, he spoke without looking in them. Just 
as in 1969, he had to open a new chapter in his life that was 
indivisible from the life of Azerbaijan. But he spoke with 
confidence. The captain was on the captain’s bridge again. He 
knew what he had to do, he knew the course. They say that people 
of this type draw on their power for strength. That’s right to a 
point. Power will be helpful if a politician relies on his own 
firmness, knowledge, intellectual potential, in a word, if help is 
given to a personality worthy of it. And if he is motivated by petty 
ideas and selfish calculations, nothing will help. 
The developments in Azerbaijan were closely followed in 
many capitals. Ambassadors asked to be received by Geidar 
Aliev, editors-in-chief and special correspondents of the leading 
newspapers and magazines and of television and radio companies 
of various countries followed their suit. Here is what Russian 
writer Alexander Prokhanov, among many others, wrote at that 
time: 
“I arrived in Baku and had to wait three days for my turn to be 
received by Geidar Aliev who was busy performing his duties. 
The country’s mejlis presided by Geidar Aliev was in session and 
it heard a report of the commission which carried out investigation 
into the Gandzha events. I followed his moves on a live TV 
broadcast. The floor was taken in turn by those guilty of the 
carnage, idols of the recent past that engaged in verbiage, taught, 
entreated, exposed and stigmatized their opponents in the course 
of a year and a half. Now they looked confused, depressed, 
mumbled something with difficulty under the pressure of evidence 
and admitted their guilt. The name of the main culprit, Elchibei, 
was pronounced. 
“As a clever psychologist Aliev led each of them to self-
exposure, stripped each of his potential of power, detracted from 
his image, thus shattering the myth of their authority created by 
the smooth-tongued television. He tore one by one the threads 
binding them to the center of power and held them in his hands, 
for now he stood at the center and worked to create the first brittle 
structure of the destroyed administration. It was obvious that it 
was difficult for him that this seventy-year old politician had to 
muster great patience and self-control for it. 
“At that moment he was motivated by the precise calculation 
of a pilot who had to assume the controls of a knocked out, 
burning plane, not the sense of triumph or revenge. 
 260 
“The four leading ‘frontline fighters’, i.e., ex-Chairman of the 
Supreme Soviet Isa Gambarov, ex-Prime Minister Panakh 
Guseinov, the top officials of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and 
of the security service, were arrested… 
“Power changed hands rapidly–every hour, every news 
broadcast reported new changes. The people, tired and 
demoralized, with their hopes dashed, followed inertly wherever 
the developments took them, but they were also undergoing rapid 
changes.” 
Aliev received Prokhanov in the spacious office of the 
Supreme Soviet Chairman late at night. 
“I could see the state flag of the republic behind him. There 
were golden arabesques with Coran surahs on the table with 
numerous ivory-colored government telephone sets bearing the 
state emblem of the USSR. 
“I knew that he had slept four hours a day in the past seven 
days. A lanky man with a flexible waist bearing no traces of 
fatigue rose to meet me. His dry palm was warm and strong as we 
shook hands. His sunburnt oval face did not look old. He wore an 
expensive well-cut suit. His tie did not look prim or official; it was 
rather fashionable, elegant, with a rich knot. He had sparkling, 
quick eyes with tenacious pupils, which lit up suddenly. In 
general, there was an artistic element in him–the ability to size up 
his interlocutor in an instant, guess his mood and plans. 
“Moreover, his office did not smell of tobacco but you could 
smell a slight aroma of expensive eau de Cologne.” 
Here are several fragments of their long conversation. 
Alexander Prokhanov. Geidar Alievich, it’s clear now that one 
more period in Azerbaijan’s latest history has come to a close. An 
end to the eighteen-month “rule” of the Popular Front was put as 
if at one stroke. It went up as if in smoke. How can you account 
for it? What was this period like for Azerbaijan? 
Geidar Aliev. That was the republic’s destruction. They have 
destroyed everything: the economy, morals, and mentality. And 
worst of all, the people had stopped working. The opportunity to 
work as such was eliminated. You know, in Lenkoran we created 
magnificent plantations on tracts of undeveloped land, in the 
desert. That area was described as an “All-Union vegetable 
garden”. We grew excellent early tomatoes, cucumbers, melons 
and watermelons and sent all this to Norilsk, Ural, and Moscow. 
The republic earned colossal income, and excellent vegetables 
were supplied to Russia’s industrial centers. I remember how 
President of Finland Urho Kekkonen visited these parts for 
recreation and expressed his admiration of the plantations. Where 
 261
are they now? They have been neglected–again wasteland, desert. 
And the people are jobless… 
“Or take grapes. Alexei Kosygin provided great support to 
vineculturists growers. The annual grape output in the republic 
then hit the 2 million ton mark. Apsheron grape is the sweetest of 
all grape varieties that I know of. Apsheron has dry, hot sandy soil 
and vineyards grow excellently there, drinking their warmth and 
sweetness. All has gone to waste! We’ll probably harvest some 
400,000 tons this year… 
“People no longer work, and to make their ends meet they are 
engaged in small trade. Iran is not far away, just as Turkey. So 
they buy small batches of some kind of unnecessary goods and 
sell them. But they do not produce anything!.. The Sumgait 
Chemical Plant operates at half of its capacity! Oil output has 
dropped sharply!.. Those at the helm are neither economists, nor 
administrators, nor politicians! As junior scientific associates or 
writers they are far removed from state affairs!.. Moreover, having 
started with proclamations of freedom and justice, they ended up 
in all-out thieving! The people are disenchanted! All they do is 
driving around in expensive Mercedes cars and engage in 
verbiage! There are lots of amoral people, lots of outright 
thieves!.. 
“And of course, Karabakh! They have not won this war; they 
have failed to resolve this conflict by political means! We have 
lost many villages and a lot of land! Yesterday I received a 
collective farm chairman. “Of course,” he says, “it’s horrible that 
we’ve lost there a great number of livestock, thousands of hectares 
of land but worst of all, we’ve lost our fathers’ graves! The enemy 
celebrates victory on these graves!” 
Alexander Prokhanov. So what will you do next? The country 
has been ravaged; the nation is split and demoralized. What kind 
of idea will unite the people? What kind of philosophy or ideology 
will unite the exhausted people? In the recent past you propagated 
the communist idea, which is nonexistent now. The liberal idea 
the Popular Front was propagating has just crumbled. What kind 
of idea the people will accept? 
Geidar Aliev. Nothing but the idea of national accord! It 
doesn’t matter to which party you belong, how old you are or 
what are your possessions. It is only national accord that will help 
us retreat from this state. The people, servicemen, businessmen 
and directors of enterprises are aware of it. We won’t persecute 
anyone. If you are a liberal or a Popular Front member, you won’t 
be persecuted. Serve the people, sacrifice yourself for the people. 
That’s the idea, that’s the kind of philosophy! And this ideology, I 
 262 
believe, will be formulated by men of letters and art by religious 
advocates!” 
Alexander Prokhanov. What was the reaction of Russia’s 
official circles to the Baku events, to your return to politics? 
Geidar Aliev. No reaction so far. Ruslan Khazbulatov alone 
congratulated me on election to the post of Supreme Soviet 
chairman. Not a word from the official Moscow. The Popular 
Front pursued an anti-Russian policy, did its best to rule out 
rapprochement between Russia and Azerbaijan. It must have been 
suitable to Moscow too. You know my attitude to Russia. 
Azerbaijan is bound up with Russia in economic, cultural and 
geopolitical spheres. We are not just neighbors, we have history in 
common. I repeat: I am not satisfied with our current relations 
with Russia but I am confident that they will inevitably develop.” 
Now it’s time to tell you the story of a man whose bright star 
rose rapidly on the horizon of Azerbaijan politics in the early 
1990s and later dropped in the same way. 
Back in Soviet times Suret Guseinov was an engineer and held 
the post of director of a wool-processing factory. After hostilities 
with Armenia broke out, he, as he put it, “assisted the front as 
much as he could. Finally abandoned all affairs, except military 
ones”. Readers who know the story of Civil War in Russia will 
certainly recall many destinies of this kind. Take, for instance, 
Nestor Makhno whose forces often changed sides by fighting now 
against the Red Army and then against the White Guards and, 
finally, on their own behalf. According to witnesses, Suret fought 
valiantly. He was promoted to the rank of colonel and became a 
National Hero of Azerbaijan, Elchibei appointed him as his 
personal representative in Karabakh and a corps commander, who 
had regular army units subordinated to him and “his own reserve 
units”. 
What did the ambitious colonel intend to attain with their 
assistance? He gave hazy answers to direct questions about his 
personal ambitions, as he did in an interview with journalist 
Elmira Akhundova in late June 1993, after the Gandzha events. 
– The time hasn’t yet come to distribute posts. Now all 
influential political forces and leaders should join their efforts in 
order to find a way to put an end to the hostilities as soon as 
possible and improve the people’s living standard. I’m most of all 
concerned with these two problems. The people, I believe, already 
know who is who. It’s high time to switch from empty talk to 
deeds. He who is in a position to assist the people, assist the front 
shall be put to the fore. It’s the people’s opinion that matters.” 
 263
The insistent journalist asked her interlocutor what had to be 
done without delay. To elect a new President? Or probably to 
cancel the post as a destabilizing factor? 
While telling his beads the young man in a well-cut light suit 
repeated his favorite idea that it wasn’t time to distribute posts. 
The way out, he believed, was for all honest sons of the nation to 
join their efforts. 
– And what role will you play in the new power structures? 
– I will act in accordance with the people’s will. If the people 
wish they will put me to the forefront. And I’ll obey their wish. 
Alexander Prokhanov saw Suret Guseinov in his mind’s eye as 
a kind of Prince Pozharsky of our times. In the early 17th century 
Prince Pozharsky and Kuzma Minin, a Nizhni Novgorod resident, 
organized and headed the people’s volunteer corps, which 
defeated the Poles who had captured Moscow. The grateful Russia 
erected a Monument on Moscow’s Red Square to Minin and 
Pozharsky. This is what Prokhanov wrote about Suret Guseinov: 
“As soon as he repelled the attack on his barracks in Gandzha 
and led his tanks to Baku in order to crush Elchibei, Suret 
Guseinov became a mythical hero for Russians. The liberals 
associated him with a horrible myth about a cruel colonel who 
dreamed of hanging all guilty “democrats” on lampposts. The 
patriots–with a heroic myth about a rebel, who headed a long-
awaited revolt against the invaders. He became a symbol of the 
humiliated army that could no longer endure the mediocre rulers’ 
policy, which was destructive for the nation and its armed forces. 
“Patriots still laud him as a model for the Russian servicemen 
who failed to say a single valiant word of protest in the five tragic 
years which saw the end of the superpower, strategic defense and 
military industry, which did not see a single deed worthy of 
officers, but only dull complaints and groans, whispered threats 
and sullen subordination, which allowed the “democrats” to 
destroy groupings, fleets, protective belts, and stamp out defense 
mentality won by victories and at the price of sacrifices. 
“Stealing generals, drinking officers and deserter soldiers–
that’s what made the Azerbaijan colonel into a hero in the eyes of 
the Russian patriotic movement dreaming of its own Pozharsky. 
“I watched Suret Guseinov at the mejlis session shown in a 
live TV broadcast. A strained face with sharp features, gloomy 
tightly knit brows, sparkling eyes was looking attentively at those 
who had not long ago given orders to destroy his barracks in an 
attempt to kill him, shelled the residential houses and killed 40 
people, and now deposed and humiliated, was mumbling 
something pitifully on the rostrum. The same vector, it seemed to 
 264 
me, worked in him according to which his tanks had headed from 
the ravaged Gandzha to Baku in order to smash, punish, take 
revenge.” 
In reply to Prokhanov’s questions, Suret Guseinov spoke about 
miscalculations and blunders of the Popular Front, which had 
formed “a mediocre team. They could do nothing but ravage. 
They deceived, bribed and were engaged in dirty politics”. That 
was the dictatorship of bribe-takers, the dictatorship of Mafiosi, 
according to the insurgent colonel. 
He spoke with deep respect about Geidar Aliev saying that he 
was “an experienced man, a wise politician relying on a wealth of 
past experience. I’m a comparatively young man and, I believe, I 
have a keen sense of the future. We shall supplement each 
other…” 
And here is one more excerpt from the colonel’s interview 
given to the Editor-in-Chief of the Russian Zavtra newspaper. 
“...I did not wish to seize power! My path did not lead to 
power! I followed my own life’s path but it has led me to power!.. 
“If the wave of disorder is sweeping the country, if the people 
are plundered and massacred, servicemen finally lose patience. 
For they are also a part of the people which are plundered and 
massacred…” 
Geidar Aliev suspended contracts with foreign companies by 
one of his first resolutions after his return to power. Izvestiya 
newspaper then wrote that by that move “he shocked certain of the 
world’s leading oil companies”. However Aliev thought 
differently. 
– It’s an open secret, –he explained for his stand in August 
1993. –Yes, I gave orders to the cabinet of ministers for 
suspending this process, and mind, it’s all on the level of 
declaration there, this matter is yet to be discussed by the 
government and the parliament. The fact is that I am not by far a 
novice in these problems. When I stood at the head of Azerbaijan 
I studied them profoundly enough. And here many aspects seemed 
at once suspicious to me. Judge for yourself. On June 6 Panakh 
Guseinov handed in his resignation as prime minister and on June 
11 he signed a government resolution on signing a declaration, on 
June 12 PF member Sabit Bagirov, head of the State Oil 
Company, signed the declaration. But as soon as I was appointed 
Supreme Soviet chairman several days after, members of the 
cabinet of ministers came to my office and told me that there was 
some kind of foul play with these contracts. 
Then I gave orders on suspending this undertaking. And then 
they raised hell abroad. President of AMOCO, followed by the 
 265
leading officials of British Petroleum, immediately paid visits to 
me. I explained everything: there is nothing wrong. We should 
study the situation. If everything is properly done, why worry? 
The problem isn’t simple; you can’t resolve it in some way and 
then the other way round. Oil is Azerbaijan's national wealth 
which is required not only by our generation but the people will 
need it 100-200 years later. And of course there are variants, 
which would make it possible for our partners to «drain» our oil 
fields, clean in some 10-15 years, and so nothing will be left. 
Incidentally, there are serious grounds to believe that certain 
people were going to feather their nests and line their pockets by 
making use of such variants. 
It should be noted in this connection that it’s exactly what is 
taking place in contemporary Russia. Here, according to 
Academician Primakov, “the practice is continued of selective oil 
extraction at the most productive plots of oil fields. One may say 
that the state had lost control over the processes of depletion of 
natural resources and reduction of the stock of oil wells” 
(Rossiiskaya gazeta, January 15, 2005). Owing to Aliev, this has 
not happened in Azerbaijan. 
 
 
Next came workdays. Personnel were the main concern. Aliev 
could not yet appoint anyone on his own, for Parliament had to 
approve each nomination put forward by him. New appointments 
were made in Baku on July 3: ministers of national security, 
internal affairs, the procurator general, and the head of the 
executive authorities of Baku… Aliev planned the discussion of 
«personnel matters» at the close of a workday, which for him 
meant late in the evening, and even at midnight. At one of such 
late meetings he offered Nazim Ibragimov to resume his duties at 
Goskomizdat (renamed as the Ministry of Information at that 
time). Nazim objected: under the circumstances such a ministry 
was hardly necessary… 
– You always start by objections, –Aliev smiled. –Then what 
is your idea? 
– My idea is to set up Azerbaijan State Publishers with up-to-
date printing equipment at its disposal to be subordinated to the 
Presidential Administration. 
And so they did. Azerbaijan Publishers is even now among the 
largest, and probably the largest, in Transcaucasia. 
Geidar Aliev included in his team also young people at those 
evening and midnight conversations. Among them were also those 
whom in his time he had sent to Moscow for studies, for instance, 
 266 
Fatima Abdullazadeh, Dr. Sc (Physics and Mathematics), now 
holding the post of manager of the Humanitarian Policy 
Department of the Central Executive Staff of the President of the 
Azerbaijan Republic. 
And what about promoted workers of the Popular Front, were 
they calmly packing their bags? Nothing of the kind! Nine of the 
eleven heads of Baku districts announced “the suspension of their 
activities in protest against loss of presidential powers by 
Elchibei”. God speed you, as they say. New people were 
appointed to their posts. 
 
 
On July 4, 1993, Geidar Aliev granted a lengthy interview to 
Ostankino Television Company–that was then the name of 
Channel 1 of Russian television. He said in reply to the question 
about the situation in the country that they had “managed to avert 
civil war which posed a serious threat to our republic, and the 
confrontation has lost its edge to a certain degree. Nevertheless, 
the situation is still very complicated, but these difficulties are 
aggravated by the Armenian armed forces’ offensive on 
Azerbaijanian territory, launched in the past three days.” 
Moscow had its own confrontation that summer, Boris Yeltsin 
was going to disband the recalcitrant Supreme Soviet of Russia 
led by his former associate Ruslan Khasbulatov. Moscow 
interviewers assailed Aliev with questions: 
– Mr. Aliev, many observers have assessed your advent to 
power as “unconstitutional”. Please, explain; can there be, in 
your opinion, such goals in politics for attaining which it is 
possible to waive the law? And one more question, associated 
with the former: what is in store for President Abulfaz Elchibei, 
what is happening with him today and what are the prospects, has 
he accepted his resignation? 
– First, I must tell you that I do not regard my appointment to 
the post as anti-constitutional, –was Aliev’s confident answer to 
his interviewers. –I was elected to the post of Chairman of the 
Supreme Soviet of Azerbaijan on June 15 on the recommendation 
of many MPs and also of President Abulfaz Elchibei himself. That 
was quite a constitutional decision. Several days before that, as 
you know, Chairman of the Supreme Soviet Isa Gambarov handed 
in his resignation. That is why I hold the post of Chairman of the 
Supreme Soviet of Azerbaijan. Second, that was not my advent to 
power, I had been invited, I had been insistently entreated, for 
several days after the Gandzha events, members of various strata 
of the Azerbaijan population, intellectuals and authoritative 
 267
aksakals addressed me with this request. President of Azerbaijan 
Abulfaz Elchibei also insistently entreated me. On three 
occasions–on June 7, 8 and 9–he sent a special plane to 
Nakhichevan and asked me insistently in our telephone 
conversations to come to Baku. On June 7 and 8 I refused. Finally, 
on June 9, being aware of the further exacerbation of the situation, 
I accepted that invitation and arrived in Baku. 
Here, jointly with Abulfaz Elchibei and other politicians I 
contributed to the process of relieving the tension, and on June 15, 
I repeat, I was elected chairman of Parliament. There is nothing 
anti-constitutional or unlawful here. And as to the fact that on 
June 24 I was entrusted to perform the President’s duties, that can 
be easily explained. 
In the early hours of June 18, President Abulfaz Elchibei 
secretly left Baku without warning anyone, me included, although 
an hour before his departure from Baku we were together. It was 
only in the morning that we received the news of his plane having 
landed in Nakhichevan whence the President was taken by 
Popular Front members to the mountain our village of Keleki 
where he has stayed ever since. In the period from June 18 to 24, I 
constantly held telephone talks with Abulfaz Elchibei, and a large 
group of intellectuals left for the village, led by the President of 
the Academy of Sciences of Azerbaijan–academicians, professors, 
writers and aksakals. 
They met with him and also asked him to come back to Baku. I 
insistently invited him. He did not accept our invitation, did not 
agree with it and is even now staying in the Keleki village. It was 
he who issued the Decree on almost all Presidential duties to be 
entrusted to the Chairman of the Supreme Soviet, with his duty 
reserved in the Decree solely to grant citizenship and sign laws. 
All other duties he has entrusted to the Chairman of the Supreme 
Soviet of Azerbaijan. 
Simultaneously this situation was discussed for several days in 
a row at a meeting of the Azerbaijanian Parliament, and MPs 
insistently proposed that I assume these duties. I would not 
consent, but after Abulfaz Elchibei had issued such a Decree, I 
consented. As a matter of fact, the republic was almost out of 
control, for it had neither President nor Prime Minister–the latter 
has long been dismissed, so only I have remained, and many 
problems had to be resolved using presidential powers. And in 
that situation I assumed these duties. I repeat, that was not my 
goal, I didn’t want it. And if Abulfaz Elchibei comes back here 
today, he is free to perform his presidential duties.  
 268 
– As to your second question referring to Abulfaz Elchibei’s 
fate–he still resides in the Keleki village and is protected by a 
Popular Front armed group. He is there now and, I believe, is not 
engaged in anything. Probably he is resting or doing something, I 
don’t know. 
– You stood in stiff opposition to Elchibei’s team, to him 
personally, to his course. What was Elchibei’s aim in inviting you 
to take up the post of Chairman of the Supreme Soviet of the 
republic and what were your motives when you consented? 
– You are slightly inaccurate in formulating this question. I did 
not stand in stiff opposition to Abulfaz Elchibei; moreover, I did not 
belong to opposition. I simply resided in Nakhichevan and 
performed the duties of Chairman of the Supreme Mejlis. On rare 
occasions I spoke with Abulfaz Elchibei over the phone. Of course 
Abulfaz Elchibei did not devote sufficient attention to the 
Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic as President, although it was 
and still is in dire straits in connection with the siege. And of course 
he did not devote the required attention to me as the Chairman of 
the Supreme Mejlis. So our relations, strictly speaking, were of this 
kind, not in the nature of acute confrontation. 
(For some reasons, probably owing to respect for the man who 
legally still held the post of the country’s President, Geidar Aliev 
did not supply Russian TV viewers with all details of their 
relationships. He passed over in silence the fact that when the 
Popular Front forces were assaulting the Ministry of Internal 
Affairs and the television building in Nakhichevan, he called 
Elchibei, who promised to intervene. It later transpired that 
Elchibei had been informed of the attempted coup. 
In February 1993 Geidar Aliev left for Baku to attend his elder 
brother Gasan’s funeral. Then he first met Elchibei in person. The 
President expressed his condolences suitable for the occasion and 
showed signs of attention to the guest.) 
– We met, –Aliev went on, –discussed many issues, it seemed 
that we had reached mutual understanding on many issues. I gave 
him advice, expressed my wishes and recommendations. He was 
free to use them or not–that was his own choice, and we had quite 
normal relationships after that. 
What had Abulfaz Elchibei in mind on inviting me? Here we 
should proceed from the first question about our alleged acute 
confrontation–there was none? And after the situation in 
Azerbaijan had exceedingly exacerbated, and proposals kept 
coming, as I have said, from many regions and various strata of 
population to invite Aliev, Elchibei must have come to the 
conclusion that here, in that tense situation, my assistance was 
 269
required. And when he rang me up he said just this: the situation is 
complicated, I ask you to come to Baku, let’s discuss the situation 
jointly and find a way out of it… 
On August 29, 1993, a referendum was held in Azerbaijan on 
confidence in President of the AR Abulfaz Elchibei. Just a year 
and a half before he collected over 1,800,000 votes, or almost 
60% of the electorate expressed their confidence in the scholar-
historian who promised them a happy future. One should have 
spared no effort to squander this capital, this unexpected wealth. 
Today only 77,000 people expressed their confidence in Elchibei. 
Seven, the figure associated with good luck in Azerbaijan  
mythology, this time proved to be unlucky for him. A total of 
3,673,978 people actually said they had no confidence in him. The 
Azerbaijanian people had made their choice. 
 
 
Of interest is testimony by Olzhas Suleimenov, a prominent 
Kazakh poet, writer and public figure. 
“…On June 1, 1993, Children’s Defense Day, I brought to 
Baku humanitarian aid–40 tons of foodstuffs for children. 
“Children are not at fault” –ran the inscription on the board of our 
“truck”, i.e., Il-76 airplane. I saw to it that all cans with foodstuffs 
were used according to their designation–at children’s hospitals 
and children’s homes. My friends Elchin, Anar, Polad Byul-
Byuloglu, and Farkhad Badalbeili helped me in my undertaking. 
“Elchibei received me in his residence. I knew him for several 
years. I met him as a philologist in peacetime and in January 1990 
as one of the leaders Popular Front. At that time I spoke in his 
support in reply to accusations by Ye. Primakov and A. 
Mutalibov. I was in Baku as the sole observer of the USSR 
Supreme Soviet and my opinion was taken into account. 
“But the meeting and conversation with the President on the 
Children’s Defense Day I remember rather well. A nice and 
intelligent man, but certainly not a leader. Not a politician either. 
In a short period of time he managed to spoil relations with two 
great neighbors–Russia and Iran. And he was firm in his 
determination not to restore them. 
“I am sure that had the people not invited Geidar Aliev a few 
days later, in June of the same year, the country could have lost 
considerably more lives and territories. Slaughter was rampant at 
that time also in Tajikistan, massacres and violence accompanied 
the process of division of Yugoslavia, Georgia and Moldavia with 
the connivance of the UN and omnipotent Western democratic 
states…” 
 270 
News releases opened with frontline reports in those months. 
Azerbaijan units bravely defended their positions. “Suret 
Guseinov’s units have been dispatched to the Armenian-
Azerbaijan conflict zone where the situation had been extremely 
exacerbated” to assist regular troops, said one of the official 
reports. 
Geidar Aliev sent an open letter to US President Bill Clinton, 
Vice-President Albert Gore, Speaker of the Congress Thomas 
Foli: 
“At the time I am writing to you this letter Armenian armed 
forces continue their attacks in order to seize more regions of 
Azerbaijan–Djebrailsky and Kubatlinsky, they capture, burn down 
and subject to barbaric plunder ever more populated localities. 
“In the name of the ideals of democracy and freedom, respect 
of human rights and of man’s primary right to life, I ask you to do 
all you can to put an end to this carnage and defend Azerbaijan  
people who have proved defenseless through no fault of theirs in 
the face of barbaric aggression.” 
 
 
Aliev’s first decree in the capacity of President of the 
Azerbaijan Republic was devoted to the appointment of an 
ambassador to Moscow. He chose Ramiz Rizayev for his 
penetrating mind, initiative, readiness for dialogue, determination 
in inordinate situations, which is not out of place for a diplomat. 
– It’s only to you that I can now entrust this sphere, –were 
Geidar Aliev’s parting words to the ambassador said in his office 
late at night. –That’s of primary importance. Please, go there for 
two months. Do not make institutional concessions. I’m sure 
you’ll cope with the task. 
On September 5 Geidar Aliev left for Moscow, as the official 
communiqué said, “for holding talks with the leadership of the 
Russian Federation”. In the four days of his visit he met with 
President Yeltsin, Chairman of the Supreme Soviet Ruslan 
Khasbulatov, Chairman of the Government Viktor Chernomyrdin, 
ministers and Moscow Mayor Yuri Luzhkov. 
– Current contacts have made it possible to break the ice of 
distrust, which had frozen the bilateral relations due to the 
miscalculations, and blunders of the republic’s former leadership, 
–Geidar Aliev said summing up the results of the talks. –This turn 
in the Azerbaijan-Russian relations has been dictated by the logic 
of historical development, for the bonds of close cooperation in 
the past two centuries have bound up these two states and they 
cannot be torn. 
 271
Incidentally, Boris Yeltsin deleted the offensive and unjust 
assessments of Aliev from the second edition of his Ispoved Na 
zadannuyu temu (Confession on the Set Subject). The 
ambassador’s two-month business trip is in progress for more than 
a decade. 
At present Ramiz Rizayev acts as a doyen of the diplomatic 
corps in Moscow. 
 
 
…Presidential elections were due to be held in Azerbaijan on 
October 3. Not long before it, on September 20, 1993, Chairman 
of the Supreme Soviet of the Azerbaijan Republic Geidar Aliev 
signed a resolution “On the Annexation of the Azerbaijan 
Republic to the Commonwealth of Independent States”. Printed 
below is this most important political document, laconic and 
expressive at the same time, written by Geidar Aliev personally in 
his minute handwriting. 
“ Guided by the primary interests of the Azerbaijan people and 
with account of the Azerbaijan Republic’s historical contacts with 
the member countries of the Commonwealth of Independent 
States, for the purposes of promotion of political, economic, 
scientific-and-technological, cultural and other relations with 
these states, the National Assembly of the Azerbaijan Republic 
hereby resolves: 
“1. The Azerbaijan Republic shall join the Commonwealth of 
Independent States. 
“2. The Azerbaijan Republic shall join the “Collective Defense 
Treaty” of the Commonwealth of Independent States. 
“3. To recommend the President of the Azerbaijan Republic to 
implement the required measures following from this resolution.” 
A meeting of the heads of states and governments of the 
Commonwealth was planned to be held on September 24. On 
September 21 President of Russia Boris Yeltsin signed a decree on 
termination of the activities of the Congress of People’s Deputies 
of the Russian Federation and of the country’s Supreme Soviet. 
Simultaneously Yeltsin assumed the powers to amend the 
Constitution. Electricity, water, communications and sewerage 
were switched off in the Government House. In this way a siege 
of the countries own parliament has started, unprecedented in 
modern history, with preparations underway for the assault of the 
huge building near the Moskva River. 
Boris Yeltsin feared that in that situation the heads of states 
and governments of the Commonwealth republics would not come 
to Moscow, the summit would not be held and that “this would be 
 272 
a heavy blow at the president’s authority”. However, all of them 
arrived. On September 24 Geidar Aliev signed in the Kremlin 
documents on Azerbaijan’s joining the CIS. Yeltsin congratulated 
him and gave him a friendly smile saying: “Geidar Alievich, you 
seem to have never left the Kremlin.” But it was only too obvious 
that Boris Yeltsin had other concerns on his mind. You’ve come–
thanks so much! The more so that Stanislav Shushkevich, 
Chairman of the Supreme Soviet of Belarus, declared on his 
colleagues’ behalf that “the heads of states and governments of the 
CIS have supported the constitutional reforms carried out by 
President Yeltsin and wished him success in implementing the 
reforms.” 
The RSFSR Supreme Soviet was coming to its end. No one in 
the Kremlin thought about the Constitution at those moments. The 
power of the period, let’s repeat Tyutchev’s words, neither 
recognized nor thought about any other rights than its own. In this 
way “it was formed by its own past on the basis of the break with 
the country and its historic past”. 
 
 
Azerbaijan Elects Geidar Aliev 
 
On October 3, 1993, Azerbaijan elected its President–Geidar 
Alirz ogly Aliev. 
On October 4, elections were held in Moscow too. Tanks of 
the Russian army fired at the Supreme Soviet of Russia. US 
television conducted a live broadcast of the fight in Moscow’s 
center for the world to see. 
In contrast to Aliev, Yeltsin failed to find a peaceful 
constitutional way out of the state crisis. 
 
 
…The ceremony of inauguration. President Geidar Aliev 
expressed gratitude to his compatriots and spoke about the 
responsibility to the people. 
– The Azerbaijan Republic has gained independence in 
exceedingly complicated conditions. The most difficult thing for 
us are the hostilities Azerbaijan has been living with for more that 
five years, aggression by the Armenian armed forces against our 
territories and misfortunes which befell the Azerbaijan people as a 
result. That is why our primary task is to do away with the state of 
war in the republic and ensure peaceful conditions for the people’s 
life. 
 273
…As a result of gross miscalculations by Azerbaijan’s 
statesmen, the republic found itself on the verge of civil war with 
a real threat of separation of certain regions. Thank God, all these 
phenomena have been averted, a number of criminal groupings 
have been eliminated, with conditions provided to ensure socio-
political stability within the republic. 
Step by step Geidar Aliev developed Azerbaijan’s new policy. 
Search for peaceful settlement in Karabakh…. Oil agreements–the 
Contract of the Century we will tell you about in the next chapter, 
visits abroad–to Turkey, England, China and Turkmenistan. 
He spoke as a man having equal rights with foreign partners, 
not as someone in quest of a salutary credit. Elmira Akhundova 
remembers Geidar Aliev’s brilliant speech made in Turkish 
Parliament. The president described Azerbaijan’s great and 
impressive successes of the past 70 years in the sphere of science, 
education and culture. “Our country has preserved its face, its 
language and its national traditions,” the President stressed. By 
proclaiming Turkey as one of Azerbaijan’s main partners, Geidar 
Aliev also expressed the idea of the inadmissibility of rupture of 
the age-long political and economic relations between Azerbaijan, 
on the one hand, and Russia and the former Soviet Republics, on 
the other. In his opinion, one should speak not about replacement 
of some priorities with others but about their balanced 
combination. 
That long year, packed with dramatic collisions, which would 
be sufficient for a decade, closed with a visit to Turkmenia, 
Ashkhabad, to attend a meeting of the Council of the Heads of 
CIS States. President of the Azerbaijan Republic Geidar Aliev 
made the following statement at the Council’s closed meeting of 
December 24. 
– The almost six-year-long aggression of the Armenian 
Republic against Azerbaijan has caused boundless suffering to the 
Azerbaijan people, –the President said. He pointed out that the 
Armenian armed formations which had full control of the territory 
of Nagorny Karabakh, were consistently expanding their 
operations having occupied outside it a number of Azerbaijan’s 
other regions. About a million of Azerbaijanians had lost their 
homes, and private and state property to the value of hundreds of 
millions of dollars was being taken out of the occupied territories 
to Armenia. –I must state with great regret, –Geidar Aliev went 
on, –that after the Azerbaijan Republic became in September 1993 
a full-fledged member of the Commonwealth of Independent 
States and joined the Collective Security Treaty, the Republic of 
 274 
Armenia not only failed to stop its aggression but, on the contrary, 
its military operations have been escalated on a larger scale. 
The President of Azerbaijan proposed that a system be 
elaborated for bilateral and multilateral agreements aimed to 
stabilize the political situation throughout the CIS space. He 
appealed to the heads of states with an insistent request “to give a 
political assessment of aggression by the Republic of Armenia 
against the Azerbaijan Republic; to resolutely demand that the 
Republic of Armenia stop military operations against the 
Azerbaijan Republic; to immediately withdraw all units of the 
armed forces of the Republic of Armenia from the territory of the 
Azerbaijan Republic…” 
 
 
September 30, 1994, New York 
 
The President of Azerbaijan had to address a session of the 
UN General Assembly. UN General Secretary Butros Ghali met 
Geidar Aliev in the hall of the world-famous skyscraper. Protocol 
photographs were taken at the flags of the United Nations and 
Azerbaijan; the General Secretary led the guest to the assembly 
hall. For the first time in sovereign Azerbaijan’s history its leader 
spoke from such a high rostrum. 
On the same day in Azerbaijan hired killers assassinated 
Afiyaddin Djalil ogly Djalilov, deputy chairman of the Republic’s 
Supreme Soviet, and Shamsi Nuru ogly Ragimov, chief of the 
Special Department under the President of the AR, one of the 
oldest staff members of the republic’s security agencies. 
Their funeral was held on October 1… Funeral wreaths, 
portraits in black frames, Chairman of the Supreme Soviet Rasul 
Guliyev, Prime Minister Suret Guseinov, Procurator General Ali 
Omarov standing in the guard of honor… Not a single muscle 
moved on the face of iron-willed Suret. 
Rasul Guliyev informed them that Geidar Aliev had just called 
him from New York, expressed regret that he would not be able to 
attend the funeral ceremony and asked him to convey his deep 
condolences to the relatives of the deceased, to all Azerbaijan   
people. 
– The goal of those guilty of this tragedy, –the Chairman of 
Parliament went on on his own behalf, –is to reverse the course of 
Azerbaijan’s history, break the people’s will, throw them into 
confusion. The prisoners’ flight from the isolation ward of the 
National Security Ministry, the brutal assassination of the 
prominent statesman Afiyaddin Djalilov and of the oldest staff 
 275
member of the security agencies Shamsi Ragimov testifies to the 
fact that we have enemies scheming against the Azerbaijan 
people.” 
 
 
“I Rely on the People” 
 
Yes, both the flight and two assassinations were only initial 
links in the chain of tragedies, which the future had in store for 
Azerbaijan. Having returned to the country, the President signed 
on October 3 a decree on the introduction of an emergency 
situation in Baku. An attempt on Geidar Aliev’s life had also been 
prepared. He reminded of it hundreds of thousands of people from 
Baku and other cities and villages, who had gathered for a 
meeting at the Azaldyg Square. 
– Esteemed compatriots, dear sisters and brothers! –Aliev 
addressed the crowd. –My beloved Azerbaijan people! 
In the past few days’ complicated events occurred in the life of 
Azerbaijan, tension has increased. In this connection I have 
repeatedly addressed the Azerbaijan people with a request to come 
up in defense of the independent Azerbaijan state. I have always 
pinned hopes on the people, on their support and each time was 
convinced of its strength and wisdom. In these days, too, the 
Azerbaijan people have again displayed their cohesion, solidarity 
and proved that having gained national freedom, they are 
inflexible, unswerving and valiant… 
The armed conflict provoked three days ago as a result of 
unlawful actions of individual groups of the police detachment of 
special designation, has been defused by peaceful means, although 
the situation was extremely tense, –Aliev said. –I realized that 
there was forces, which had deceived those young people, led 
them astray, forces, which, by using them as their pliant tool, 
pursued dishonest hostile goals. We spared no efforts for a long 
period of time to get to the bottom of it. And we’ve succeeded! 
As a result, we’ve managed to settle the conflict amicably. 
…You know that last autumn a terrorist group was detained in 
Baku, which was engaged in the preparation of an attempt on my 
life. Members of this group were caught red-handed–right at the 
time of committing the crime. Having misled Gasan Toka, a 
Turkish national, certain Popular Front members had brought him 
here to make an attempt on my life. However, certain forces failed 
to draw appropriate conclusions from the fact that those terrorists 
had been indicted, that is why they are again trying to resort to 
terror. I have no doubt that our people will not tolerate it. But our 
 276 
people should also bear this in mind: I’ve spared no effort in the 
name of Azerbaijan’s independence, our Motherland’s 
sovereignty, integrity of our lands, and I am not to be intimidated 
by terror and made to retreat. 
Today I’d like to say with great regret that certain terrorists 
who were behind the attempt on my life are now hiding in the 
Keleki village. They have rallied behind ex-President Abulfaz 
Elchibei. I appreciate Abulfaz Elchibei’s contribution to the fight 
for Azerbaijan’s national liberation. But, I repeat, no one should 
resort to arms or terror. All armed detachments should be 
disarmed. That is why today I say that I hate people who have 
chosen the line of political terror and I urge the people to expose 
them. 
The President had to speak about Gandzha on two occasions in 
that uneasy situation. First, when he addressed at dawn his 
compatriots who had converged towards the Presidential Palace. 
He thanked Baku residents: 
– There is a wise saying: strength lies in unity. No one, no 
strength can withstand the people’s strength. And I rely on the 
people, on you, my dear citizens of Azerbaijan. Thank you… – 
And he went on to say that in Gandzha the armed forces had 
seized “the buildings of the city and district executive authorities, 
the airport, the railway station and the administration of the 
National Security Ministry. However, that was a great blunder in 
relation to the people and state. Their patron has also sinned. He 
should have realized that one should not act like that in those 
difficult days for Azerbaijan. He has failed to appreciate the 
respect shown him until now. 
However, I can inform you that healthy forces have risen in 
Gandzha. They are giving a rebuff to all those who encroach on 
Azerbaijan’s statehood. Gandzha residents probably can hear now 
my address on television. I send them greetings from Baku, the 
capital of Azerbaijan, and express my respect and esteem to 
Gandzha residents. I’d like to express confidence that they would 
withstand the hostile forces. 
The President did not mention as yet the name of the 
insurgents’ patron. 
Here is the text of Aliev’s one more address to the people: 
– It was very difficult to establish contacts with Gandzha, for 
all communication lines had been damaged. I called Prime 
Minister Suret Guseinov. As you know, Gandzha is his native 
town, his associates are there and the armed forces subordinated to 
him (regrettably, illegal armed forces) are now stationed there. I 
told him about what happened in Gandzha. Suret Guseinov 
 277
answered that he knew nothing about it and promised to sort 
things out. After some time I asked him once more to study this 
problem. He answered that unrest in Gandzha had been provoked 
by the police detachment of special designation (OPON). 
Later I was informed that it was not OPON but illegal armed 
detachments led by close friends of Suret Guseinov. I also 
received information that certain people from Suret Guseinov’s 
Cabinet of Ministers had left for Gandzha to manage the 
developments in Gandzha. On learning this, I summoned Suret 
Guseinov in order to clear up the situation jointly. But regrettably 
he did not come. 
Later I couldn’t contact him by phone. He rang me up after my 
TV address. I told him that such actions were intolerable. As we 
work jointly, in the same state. If you hold a leading state post you 
cannot take part in a coup. That is why I again invited him to my 
office. But he did not come this time either. Now he is here. I speak 
about everything openly. I do not conceal anything. I condemn 
actions like these. Such things should not happen among us. 
In order to avert a sequel to the Gandzha events, we had to use 
the army, which started carrying out an operation last evening. As 
a result, the criminals, those of them who had taken part in the 
coup, were detained. 
Then a trial followed. Suret Guseinov was sentenced to life 
imprisonment. In anticipating the events we’ll tell you that on 
March 17, 2004, President Ilkham Aliev pardoned him. As soon 
as he was set free, Suret Guseinov went to Geidar Aliev’s tomb 
and made three bows to his ashes. Repentance may also take such 
form. 
 
 
Yuri Konstantinovich Shafranik held the post of Minister of 
Fuel and Energetics of Russia in 1993-1996 and for the past few 
year’s heads the Interstate Oil Company SoyuzNefteGaz and the 
Supreme Mining Council of Russia. He met Geidar Aliev in the 
crucial years, which served as a turning point for Azerbaijan. 
– A statesman of such plane, –Yuri Shafrannik believes, –is 
guided in his actions by his country’s priority interests, which are 
not always clear to outsiders. Contemporaries regard certain 
things as wrong but he looks far ahead and chooses the only right 
way. One may draw many historical parallels. 
Deng Xiaoping said in his time, –Yuri Shafranik recollects, –
that it would take China a hundred years to carry out its 
perestroika. And in this case the political system, political choices 
are not questioned. While in the economy you are free to act, as 
 278 
you like provided you ensure prosperity for the people. The cat’s 
color doesn’t matter, the wise Deng argued, and it should be 
clever at catching mice. As a young man I only shrugged 
shoulders thinking that Chinese wisdom is too enigmatic for me, –
Shafranik went on. –But with the passage of time you can see that 
they have acted wisely. They have learned the lessons of there 
“great leaps” while we haven’t. We accepted the theory that the 
economy could be transformed in 500 days. Here I’m drawing a 
parallel with Azerbaijan in order to show Aliev’s calculated, 
weighed, well thought out moves in an emergency situation. You 
cannot judge about it from outside. You should have been at his 
side to assess him as a politician and that time. Even today that 
has not yet been done. I assure you, at that time–in 1993, 1994 
hardly any of the Russian ministers paid a visit to Baku. Maybe 
some servicemen did. And since they didn’t, how could the people 
in Moscow conjecture what had to be done in Baku, in 
Azerbaijan? 
More than a decade has elapsed. Not so much, you would 
think, but that’s quite a long period, although as time goes, events 
recede into the background. Let’s recall: it wasn’t simply a 
conflict between Azerbaijan and Armenia but a full-scale war. It 
was a brutal war. The units advanced and retreated alternately. 
Millions of refugees fled to Baku, most of them peasants from 
mountainous regions who were not used to life in the city. Whole 
families were starving. The plants did not operate. Azerbaijan 
accounted for 70 per cent of oil and gas equipment supplied to the 
Soviet Union, while the figure was nil in 1992-1993. Oil 
production had dropped. Complete isolation due to the war. And 
inside–the Popular Front, parties, the president had fled and havoc 
reigned in the streets. I tried to put myself in Geidar Aliev’s shoes: 
what would I have done? Then and now I can say this: in that 
situation Aliev “won” 100 out of 100. Yes, he was a political 
sharpshooter! I continued to follow the developments with 
increasing interest: could he really make such precise 
calculations? I followed him with keen interest. And I may assure 
you that I did not find a single error in his actions. I paid visits to 
Baku and met with his understanding and trust–as a Russian 
Minister, not just Shafranik. Of course he supplied information to 
me in an attempt to bring certain aspects to the notice of Russia’s 
leadership with my help: here is one plot exposed by me, 
another… Yes, you may perceive it in different ways. Both as 
political fighting and efforts to oust his rival… But the question 
arises: what’s the result? Had that led to stability? Had the 
 279
hostilities come to a close as a result? Was Baku a different city 
two years later? Yes. 
…Another man in Aliev’s place, I believe, could have declared 
an emergency situation in the country. And would have acted 
according to military-time laws in order to preserve Azerbaijan, 
put an end to the hostilities, ensure elementary law and order, 
make it possible for the people to be sure of the morrow, 
regenerate the economy. It took Aliev two-three years to attain 
this goal. And, I stress, by political means.  
I remember our first encounters. Geidar Aliev invited to sit 
next to him Popular Front members and leaders of various 
movements. I looked at those people and realized that as 
compared to Aliev, to the tasks confronting Azerbaijan, they were 
simply nonentities. He also invited people from the crowd 
gathered at the meeting to the negotiations with me and asked for 
their opinion… Once I saw Suret Guseinov. I do not want to cast a 
slur on anybody, but they looked worlds apart by the level of 
education, comprehension… He had the most complicated period, 
sought to build up some kind of support in society. 
I am not going to idealize anybody; simply I have no idols 
since childhood. But I have a definite admiration for personalities 
like him. He created something in the most critical moment of 
history. It was God who gave him to Azerbaijan. 
What kind of resources has Azerbaijan to rely on to change the 
situation? –I, Russian Minister Shafranik, asked myself. And 
answered: –Oil! Consequently, it’s necessary to find partners and 
launch an oil project. 
And where does Russian interest lie? –is Shafranik’s next 
question. –In banning this project? Wrong. To share and join 
efforts. Pipes run across our country, Azerbaijanian oilmen have 
long been working here and we–there. What’s the problem? 
Political will–that’s what is required. To assist Azerbaijan and 
determine our own share. I do not touch any other details of 
higher order. Even this vector is sufficient to start the decision-
making process. Time has shown that I as a minister upholding 
Russia’s interests–which is my credo–was quite right. And this, 
you see, makes me happy. I have warm feelings for all former 
Union republics, Armenia included… We grew up and were 
educated in one big country. Can I feel hostile to Armenia? There 
were a great number of our gas-and-oil builders there when an 
earthquake shook Armenia, and they gave a helping hand. But if 
we are to speak from positions of Russia’s interests, I acted 
regardless of public opinion, regardless of the stand of Russia’s 
Foreign Minister Kozyrev. After all these years I can assert that 
 280 
Aliev’s actions and mine as a minister were not conflicting. I 
proceeded from my own idea of Russian interests in a new 
situation.” 
Yuri Konstantinovich Shafranik described the nature of a 
different approach to Russian interests in Azerbaijan, on the 
Caspian, in Transcaucasia. We shall discuss it in greater detail in 
the next chapter. 
 281
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 10 
AZERBAIJAN’S OIL IN WORLD POLITICS 
 
 
If Oil Is a Queen… 
 
We must admit that the title of this chapter represents Geidar 
Aliev’ formula. Back in 1994 he planned to write a multi-volume 
work entitled Azerbaijan’s Oil in World Politics which had to deal 
with the history of the country’s oil industry since ancient times to 
our days, its lessons and prospects. Its publication was entrusted to 
Ilkham Aliev who at that time held the post of the first deputy 
Chairman of the State Oil Company of the Azerbaijan Republic 
(SOCAR), and to Akif Muradverdiyev, Dr. Sc. (Technology). One 
may assert today that Azerbaijan’s new oil policy and the study of 
its history were carried out in parallel. And that represented the 
President’s remarkably precise solution–in political, economic and 
social respects. 
In old times oil was an object of worship by pagans. At the 
close of the 19th century one of obscure prophets wrote: “Oil 
which provided only frugal light to the small temple now serves as 
a source of light for the empire as a whole, and the time will come 
when it will supply light and heat to half of the world.” Oil 
worshippers include kings and tsars, presidents and sheikhs, 
bankers and adventurers. States and politicians waged wars for oil. 
British economic journal Middle East wrote in 1918: “Baku is 
unique in the oil world. If oil is a queen, then Baku is its throne”. 
Many countries made their claim to the throne, such as England, 
Germany and Turkey… The Red Army made short work of them 
all in 1920. 
…On April 20, 1942, German generals presented Adolf Hitler 
with a cake representing a scale-model of the Caspian Sea and the 
city of Baku. In those days Wehrmacht was engaged in 
preparations for a decisive offensive on the southern flank of the 
Soviet-German Front. 
From mid-May Sovinformburo bulletins opened with reports 
of battles in the Kharkov and Kerch directions. Later Kerch was 
no longer mentioned in the reports. It was years later that we 
 282 
learned about the staunch resistance of Adjimushkai where, 
blocked in the catacombs, suffocating from gases and suffering 
from hunger and thirst, the underground garrison fought to the last 
breath of their life. On July 3 Soviet troops withdrew from 
Sevastopol after the 250-day-long heroic defense. The Soviet 
Army retreated to the south in the Rostov, Bataisk and Krasnodar 
directions… The world waited avidly for news from the East. Mr. 
Cassidy, a US Associated Press correspondent, posed the 
following question to Joseph Stalin, Chairman of the USSR 
Council of Peoples’ Commissars: 
– What is now Soviet potential for resistance? 
– I believe that Soviet potential for resistance to German 
bandits is no lower by its capacity–and probably even higher–than 
the potential of Nazi Germany or any other aggressive power to 
win world domination. 
The Front was retreating. But Marshal of the Soviet Union 
K.S. Moskalenko stressed in his memoirs that “retreating were not 
just groups of servicemen but battalions, regiments, divisions, that 
is, the army guided by their commanders and headquarters… We 
were tormented by bitter thoughts. However, we by no means felt 
either impotence or doom. Just as before, we were firmly, 
boundlessly confident of the enemy’s defeated, of our victory.” 
August 1, 1942. The journal of military operations of the 383rd 
rifle miners’ division: “…all reserves, including even the 
commandant’s company, have joined the fighting”. August 2. 
“The enemy attempt to crush the defense ended in failure. At 
16:00 the enemy outflanked from the right the 691st RR (rifle 
regiment–Author’s note.) and by the force of up to two battalions 
crushed the third battalion. The people fought to death. Most of 
the servicemen fell in battle heroically. Five machinegun squads 
fell in battle. Commanding officers took their place with the same 
result. Only a few people of the battalion have survived.” 
The 416th rifle division, manned largely by Azerbaijanian 
servicemen, fought on the same fronts. A year later, when the war 
moved in the Western direction, this division distinguished itself 
in the battles for liberation of Taganrog and was renamed as the 
Taganrog Rifle Division. 
And in the summer of 1942 Nikolai Baibakov, deputy People’s 
Commissar of Oil Industry of the Soviet Union (he was born in 
Baku, as mentioned above), was blowing up oil wells in Kuban 
region. 
– Comrade Baibakov, –Stalin said entrusting him with the task, 
–Hitler is eager to win Caucasia. He has announced that if he fails 
to seize Caucasian oil, he will lose the war. We must do our best 
 283
for the Germans not to get a single drop of oil. And he added more 
sternly: –Mind, if you leave even one ton of oil to the Germans, 
you’ll be shot… –After a pause he added: –But if you destroy oil 
fields prematurely and they are not seized by the Germans, while 
we are left without fuel, you’ll be shot as well. 
The young deputy People’s Commissar (he was over thirty) 
summoned his courage and said under his breath: 
– But you leave me no alternative, Comrade Stalin. 
Stalin stopped next to him, slowly raised his hand and softly 
rapped his fingers on the temple: 
– Here is the alternative, Comrade Baibakov. Fly. And resolve 
the problem on the spot jointly with Budenny. –Marshal Semyon 
Budenny was in command of the Northern Caucasian Front. 
Kuban oil wells operated to the last hours. And Baku residents 
were building defense fortifications around the city. After their 
exhausting shifts oilmen kept watch students, schoolchildren and 
housewives took spades. Luckily, the front did not approach the city. 
Antiaircraft gunners alone used their gunfire to protect oil fields.  
Much water has flown under the bridges. Secret orders kept in 
archives have been declassified. Order No. 45 was revealed in a 
heap of Nazi directives, dated July 23, 1942: 
“The immediate task of “A” Group of Armies consists in the 
encirclement and destruction of the enemy forces which have 
retreated beyond the Don River, in the region located south and 
southeast of Rostov.” “A” Group of Armies did not implement its 
immediate task. Our units had retreated to Northern Caucasia. 
A remarkable detail. On September 9, 1942, Adolf Hitler 
assumed the command of “A” Group of Armies. He displaced 
former commander Field Marshal General List and assumed the 
command of the operations of “A” Group of Armies in Caucasia 
via its headquarters, located in the town of Stalino (now Donetsk). 
On the following day Hitler issued an order from his Verwolf 
headquarters near Vinnitsa for an offensive on Tuapse to capture 
the Black Sea coast. But the developments took a different 
course–both near Stalingrad and in Caucasia. 
The gentlemen in Berlin certainly acted too hastily when they 
placed an order for that fancy cake representing a scale model of 
the Caspian and Baku.  
In the years of the Great Patriotic War Azerbaijan’s oilmen 
produced about 75 million tons of oil and 22 million tons of 
petrol. Azerbaijan accounted for 71.4% of the total Union oil 
output, and the figures for aircraft petrol and motor transport oils 
were 80% and 96% respectively. Soviet tanks rolled to Victory by 
using Baku fuel. 
 284 
April 21, 1971, Baku 
 
On that day a formal meeting was held in Baku devoted to an 
epoch-making–it’s no exaggeration–event both in Azerbaijan’s 
history and the Soviet Union’s oil industry–the billionth ton of oil 
was produced by the oil fields of the republic. There is an old 
photograph of that meeting showing in the first ranks oilmen 
wearing their decorations, Geidar Aliev on the rostrum with an 
impressive composition above the stage of a derrick, the stunning 
figure and Lenin’s profile, an obligatory element for celebrations 
of those years. 
Billion is, understandably enough, a slightly conditional figure. 
Trustworthy records have been kept in the past hundred years, i.e., 
after the commercial development of oil fields. And who knows 
how much had been produced in the past centuries, even 
millennia, for they started pumping “black gold” on the generous 
Caspian coasts even in prehistoric times. 
And it was not only black. Merchants and travelers had long 
known and valued white oil of Baku. Vladimir Dal pointed out in 
his famous dictionary: oil can be white, very liquid; brown and 
black, thick as resin and, finally, hard and flexible as shale. Oil 
springs (a very apt word used by Dal!) can be met in volcanic 
localities, for instance, near Baku, where they dug “oil wells for 
oil flow and collection”. In 1880 the outstanding Russian scientist 
Dmitry Mendeleyev wrote from Baku: “…nowhere has so far 
been discovered such rich oil as here. I visited Pennsilvania and 
inspected oil fields there, and I can confidently assert that there 
are greater oil stocks here and it is much easier to produce it”. One 
of new oil gushers in the oil fields of the widely known 
Azerbaijan industrialist Tagiyev was named by their owners after 
Mendeleyev’s son Vladimir in recognition of Dmitry 
Mendeleyev’s services for Azerbaijan’s oil industry. Here is one 
more excerpt from the prophetic lines from his letter: 
“There are sufficiently great stocks of oil here… Now it is 
necessary to develop the oil fields and use oil to supply light and 
oil for the benefit of Russia, East and West. Baku residents can 
hardly manage it on their own. 
They have already performed all their works and fulfilled their 
tasks with honor. New brains and new strength, foresight and 
daring are needed.” 
 
 285
September 20, 1994, Baku 
 
…Now, let’s find in the calendar September 1994. It was then 
that the Contract of the Century, a vigorous formula coined by 
Aliev, gained currency in Azerbaijan and in the political and 
business circles of other countries. What did it stand for? The 
agreement concluded between the State Oil Company of the 
Azerbaijan Republic (SOCAR) and the consortium of 
international companies for joint operation of the Chirag, Azeri 
and Gyuneshli oil fields, located in the Azerbaijan sector of the 
Caspian Sea. Pay attention to this detail. The ceremony of signing 
the Contract of the Century was held on September 20, 1994, 
exactly a year after Geidar Aliev’s return to power, i.e., slightly 
more than a year after the initially planned date–it was planned to 
sign the contract on July 21, 1993, and President Elchibei was 
going to England. As you remember, he had to change his route 
unexpectedly. 
Yes, Aliev’s predecessors, incompetent and greedy temporary 
rulers, had opened negotiations. The dilettantes were going to 
conclude a contract with foreign companies on crippling terms for 
the country, but apparently on advantageous terms for themselves. 
The meaning of versions in attractive packing can be explained in 
terms of the enticing advertisement: “Total sale”. But in this time 
mineral resources, not old rags, were at stake. A certain smart 
businessman offered to invest $21 million in the development of 
the Chirag oil field in the course of six years, with himself to 
become the owner of oil and casing-head gas, later to be sold by 
him to Azerbaijan at market prices. Chirag oil gushers began 
operating on the third year of the field’s development and oil 
output was counted in millions of tons. 
This is how Ilkham Aliev recollected the negotiations: 
“…Each of the parties naturally wished to promote its interests to 
the utmost. Sometimes we landed in a dead alley. The final stages 
of the negotiations, held in Istanbul and Huston in the spring and 
summer of 1994, were especially difficult. There were also critical 
moments in the course of the negotiations. And the Azerbaijan 
side was on the verge of termination of the negotiations, since, 
regarding certain terms as unacceptable for the country’s national 
interests, it could not accept them. We said to the foreign 
companies: “You uphold the interests of individual companies but 
we uphold the interests of the country and of the Azerbaijan 
people. If you make an error, that will affect your company’s one 
project. If we make an error, the error will have a negative effect 
 286 
on the interests of all Azerbaijan people. In other words, we 
cannot afford any error.” 
The opponents asserted that all profits would line the pockets 
of foreign businessmen. Ilkham Aliev’s answer was to the point: 
“…Azerbaijan will receive 80% of the profit from the Contract of 
the Century in the course of thirty years, and foreign companies as 
a whole–just 20%”. 
The Contract of the Century became Azerbaijan’s political and 
economic breakthrough to the 21st century. Undoubtedly it is first 
of all due to Geidar Aliev’s efforts, his intellect, will and energy. 
That is why we’ll describe in more detail this epoch-making 
event, which had worldwide repercussions. 
On February 4, 1994, President of Azerbaijan Geidar Aliev 
issued an order “On Speeding Up of Development of Off-Shore 
Oil and Gas Fields in Azerbaijan”. This strategic document 
formed the basis of the negotiations the country’s State Oil 
Company was conducting with the consortium of the world’s 
leading companies. The President signed a decree according to the 
results of these negotiations on September 14, 1994. It assessed 
the project’s economic, social and political significance. President 
of SOCAR Natik Aliev (no relation of Geidar Aliev) was 
entrusted with a task of signing a contract for joint development of 
the Azeri-Chirag and the deep sea Gyuneshli oil fields and for 
share distribution of oil products between the SOCAR and nine 
foreign companies, Russia’s LUKOIL among them. Initially 
Azerbaijan refused to include LUKOIL and Iranian and French 
companies. 
The ceremony of signing the contract was held on September 
20, 1994, in the Gyulistan palace. Ministers and MPs, deputies 
and businessmen from the United States, Russia, Great Britain, 
Turkey and Norway arrived in Baku. 
– Oil is the greatest national wealth of the Azerbaijan Republic 
and of the Azerbaijan people, –Geidar Aliev said in this address to 
the guests. –That is why Azerbaijan is described as the Land of 
Lights. –He spoke with pride about the history of oil production in 
the republic and highly praised the contribution made by 
Azerbaijan’s oilmen to the victory over Nazism in the years of the 
Great Patriotic War. –Our oilmen took an active part in the 
development and operation of new oil fields in any spot of the 
Soviet Union. It is not by chance that new oil fields, prospected 
and developed owing to their efforts and work were described as 
Second Baku, Third Baku and Fourth Baku. Azerbaijan’s oilmen 
have made an inestimable contribution to the development and 
operation of Russia’s largest oil fields, located in Siberia and in 
 287
the Tyumen region, and to the creation of major oil and gas 
complexes there. 
I deem it necessary to inform our guests about it and remind 
the Azerbaijan people of it. For all that is a part of the Azerbaijan 
people’s pride and glory and serves as a testimony of our people’s 
great deeds and of our oilmen’s contribution to world economy. 
That was the President’s address to the country, and his words 
were heeded not only in the resplendent and brightly-lit hall of the 
Gyulistan palace but also in each home throughout the republic, 
for it was national wealth that was discussed. 
– I’d like to say frankly that not all wishes of the Azerbaijan 
party have been reflected in the contract, –the President went on. –
But we understand that the interests of both parties should be 
taken into account in any contract. The consortium of the Western 
oil companies sought to promote its interests and the State Oil 
Company of Azerbaijan spared no efforts to promote the 
Azerbaijan Republic’s national interests. I can assert that as a 
result of great and intensive work, as a result of the parties’ highly 
responsible approach to the matter, a contract has been prepared 
meeting both parties’ interests. 
On December 2, 1994, the Contract became a law. Intensive 
work was launched, or continued, to be more precise, at offshore 
derricks and in the laboratories, offices and routes of oil pipes 
running across Russia and Georgia. 
 
 
Bon Voyage, “Dede Gorgud”! 
 
On October 9, 1995, a year after the ceremony in Gyulistan 
palace, Geidar Aliev received members of the International 
Management Committee of the Oil Consortium. The year was 
successful, according to the project participants. Oil production 
and utilization of initial oil became a reality in 1996. 
Azerbaijan’s oilmen were able to engage in deep drilling 
owing to the vast experience they accumulated in Soviet times. 
November 7, 1949, is a red-letter date in the history of oil 
industry, for on that day first ever oil gusher started operating in 
the Neftyanie Kamni (Oil Stones) offshore field. Later it was 
followed by floating derricks such as Shelf-1, Shelf-2 and Shelf-3, 
and a plant for the manufacture of deep-water foundations was 
built on the initiative of Geidar Aliev, then First Secretary of the 
CC of the Communist Party of Azerbaijan (initially planned to be 
built in Astrakhan); the construction project was recorded in a 
 288 
separate line in Union plans–after all, $500 million had been 
allocated for it! 
On June 4, 1996, Azerbaijan signed one more contract with 
foreign partners for the development of the Shakh-Deniz deep-
water oil field. Geologists had prospected there under half 
kilometer thick water a fabulously rich gas stock–up to a trillion 
cu m. It should be reminded that speaking about the results of 
survey at the Shakh-Deniz field, Geidar Aliev noted: “There are 
even now certain people who seek to put roadblocks to this 
project. But no one will be able to do anything. Azerbaijan’s new 
state strategy has been determined. We will resolutely implement 
this strategy in the future.” 
Today an entire flotilla operates on the Caspian including the 
Istiglal and the Dede Gorgud (once widely known as the 
Kaspmorneft). The latter, a half-submerged floating oil derrick–as 
a matter of fact a plant–set out in search of oil and gas in 1981. It 
prospected scores of oil wells and new oil-and-gas horizons. Then 
a period of modernization followed and the floating plant was 
modernized by US Santa-Fe Company jointly with Azerbaijanian 
specialists and skilled workers. 
…An odd hundred steps lead to the upper deck of the powerful 
floating oil derrick. Even strong oilmen sometimes feel exhausted 
while ascending them. However, 74-year-old Geidar Aliev 
confidently climbed higher and higher. I wish the Kremlin doctors 
who made a diagnosis in 1986 could see him then! 
Geidar Aliev made a memorable note in the honorary guest 
book: 
 
 
“Today a memorable event is taking place in the development 
of Azerbaijan’s oil industry.  
“As a result of the implementation of the Contract of the 
Century, the first half-submerged oil derrick is being put into 
operation. It will be named Dede Gorgud, a name which is near 
and dear to our people. May this installation have a long and 
successful service life, bon voyage! I express gratitude to all those 
who have reconstructed this installation and modernized it. I wish 
great success to the international consortium carrying out the big 
oil contract. 
 
President of the Azerbaijan Republic 
Geidar Aliev 
Baku, August 24,1996” 
 
 289
Incidentally, exactly on that date, 17 years ago, the title of the 
Hero of Socialist Labor was conferred on the First Secretary of the 
CC of the Communist Party of Azerbaijan. Oilmen had not 
forgotten that memorable event. It was obvious that Geidar Aliev 
had never forgot about it either, to be more precise; he probably 
remembered it as a sign of recognition of his selfless work. 
– In order to promote the development of our republic’s oil 
industry, rational utilization of oil fields in the Azerbaijan sector 
of the Caspian, –Geidar Aliev said on that occasion, –we adopted 
a decision in the 1970s on the construction here, on the spot where 
we are standing now, of a big deep-water foundation plant… Now 
we can see with great pride the buildings of this big plant, 
production sites created here. 
– On my way here today I once more felt proud at the sight of 
the buildings of the big plant and powerful installations, of the 
trees growing on the coast and around this square–all that has 
appeared on the once completely deserted Caspian coast. I’m very 
happy today, really happy. I feel happy for I am among those who 
have laid the foundation of all you can see here, it was my 
initiative. In the past I tried for years for all this to be 
implemented, I worked for many years for this to become a 
reality, I’ve traversed a difficult path for the sake of this. 
(Yes, one should feel happy if he lives to see his project 
incarnated. Let’s recall the builders of the Baikal-Amur Highway 
and their joy and pride when they laid a “golden link”, and their 
tears were quite understandable. Let’s recall the oilmen and 
geologists and their happy faces smeared with first oil. Geidar 
Aliev was confident that such time would come here too.) 
– The installation has got a new lease on life, –the President 
went on. –That is why it should be given a new name. I can tell 
you that about a score of names have been suggested that are 
associated with the Azerbaijan people’s history, their traditions 
and various historical places. All suggested names were really 
important. However, I decided to name this installation Dede 
Gorgud. This name, I believe, is sacred and dear to each 
Azerbaijanian, and it will be the most valuable and outstanding 
name for this installation. 
I wish great, happy journey to the Dede Gorgud installation! 
My Grandfather Gorgud’s Book, an Azerbaijan folk epic story 
dates back to the early 8th century. By UNESCO’s decision, in 
2000, the 1300th anniversary of this widely known epic story was 
celebrated in the world. The anniversary was naturally celebrated 
on the grandest scale in Azerbaijan. And in this connection the 
name of Vassily Vladimirovich Bartold, a Petersburg University 
 290 
graduate and an outstanding Russian scholar specializing in 
Oriental studies, was on everyone’s lips. 
– It was he, –said Kyamal Abdullayev, Rector of the Baku 
Slavic University, –who had actually brought back to life My 
Grandfather Gorgud’s Book. –But for Bartold’s translation, the 
epic story might have had a tragic fate. 
This was said at the ceremony of presentation of a certificate 
of Honorary Doctor of Slavic University to President of Russia 
Vladimir Putin, who, just as Bartold, is a graduate of Petersburg 
University. And Geidar Aliev established Slavic University of 
Baku. That’s the way epochs meet. 
The road to big-time oil is never simple. And not only because 
“black gold” is produced through a lot of work. Oil is money–a 
formula coined by a famous banker. Big-time oil is big-time 
money… And big-time politics, another one added. A great 
variety of interests, those of corporations, banks and states, 
clashed around Azerbaijan’s oil, the development of oil fields, 
transportation means. Russia, formerly the region’s omnipotent 
master, naturally could not put up with the loss of its positions. 
“Only one solution can suit Russia–domination of the Caspian,” 
noted an influential diplomat of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of 
Russia. “It has rights and opportunities for the purpose. The 
alternative will lead to the loss of Moscow’s political influence in 
the region…” Threatening rhetoric, quite in the spirit of Peter the 
Great’s instructions to Neplyuev, the Russian resident in 
Constantinople: “Our interests utterly exclude the possibility of 
any other power, whichever it may be, to be strengthened in the 
Caspian…” 
Yes, this is threatening rhetoric, but regrettably it has lived its 
day. Many businessmen in Moscow were aware of it. For 
instance, Yuri Shafranik, Minister of Fuel and Energetics of 
Russia, said in his speech in Baku in May 1995, that he viewed 
positively the Contract of the Century and regarded “as 
ungrounded talks about the Caspian’s status”. It was a bold 
statement by the minister. Some time before the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs of Russia sent a note to the British Ambassador 
B. Fall who was surprised to get it. This rare and probably unique 
event in diplomatic practice occurred on April 27, 1994. It was a 
note of protest against the use of the term “the Azerbaijan     
sector of the Caspian Sea” in the memorandum “On Cooperation 
in the Sphere of Power Engineering”, signed between Great 
Britain and Azerbaijan. Any project, the note stressed, dealing 
with the development of oil fields in the Caspian and with its 
transportation to the countries of Europe shall be invalid without a 
 291
prior agreement signed with all countries of the basin. That was 
the decision of Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev, a “defender” of 
Russia’s interests. Strobe Talbot, US Undersecretary of State, 
once described Kozyrev as one “of the most pro-Western 
politicians of Russia”. 
It was in those years that Russia introduced a transportation 
blockade of Azerbaijan, the official reason for it being the need to 
block the roads used for the supply of arms to Chechnya. The 
blockade boomeranged on Daghestan and on Russia as a whole as 
a matter of fact. As a result, in 1994-1995 Russia incurred losses 
estimated at $6.1 billion. Before his tragic death, General Rokhlin 
in his address at the State Duma assessed Russia’s policy in 
relation to Azerbaijan as betrayal of Russia’s national interests.  
Verbiage in connection with the Caspian’s status continued for 
many years. Russia finally accepted Azerbaijan’s positions, in 
Ilkham Aliev’s authoritative opinion, after an official visit to Baku 
of the President of the Russian Federation Vladimir Putin in 
January 2001. 
In out opinion it would be expedient to study the origin of the 
issue, i.e., the note of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Russia. 
What was the reaction in those days of Yuri Shafranik, RF 
Minister of Fuel and Energetics? Was he also preparing a note? Or 
did he issue instructions to border guards to send patrol for 
protection of the Caspian’s Russian sector? We posed these 
questions to the chairman of the board of SoyuzNefteGaz 
Company in his comfortable study in an old mansion located 
behind the Minsk hotel soon to be pulled down. Yuri Shafranik 
slightly pushed aside the desk lamp and said: 
– While you were posing your questions, I tried to find suitable 
words to describe the subject–conceptual, system–of the conflict. 
Here is my answer: the difference of our opinion depended on the 
worldview. I insist on precisely this word. On this position. 
And my interlocutor adduced an example from his own life 
when before his appointment as minister he stood at the head of 
Tyumen Region. Then, in the last months of the Soviet Union’s 
existence, the Latvian authorities extradited from Latvia the Riga 
OMON (militia detachment of special designation). 
– No one wished to receive it, but I did so and accommodated 
it, –Shafranik went on. –The people lived and worked–and 
suddenly, at the close of 1991, when I was on a business trip, 
representatives of the Procurator’s Office and the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs of Latvia came to Tyumen, arrested our citizen 
and took him to Latvia. As soon as I came back, I raised a row. 
“How can it be”, I said, “they have proclaimed their 
 292 
independence, Russia, Ukraine, Latvia–all of them have 
proclaimed their independence. Can, for instance, the French 
police fly to our country and arrest our citizen? Why the devil do 
they fly from Latvia in order to arrest a citizen of Russia?” I 
unfold this story of the Caspian and Baku. If we ourselves have 
broken up the united country, it was not Aliev who has broken it 
up, then why the devil do we believe that relations should be 
based on pressure? This is a conflict of different worldviews. 
Absolutely! I, Minister of Fuel and Energetics, and Kozyrev, 
Minister of Foreign Affairs, relied on certain positions and views. 
But I asked myself as a citizen of Russia Shafranik: how should 
we build our relations with Azerbaijan? Version 1: to comprehend 
their problems, to comprehend our problems. To find a common 
vector and, having joined our efforts, to pursue it. Version 2: to 
comprehend their problems and not to throw obstacles in the way 
of their solution. And Version 3. Well, you’ve separated, haven’t 
you? So, God speed you. 
The last of the three versions is the worst. It’s unproductive in 
all respects–historical, political and economic. Just imagine that 
an unstable country might exist next to Daghestan and Chechnya. 
One should pose oneself such questions. The first version is the 
best. But to follow it you should gain an exhaustive insight into 
their problems and make a thorough study of yours. I made 
preparations for a trip to Baku; I weighed all pros and cons, 
insisted. And now, with the passage of time, I’m happy that my 
concept has proved to be right. Our countries’ Presidents have 
signed documents on the Caspian. But even had the negotiations 
been as yet in progress, the policy of joint action would have been 
correct. We at once received a share in Azeri-Chirag and passed it 
over to LUKOIL, for that was a state company. Then I issued an 
order for Rosneft to assume responsibility for the Caspian on the 
part of Russia, and Rosneft is still a state company. It was only 
later that the process of redistribution of property went out of 
control. 
Yuri Shafranik remembers his long talks with Geidar Aliev. 
“Yuri Konstantinovich, please, asks the President to come here at 
least for an hour. We might stroll together. Stand still on the 
square for some time. There is no need for anything else.” But he 
didn’t. 
– Other viewpoints have prevailed, –Shafranik went on. –And 
I said that I was also fond of Armenia. I have more Armenian than 
Azerbaijanian friends. In general, the people’s nationality is of no 
importance to me. But Russia is vitally interested in the Caspian 
and oil. Azerbaijan and Baku were and will be a geopolitical and 
 293
strategic center. Then let’s work here and promote the 
development of relations with all countries of the region. 
After the Ministry of Fuel and Energetics had elaborated this 
line with the help of diplomats and officials of other departments, 
I reported to President Yeltsin that I was going to Baku, and he 
consented. 
– Did he receive you then? 
– Of course, he did. True, that was not a directive, elaborated 
and agreed with the government. Had we engaged in those 
procedures, we would have been bogged in discussions. 
Consequently, there was a certain degree of risk. I assumed the 
responsibility. Later, when I reported to the President, I managed 
to convince him to take a more serious stand on Russian-
Azerbaijan interstate relations. 
I am radically opposed to the policy of concessions. I believe 
that we’ve made too many of them as it is. We should be oriented 
toward unification and look for mutually advantageous solutions, 
rather than make concessions. 
So, we shouldn’t simplify the conflict. I believe that it is based 
on different worldviews. Should Russia be worthy and strong? 
That is exactly what we, the Ministry of Fuel and Energetics, 
defended on the Caspian. I mean upholding our national interests. 
Geidar Aliev also consistently upheld Azerbaijan’s national 
interests. 
– And were they going to dismiss you from you post for 
upholding Russia’s interests? 
– That wasn’t only on one occasion. I was on the verge of 
dismissal at least on three occasions when deputies of the 
chairman of the government wrote in their reports to the president 
that it was necessary to dismiss Shafranik. 
– What was the reason for it? 
– That was in connection with fuel-and-power and economic 
problems, I’d put it like that. I acted quite consciously. I couldn’t 
imagine that all that would lead to a note. But I consciously took 
steps for materialization of my idea of cooperation with 
Azerbaijan. And I’ll conclude our conversation by a few words 
about Geidar Aliev. I regard Geidar Aliev as an outstanding man, 
an outstanding statesman. It was a piece of good luck for the 
Azerbaijan people that at that time Geidar Aliev held that post. 
His spirit hadn’t been broken, so he was strong enough to rise… 
But those who have never risen are not in a position to judge what 
that means to rise. 
Have you met many people who rose after their dismissal? But 
he managed to do so and be of use to his republic, his people. I 
 294 
took part in many meetings, many conversations which lasted for 
hours on end, in night negotiations and discussions. That was a 
sort of Aliev’s classes. I could see that the man took pains to be 
thoroughly prepared for a conference or meeting; he himself 
checked the way the tables were arranged, who and where would 
take his seat and realized that there were no minor problems for a 
politician. I flew to Azerbaijan at Aliev’s invitation to attend his 
meetings with presidents in the period when I was no longer a 
minister. I could see how efficiently he conducted them, he did 
not run them but conducted, for all participants had equal status, 
and he acted as a conductor–that was high class, I’d say. Those 
were also the lessons of a big-time politician. 
Many people must have told you about his fantastic memory. 
I’ve never met such people ever since. Sometimes he supplied 
certain data from memory, and of course you would think that he 
had been prepared for the conference. But after the subject, was 
changed he again had a lot of factual material at his fingertips–that 
was stunning. 
 
 
About the Contract of the Century 
 
October 1996. The participants in the conference held by 
Geidar Aliev discussed the results of activities of the 
Azerbaijanian International Operating Company (AMOC) for the 
past two years, set up in connection with the implementation of 
the Contract of the Century. The records of proceedings of the 
meeting remind one of a thrilling detective story. Take for 
example, an excerpt dealing with a course of construction of 
pipelines. 
“Geidar Aliev. You’ve said that you’ll start laying the western 
pipeline next March and complete the process in late 1998. Then 
the question arises: but why so late? You must remember that in 
March of this year Mr. Shevardnadze and I concluded a contract 
for the western pipeline. Why did it take you a whole year to 
begin work? Why such delay? 
AMOC Vice-President Vane Vaults: Mr. President, we spare 
no efforts to draw up an estimate of construction works for the 
western route, to determine the cost of works to be performed. 
The section assigned for the construction of the terminal in Supsa 
is described as the world’s worst for this kind of work. The 
Georgian International Oil Corporation and John Brown 
Engineering Company are engaged in thorough technical, 
engineering and geo-technical survey of this section. We’ll gain 
 295
required precise information for sufficient confidence to star 
works and precise estimates of the required works as late as in 
March 1997. 
To make preparations for construction works and start them as 
soon as possible and as efficiently as possible, we’ve drawn up an 
interim budget of $33 million to order equipment and materials, as 
their delivery requires a long period of time. 
We can assure you that engineering works are in progress and 
will be on till the next year for the inspection of the existing 
pipelines, examination of the pipeline laying sites, design of the 
initial parts of the pipeline, survey of the sea bottom and probing 
of the opportunity to use the organic terminal as an alternative to 
the construction of a ground terminal. A contract has been 
concluded with John Brown Engineering Company for carrying 
out engineering works in the sphere of project management and of 
preparation of the project as a whole. 
Next month we are planning to hold a tender for construction 
works. I think that we’ll be able to fairly rely on our figures and 
calculations in order to present the design of construction at the 
start of next year; construction works are expected to be started in 
March 1997. 
For the project to be completed in late 1998, we will draw up a 
very stringent, intensive schedule of works, i.e., for it to be 
completed within 20 months. 
Geidar Aliev. Thank you. But anyway, I believe that there is a 
considerable delay in the construction of the western pipeline. If 
the Supsa Port is described in this way, if, as they say, it is the 
world’s worst place for such purposes, I think that a different port 
could have been chosen there, on Georgian territory. But the 
Supsa Port was chosen from the outset. They must have known 
that the port was advantageous. In general, we’ve been discussing 
the western pipeline for a year now. And now suddenly it has 
transpired that the Supsa Port is not suitable, and even other 
terminals are discussed. To tell the truth, I’m quite astonished by 
the fact.  
 
 
Other records of proceedings of business conferences held by 
the President were no less to the point and concrete. Nothing like 
general words about “the need to work better”, but a subject 
analysis of the situation whether they discussed oil derricks or the 
need to recruit local personnel… 
 296 
Here is an excerpt from Geidar Aliev’s address at the 
conference held on April 5, 1997, devoted to the development of 
the Karabakh oil field. 
– Sometimes I hear that these companies would like to bring 
their own workers here. I’m warning you against it in advance and 
issue orders to the Azerbaijan State Oil Company to keep the 
situation under control, we are against it. You know that 
Azerbaijan oilmen are skilled in their trade. There are prominent 
researchers, engineers and skilled workers in the sphere of oil in 
Azerbaijan. All this is a reality. Azerbaijan specialists, 
researchers, prospected all oil fields oil contracts have been signed 
for. Azerbaijan has been extracting oil from deep-sea layers for 
over 50 years now. Azerbaijan oilmen were engaged in oil 
production not only at home but also, for instance, in Vietnam 
where they produced oil in deep-sea. As you know, there’s a place 
called Vunchtau in the sea, in the south of Vietnam. It was 
precisely Azerbaijan oilmen who were the first to prospect and 
produce oil there. I visited Vietnam in 1983 and paid a visit to the 
place where Azerbaijan oilmen work, I saw all this there. Large 
volumes of oil are now produced there by Vietnam. 
Azerbaijan oilmen worked in the sphere of oil production in 
Kuba, Romania and India. So, Azerbaijan oilmen are certainly 
skilled specialists in the field. I’m convinced that Azerbaijan 
engineers, technicians and workers should be attracted to these 
works on a large scale. 
For instance, when I paid a visit to the Dede Gorgud drilling 
installation I could see that skilled specialists of the Azerbaijan 
Republic worked shoulder to shoulder with skilled specialists 
from Western countries. And they worked very well. That is why, 
I’d like to ask you to take this idea of mine into account in your 
future activity, in manning the construction. I entrust the 
Azerbaijan State Oil Company and its president to ensure control 
over these matters for our part. 
Our goal is to carry into effect all agreements signed by us and 
we’ll work in the same direction even after that. I’m happy that 
you are satisfied by your labor conditions. We shall even after that 
take all measures required for the provision of good conditions for 
foreign companies and specialists. 
Our cooperation with the world’s widely known oil companies 
is of long-term nature. All our agreements have been signed for a 
period of thirty years. But I hope that after the results are 
achieved, they will be extended for many more years. 
 
 297
July 3, 1997, Moscow 
 
It was to the Russian Federation that Geidar Aliev paid his first 
official visit in the capacity of President of the Azerbaijan 
Republic, for talks in the Kremlin with President of Russia Boris 
Yeltsin. Ten years before Geidar Aliev collected his documents 
and left the Kremlin. Some other person might have felt satisfied–
something like vanity: here I am! I’ve come back! I’ve avenged 
myself on the offenders… Of course Aliev wasn’t alien to simple 
human emotions; he looked with interest at the new interiors of 
the Kremlin chambers where he was received by the President of 
Russia, inquired about his health, about his wife, daughters and 
grandchildren… Yeltsin felt quite well after the heart surgery and 
even had taken steps to reshuffle the Kremlin services and the 
government, with Boris Nemtsov (his namesake and protégée) 
transferred from Nizhni Novgorod to Moscow and assigned to a 
government post. 
The reporters in their official information about the meeting of 
two presidents stressed that it was held “in a warm atmosphere of 
mutual respect”. Of course, it could be nothing but warm 
considering the fact that it had taken the President of Russia four 
years to invite his Azerbaijan colleague whom he had known since 
the time of their service in the same Politburo. He must have been 
unable to invite him earlier… 
On this occasion they had to sign a Treaty of Friendship, 
Cooperation and Mutual Security and approve some five or so 
agreements, including on prospecting, development and share 
distribution of oil output of the promising D-222 Azerbaijan block 
in the Caspian Sea…  
The national anthems of Russia and Azerbaijan were played 
under the vaults of the Kremlin St. Vladimir Hall, restored to its 
entire original splendor. Boris Yeltsin carefully read out his 
speech from a note. 
– Russia and Azerbaijan are united by their age-long history, 
rich traditions and multifarious contacts. We cannot disrupt them. 
We must do our best to promote their development. 
Geidar Aliev did not use his paper, even if he had one. 
– I cordially congratulate you, Boris Nikolayevich, and those 
present on this significant event–signing of the document of 
friendship, cooperation and mutual security between the Russian 
Federation and Azerbaijan… I am very satisfied with the fact that 
we have signed today a big package of economic documents. 
They provide a good contractual and legal basis for further 
development and deepening of our cooperation in all spheres. 
 298 
Some time later, Geidar Aliev said in reply to the journalists’ 
problem that the question of Caspian oil had also been discussed, 
“and Boris Nikolayevich and I held a broad exchange of 
opinion… Russian LUKOIL Company is a party to three contracts 
signed before by the Azerbaijan State Company with transnational 
companies, and today in the presence of the Presidents of Russia 
and Azerbaijan the fourth contract has been signed between 
LUKOIL Company and the Azerbaijan Oil Company.” 
Geidar Aliev discussed this subject also at a meeting with 
members of Russia’s financial and business circles held on July 
4. He reminded them of the first contract signed in 1994 and 
pointed out that certain circles in Russia had for some reason 
unfavorably received the news of it, although LUKOIL was a 
party to it. 
– Now LUKOIL is a party to four contacts. I’m speaking about 
it because there are talks in various circles and, regrettably, also in 
government circles that Azerbaijan is drifting away from Russia, it 
allegedly gives preference to contacts with Western companies 
and so on, and the ill-wishers of our republic seek to artificially 
generate an unhealthy atmosphere by spreading in the press and 
writing various articles to this effect, and so on. I’ll admit frankly 
that this irritates us very much, for we work jointly… 
He spoke in this way, as he himself admitted, as a friend of 
Russia. He believed that “after all meetings held yesterday and the 
day before yesterday in Moscow, all these talks, which took place 
and maybe will take place tomorrow, for there are many ill-
wishers, would be cut short by you…”. He reminded them that it 
was Azerbaijan that accounted for 70% of oil-production 
equipment delivered to Siberia, Tataria and Bashkiria, “but we 
have been cut off from these contacts, our mechanical engineering 
works are in dire straits. But that’s not the main problem, we’ll put 
things straight there. But if there is certain well-managed 
production, why not make use of it?” 
 
 
If There Is Will There Is a Way 
 
All’s well that ends well. This proverb exists in various 
versions in many languages. But how will you apply it to oil 
production? First oil gusher crowns geologists’ efforts. Next 
comes the turn of oilmen’s clever and creative work. For the 
Contract of the Century, production of early oil was the most 
significant event, which occurred three years after work was 
started to attain this goal. 
 299
…Grand celebrations were held in Baku on that day. Oil had 
been produced. According to tradition one shall smear his face 
with the priceless product. That was done with pleasure by Geidar 
Aliev, Ilkham Aliev, then the first deputy President of the State 
Oil Company of the Azerbaijan Republic (SOCAR), and by all 
guests of honor. 
The Oil Fund of hundreds of millions of dollars served as a 
visible testimony to the new strategy. The money would be spent 
on the solution of social problems, on the improvement of living 
standards of all the republic’s citizens. 
The amount of investments made in Azerbaijan far exceeded 
that made in many CIS countries. That was not only owing to the 
economic gain but also to stable climate in the republic, to the 
firmly entrenched democratic and legal principles. Foreign 
partners and specialists stressed this fact. President of AMOC 
company David Woodward pointed out: “Economic and social 
stability, ability by foreign oil companies to cooperate with the 
SOCAR and the government of Azerbaijan on the basis of 
partnership meeting the standards of international oil industry will 
further attract investments to the country.” 
The first stage in the development of the Azeri-Chirag-
Gyuneshli fields alone created 3,000 additional jobs in the 
country. 
Two new oil pipelines started operating. A major terminal was 
built in Sangachaly. 
Will in combination with a wealth of administrative experience 
and realistic approach were Geidar Aliev’s traits, which ensured 
successful implementation of the republic’s oil strategy. 
In various epochs’ philosophers, writers and politicians 
pondered on the nature of man’s will. Jack London described it as 
a kind of magic. “There is no solid wall, no matter what kind of 
stones were used to build it,” Brazilian writer Jorge Amado 
asserted, “which could block the way to man’s will and thought.” 
You could also find works by other famous thinkers on the 
desk of the President of Azerbaijan, such as Dostoyevsky, Carlyle, 
Nizami, Sartre… Who knows what idea exactly was especially 
close to the soul of the man who read them. Geidar Aliev was 
such a great book lover that he never made notes on the margins. 
He often recommended his son or daughter to read this or that 
book and drew his assistants’ attention to certain publications. For 
instance, that was the case with Repentance, written by 
Guseinbala Miralamov (who is one of the authors of this book 
about Aliev) and devoted to the Karabakh tragedy, the 
Azerbaijanians’ exodus from that land. 
 300 
Geidar Aliev could well repeat Emerson’s words: “Man alone 
can implement what seems impossible… Character means will 
train to the point of perfection.” Will is all-important for a general, 
statesman and scholar. Will was the core of the character of 
Suvorov and Zhukov, de Gaulle and Roosevelt, Korolyov and 
Mendeleyev… Clever will! And we may well agree with these 
Nekrasov’s words: 
Man’s will and work 
Amazing wonders work. 
For Azerbaijan the implementation of the Contract of the 
Century is in the nature of such amazing wonders. And not this 
alone. 
 
 
August 1, 1997, Washington 
 
On that day in the White House four contracts were signed 
between US companies Shevron, Exxon, Mobil, AMOCO and the 
Azerbaijan State Oil Company in the course of Geidar Aliev’s 
official visit to the USA. This is how the presidents of the two 
countries assessed these documents. 
Bill Clinton: “The Caspian Sea basin is a region of vital 
importance for the implementation of new oil and gas projects. 
The agreements reached these days for the operation of energy 
resources will be of benefit for future generations. By our work 
jointly with Azerbaijan in the sphere of exploitation of  
the Caspian wealth, we thereby not only contribute to 
Azerbaijan’s prosperity but also supply our country in various 
ways with energy products and consolidate our state security.” 
Geidar Aliev: “Good success has been so far gained in 
cooperation between America and Azerbaijan in the sphere of 
utilization of energy resources in the Azerbaijan sector of the  
aspian. We continue and shall continue this cooperation. Four 
contracts, signed by us today in this hall, serve as a tangible proof 
of this. We are faced with a task of laying a number of oil 
pipelines, including from Central Asia via the Caspian to the West 
for expert of energy resources to the world market, to the West. 
We will cooperate with you in this sphere on a permanent basis.” 
The documents were signed in the White House, in the room 
named after Franklin Roosevelt. US Vice-President Albert Gore 
said in this connection that America and Azerbaijan were opening 
“a dialogue on power engineering” which “reflects our serious 
attitude to our common hopes for the utilization of the Caspian 
wealth”. 
 301
Geidar Aliev: “Today here, in Washington, in the White House 
I am happy to say that it was 50 years ago that Azerbaijan’s 
oilmen started operating off-shore oil fields. At the close of the 
20th century Azerbaijan presented to the world large, rich oil 
fields of the Caspian Sea. I point out with great satisfaction that 
major oil companies of the United States of America take an 
active part in these works. We realize that the inflow of foreign 
investments to Azerbaijan, our economy’s integration in the world 
economy, in particular, the establishments of strong economic 
relations with the United States of America serve as a contribution 
to the Azerbaijan people’s bright future. 
Incidentally, these relations have a long history. Back in May 
1923 Azneft concluded a contract with an American corporation 
for oil drilling and production. In July of the same year “11 
American experts in various sectors of oil industry arrived” in 
Baku. The Bakinsky rabochy issue of July 17, 1923, carried all 
their names. A certain Clinton Longshore represented Number 7, 
and 18 drilling technicians were still on the way. 
Apart from high-level meetings, in the course of his visit 
Geidar Aliev held 75 (yes, seventy-five, no mistake) business 
talks with the heads of the leading companies, such as BP 
America and Frontera Resources, Shevron and Pennsoil, Unocal 
and Conoco, Exxon and Shell. The President’s schedule naturally 
included not only meetings with businessmen. 
In a dialogue with one of his interlocutors he pointed out that 
he had talked with congressmen, senators, Chairman of the 
International Relations Committee Gilman, speaker of the House 
of Representatives Gingrich. These negotiations are a separate 
subject, stubborn and consistent stand to uphold Azerbaijan’s 
national interests on the world scene, arguments in favor of the 
repeal of infamous Amendment 907 to the Act in Support of 
Freedom, passed by the US Congress. 
Here are some more episodes of that transoceanic trip of 
Geidar Aliev illustrating the intensive style of his work, his 
delicate and clever methods of “educating” his partners, of 
winning them over to his side. 
On July 28 a meeting was held in New York with Steve Percy, 
Ed Wyahat and Michael Townshat, representatives of BP America 
Company:  
– All conditions have been provided in Azerbaijan for carrying 
out joint works on a large scale with companies of various 
countries of the world, including the United States of America, 
and also for companies operating in the oil sector. Foreign 
investments made in our country are protected by the legislation. 
 302 
Azerbaijan is building its economy on market principles; it has 
opened its doors to the world. 
This is what Geidar Aliev said on August 2 when he met in 
Houston with Pennsoil President James Pate: 
– Pennsoil is one of the first foreign companies to arrive in 
Azerbaijan. I highly value Pennsoil’s services in the sphere of 
building a gas-compression station in our country and of boosting 
gas output in Azerbaijan. Pennsoil is a party to the Contract of the 
Century, and your company plays a leading role in the 
performance of the contract for joint development of the Karabakh 
oil field. I know that you are carrying out great work by 
representing and advocating Azerbaijan’s interests in the United 
States. 
On August 3, again in Houston, in the course of negotiations 
with Exxon President Terry Kuntz, Geidar Aliev said: 
– After signing in 1994 of the Contract of the Century, the 
distribution of what has remained was a formidable problem. As 
you remember, at that time many big companies, just like yours, 
wished to acquire the remaining part. Those companies included 
representatives of your country and of Europe, as well as our 
neighbors. You are well aware of it, and so do I–but I won’t name 
them–that’s a part of history now. 
I was also hard put then to make decision, for apart from your 
company, other quite respectable companies also wished to 
establish really good relations with us. Having pondered on the 
problem, I adopted a decision. And this decision offered the 
opportunity for Exxon to join the Contract of the Century after its 
signing. And after that I met with you on several occasions, my 
idea was for you to work on a separate oil field. I’m happy that 
this has finally happened. It’s the Nakhchyvan oil field, that’s the 
name of my native town. And this adds to the responsibility. 
– Yes, –Mr. Kuntz answered, –Exxon is proud of it. 
It should be noted that the subject of the conversation must 
have been close to the President’s heart. His words sounded like a 
declaration of love for his native land of Nakhichevan, as it is 
referred to in Russian, or Nakhchyvan as the land is called in 
Azerbaijani. 
– And another reason for my love of my native town, –Geidar 
Aliev said, –is that in 1990, when I lived in Moscow and my life 
was in danger, I was subjected to persecution, with many 
roadblocks thrown in my way, so I finally came back to 
Azerbaijan and since it was impossible for me to reside in Baku, I 
went to my native town, Nakhichevan. The years of my life there 
were very difficult, but Nakhchyvan warmly received me, and I 
 303
spared no effort to help it survive. It may well be that had I not 
returned there, the residents of that land could have been 
threatened with great danger. That is why I’m very fond of my 
native land, my native town. In the hour of trial it gave me a 
helping hand, and I value it very much… 
I expect that you will start work energetically. I know that 
Exxon is America’s leading oil company. But I don’t know 
whether you have ever signed contracts in the White House. 
– That was for the first time ever! 
– You see, –Geidar Aliev went on, –it wasn’t simply a contract 
we signed but we managed to sign it in the White House. I met 
you on several occasions in Baku and in the United States. But 
now we’ve signed this contract in the White House in the presence 
of your government leaders, with their participation, which in 
itself is a historic event, and it was you who signed this contract. 
– Our company jointly with the State Oil Company of 
Azerbaijan works on B-9 block in the Caspian. This is a promising 
deep-sea structure. It would be desirable to sign a contract for this 
structure in the near future. That would allow us and the SOCAR 
to engage in deep drilling and extract oil at great depth… No 
doubt, you will give a name to this oil field, for B-9 sounds 
meaningless. 
– Yes, this name is temporary, after the contract is signed, it 
will have another name. I’ll instruct Natig Aliev to report me 
about it. 
– We’d like to take part in the development of the Caspian 
deep-sea structures and we’ll soon submit our proposals to the 
SOCAR. I believe that deep-sea layers of the Caspian’s 
Azerbaijan Sector hold large oil stocks. Exxon’s experience and 
potential give grounds to speak about rational utilization of these 
fields jointly with the SOCAR. 
I avail myself of the opportunity to discuss one more matter 
we’ve spoken about earlier with you, Mr. President. I mean the 
operation of Caspian gas fields. At that time we announced that 
we would prepare proposals on the stocks of these gas fields and 
on the operation and transportation of “blue fuel” jointly with the 
State Oil Company of Azerbaijan. They are ready and we consider 
that our vice-president and Mr. Natig Aliev will shortly coordinate 
them on all points. We should take even more energetic steps for 
the operation of gas fields, since search for the buyer of this 
product differs from search for the buyer of oil; there is fierce 
competition in this sphere. With account of the factor of close 
location, Turkey could be the best market for Azerbaijan gas. 
Your northern neighbor, Gazprom, has concluded several 
 304 
contracts with Turkey, but Turkey is still in need of more supplies 
of this product. And if we are not to lose this market, prospecting 
should be stepped up. 
– If you are ready, I’ll instruct Natig Aliev and, after 
negotiations, you’ll prepare a final project. You are quite right. 
There is great need for gas in our region, in Turkey and other 
countries, and if you start this work efficiently, that would be 
fine… Our friendship is very reliable and I’ll consider all 
proposals. I accept all your ideas of stepping-up the process of 
preparing proposals on gas fields. 
On August 3 Geidar Aliev met with Texaco Vice-President 
Robert Black, also in Houston. 
– Texaco has been operating for 95 years and for about 80 
years it is implementing projects in various countries of the world, 
–said Robert Black. –However, our visit to Azerbaijan was made 
with great delay. Several years ago the company’s Board of 
Directors adopted a resolution on ruling out any visit to the 
Caspian region, and now I’m sorry the resolution was adopted. 
Just as many companies of the world, we are also prone to making 
mistakes. 
– He who says he never makes mistakes is mistaken, –replied 
Geidar Aliev. –One must pinpoint the mistake, admit it and 
confess that he has made a mistake. 
– The new management of the company’s board is eager to 
start cooperation in order to take part in the development of 
Azerbaijan’s oil fields on a long-term basis. 
Geidar Aliev’s reply was brief:  
– Azerbaijan has thrown its doors wide open to the world, to 
all companies, and especially to the companies of the United 
States of America. That is why you haven’t lost your opportunity. 
It’s good you’ve realized that you were mistaken. 
 
 
Legends and True Stories of Three Seas 
 
The initial section of the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan main export 
pipeline was laid on September 18, 2002. It will to be used to 
pump Azerbaijan’s “black gold” to the world market for the 
benefit of the republic. 
The pipeline laying ceremony was really unforgettable and 
highly emotional for its main participants–three presidents: Geidar 
Aliev of Azerbaijan, Ahmet Nedjdet Sezer of Turkey and Eduard 
Shevardnadze of Georgia… 
 305
Geidar Aliev: “I’d like to tell you that the opponents of the 
Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan pipeline used to say that it was an illusion, 
impossible, Azerbaijan hasn’t got, and it won’t have so much oil. 
There was a lot of talk like that… Now all of it has proved 
groundless, we’ve made it. Remember that conference called “The 
Legend of Three Seas”… I delivered an address there, saying: 
“You are talking here about a legend. But I’ll tell you that it’s 
neither illusion nor legend, the three seas… will be connected. 
And Turkey, Georgia and Azerbaijan will connect them through 
their project and constant support of this project by the United 
States of America. That is why we’ve switched from dreams to 
reality.” 
Ahmet Nedjdet Sezer: “My greetings to all those who have 
contributed to the creation of the East-West Energy Corridor with 
esteemed Aliev and esteemed Shevardnadze at the head, I 
remember with respect the former Presidents of Turkey, the late 
Turgut Ozal and esteemed Suleiman Demirel, who displayed 
political determination by their activity, by their guiding services. 
May these grand projects contribute to the further consolidation of 
friendship and brotherhood among the people of Azerbaijan, 
Georgia and Turkey, to peace and security in our region.” 
Eduard Shevardnadze: “The Project of the Century which has 
been launched today will be inherited by our grandchildren and 
great-grandchildren. I’m proud that our generation leaves them 
such worthy heritage. We’ve shown to the world that by our joint 
efforts and coordinated harmonious activity we are capable of 
working a miracle, true, a small one. I wish our joint cooperation 
could work many such miracles.” 
 
 
…The President of the Azerbaijan Republic Ilkham Aliev, 
Geidar Aliev’s son, proposed that two more volumes be added to 
the publication planned by his father. These volumes include the 
materials on Geidar Aliev’s state visits to the USA, Russia and 
other countries, negotiations held by him, shorthand reports of his 
talks and interviews. The books were published under the title 
Azerbaijan’s Oil in World Politics, suggested by Geidar Aliev in 
his time. The son is carrying on his father’s cause. 
In August 2004 the French Le Monde carried an article under 
the noteworthy title “Why Is Oil Again in the Center of 
Geopolitics?” The article was about “a new world order 
established from Africa to the Caspian region”. 
“The Caspian region is the most important in geopolitical 
respect. According to various surveys, the prospected oil stocks of 
 306 
Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan and Turkmenistan amount to about 30 
billion barrels, i.e., approximately equal to the amount of the oil 
field in the Northern Sea. 
– The construction of the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan oil pipeline 
designed for oil transportation from Azerbaijan to a Turkish port 
on the Mediterranean via Georgia is a real state of affairs behind 
clashes between Americans and Russians in the region closely 
watched by Iran, Turkey and China, –Le Monde concludes. –
Among all these countries Russia lays claims for the role adequate 
to its potential not only as an oil (it exports approximately 8 mln 
barrels of oil a day–on a par with Saudi Arabia) but also a gas 
power, as it accounts for 45% of world gas stocks as against 36% 
in the Middle East. These two factors account for President 
Vladimir Putin having restored control over the country’s energy 
policy, which had been snatched by oligarchs suspected in 
betrayal of Russia’s interests. 
Analyzing “the flare-up of prices at oil exchanges” in the 
summer of 2004, Le Monde points out that the appeal to OPEC 
and to oil-producing countries, which are not its members, to raise 
oil export quotas will hardly have a notable effect in the medium-
term perspective: 96% of the OPEC countries’ capacities are 
already operating and it would be no easy task for it to deliver 2 
million barrels more per day as is required from it. 
The new energy outburst, analysts consider, has been provoked 
by China whose demand, according to the data of the International 
Energy Agency, will grow from 5.5 mln to 11 mln barrels of oil 
per day by 2025. China alone accounts for a 40% increase in the 
world demand, with other developing Asian countries, in 
particular India, to be soon added to the list of major oil 
consumers, whereas–a sign of the changing times–Great Britain 
started importing oil in June 2004 for the first time ever in the past 
decade. 
Demand for oil is growing. Where is it to be found? 
Theoretically, Iraq, the world’s second–after Saudi Arabia–oil-
rich country according to its prospected stocks, should play a key 
role in increasing its supply. However, the unfavorable situation in 
the country serves as a formidable roadblock to it. The same is 
true of the whole Arabian-Persian zone. Consequently, new 
sources of supply should be sought. The Caspian, Le Monde 
asserts, is one of them. 
 
 307
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 11 
THE SUN RISING FROM THE SEASIDE 
 
 
July 14-15, 2001, Baku 
 
Once–it was in July 2001, at yet another meeting of President 
Geidar Aliev with the “sharks of the pen”–someone from among 
the journalists present asked if he was going to write his 
reminiscences. 
– No, –he said, –I do not write reminiscences. Though when I 
have a chance, I just recall some of the episodes. But I don’t put it 
down, no! Not that I won’t, I’ve got no time for that. 
The get-together took place in the government country 
residence, the dacha, with a rather odd name, Zagulba–odd to an 
Azeri ear anyway, as the singer Muslim Magomayev has noted. The 
word could be rending from the Russian as a place for drinking-
bouts, or “benders”. It was built back in the 1930s for the 
nomenklatura, or big shots in the Communist apparatus of power. 
But both the “new Russians” and the “new Azeris”, too, would be 
disappointed at this country dacha as much below the mark to them. 
Yet the gushing spring with its tasty, sweet water is certainly an 
attraction. Perhaps the bender-bent folks were fixing themselves up 
with its invigorating water after their benders over there? 
– This is an old house, –Azerbaijan’s President told his guests, 
the moguls of Russia’s biggest mass media. –It in no way answers 
today’s needs. It’s just in my makeup, you know: once I get used 
to something, I can’t wean myself from it. But if I come here at 
all, it is mostly in summer, I stay in town for the most part. My 
children have grown up here. It’s a memorable place to us. 
Working with their elbows and rushing ahead, the journalists 
jostled their way in the footsteps of the hospitable host, they 
clicked their cameras and changed cassettes in their dictating 
machines, seeking not to miss a word of this sudden confession. 
– You’ve asked that we meet in an informal atmosphere, –
Geidar Alievich Aliev said. –Here we are, you are welcome! Now 
look. You’ve been driving down the road, which is much like an 
alley. We planted these trees in the seventies when building the 
 308 
road. We nursed and fostered each sapling. Baku, you know, had 
no greenery in the past. Gorky spoke about that. 
– A city without a patch of greenery... A master picture of a 
dark hell en earth... A Moscow reporter showed he was conversant 
with the work of the classic of proletarian literature, Maxim 
Gorky. 
–...And Mayakovsky did, too, –Aliev went on matter-of-factly. 
–Unlike it is in Russia, trees grow hard here. You’ve got to rear, 
water them. To raise a good tree you should water it for five or six 
years until it takes root. 
A motley boisterous crowd glanced around: they couldn’t 
believe such paradise could grow up on a barren patch of land like 
that. 
– Yes, I do say we planted the trees as we were arranging this 
place, putting it in order. These pomegranate trees I’ve planted 
myself. Our people are fond of pomegranate fruit... 
Sitting to a table creaking with fruits, Azeri dainties and 
obligatory teapots, the guests talked things over–the status of the 
Caspian, an attitude towards the press in the republic, Aliev’s 
comeback to big politics and Nagorny Karabakh, of course… 
Geidar Alievich recalled the year 1971. Soviet Literature Days 
in Azerbaijan. Foremost writers came to our republic from all over 
the Soviet Union, among them the famous Marietta Shaginyan. 
– I had never met her before, –President Aliev said. –But I had 
read her works, sure. It was her first visit to Azerbaijan in twenty-
five years or so, she was eager to look around, without official 
hustle and bustle. She asked and I agreed to have her about as my 
guest. She stayed as my guest for about twenty days. 
I told her: Please, go to districts populated by Armenians. 
There were many Armenians in Baku, of course, and she 
communicated with them. But I asked her to go to Nagorny 
Karabakh. She did–she went to Gandzha, too, and other districts 
of Azerbaijan. My wife also showed interest for literature and the 
arts. Somehow she forged good contacts with Marietta 
Sergeyevna from the first. One Sunday we invited her to our 
place. We spent all of this Sunday together; it was towards the end 
of her stay here. She presented her book to me and said, “You 
know, I have met all Armenians here, and I told them they were 
living here better than anywhere else.” I still remember here 
phrase: “Armenians in Azerbaijan are rolling like cheese in butter, 
they are in clover.” And she told me, too, –Aliev recalled about 
his meeting with Marietta Shaginyan, –that she came here from 
Yerevan where she had spent a week. She said many cultural and 
scientific workers had come to see her with а petition signed by 
 309
about a hundred prominent personalities and addressed to the 
Soviet Union’s leaders with the request to join Nagorny Karabakh 
to Armenia. She heard them out and said they were just silly. She 
said she would never sign that, and advised them to drop the 
matter as a bad job. Marietta Shaginyan was an important person. 
What I mean is that this issue was galvanized time and again. 
But the Soviet leadership had it under control. However, as it 
came up again in 1988, the Soviet leader, far from taking proper 
steps toward a settlement, stirred up trouble… 
The Azerbaijan President spoke again of the tragedy that divided 
the two peoples. Karabakh was his pain and anguish; he touched on 
this burning wound when speaking to most different audiences so as 
to articulate his stand. Aliev was certain: “If Gorbachyov and his 
entourage had taken a correct stand in 1988, this conflict would not 
have escalated like that, there would not have been so many losses, 
and both Armenia and Azerbaijan would not have been in such 
hostile relations as today”(from Geidar Aliev’s address to his 
countrymen in Moscow on June 22, 2000). 
 
 
He Bequeathed Friendship with Russia to Azerbaijan 
 
Meanwhile in 1922 the Minsk Group of the OSCE, 
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, got 
involved with the Karabakh conflict. In 1997 this group had three 
cochairmen representing Russia, the United States and France. 
The diplomats of these countries worked out proposals, which 
Azerbaijan accepted. 
And now Geidar Aliev explained to his guests what it was all 
about. Nagorny Karabakh was to be granted a high status of self-
government within Azerbaijan. Incidentally, by the close of 1997 
Armenia’s President Ter-Petrosyan had at long last come to the 
idea there could be no better way out of the deadlock. He made it 
clear he was supporting the proposal whereby the Armenian 
forces were to pull out of the seven districts they had occupied 
around Nagorny Karabakh. Negotiations on the status of Nagorny 
Karabakh were to come next... But someone spiked his guns, and 
in February 1998 he resigned… 
According to such an authority as Yevgeny Primakov, Aliev 
was on the point of coming to terms on the Armenian-
Azerbaijanian conflict. 
– I am quite positive about that. Death stopped him.  
Yevgeny Maximovich Primakov was directly involved in the 
settlement project, and so it makes sense to relate his point of view. 
 310 
– The recognition by Armenia and Nagorny Karabakh of the 
territorial integrity of Azerbaijan and inviolability of its state 
borders was linked to self-determination of Nagorny Karabakh’s 
population within Azerbaijan as a state entity enjoying the highest 
decree of self-government. Both sides were to make practical 
moves... 
Baku agreed to table these proposals to Boris Nikolayevich 
Pastukhov, First Deputy Foreign Minister of Russia at the time. 
– I asked to meet Aliev face to face, –Pastukhov recalls. –And 
I could see him at first hand, a man of fantastic memory, opening 
his note pad–frayed somewhat–and getting down what I was 
saying. That was an oral message of Russia’s President. “This is 
interesting, –Aliev said, –much interesting.” 
Aliev, in Pastukhov’s opinion, was all set to solve the 
Karabakh problem. It would be harder to do that later, he said. 
– Then Armenia recreated, too, –Boris Pastukhov continued, –
though it was Azerbaijan that made the main concessions. 
The two men quite a few times. What was Pastukhov’s chief 
impression of these meetings and talks? 
– Well, my chief impression… No doubt, Geidar Alievich 
Aliev is one of the brightest political personalities of the Soviet 
and post-Soviet times. He managed to keep peace in his land. He 
managed to avoid an economic collapse as it happened in Georgia. 
Step by step he built good-neighborly relations with Russia and 
supported our stand on the Chechen issue. He was upright with 
regard to Russia and acted on all his commitments. There is no 
other state in the CIS, with the exception of Belarus perhaps, 
where the Russian language enjoyed as broad rights as it does in 
Azerbaijan. You know where he is great? He bequeathed 
friendship with Russia to his son and his country. Like any other 
state Azerbaijan looks out for vantage points... This is but natural. 
I talked with him many times. We discussed different problems–
like the Caspian for instance. It was tough bargaining, wasn’t it! 
He accepted our formula, but when we stayed vis-à-vis, he said, “I 
shall tackle this problem instantly, but you guarantee on Nagorny 
Karabakh this and that...” This is quite normal from a political 
standpoint.  
– Zounds! –Pastukhov exploded (his pet oath since his young 
days). –Yes, you’ve got to heed the interests of another side. 
Yeah, a balance of interests... That’s the way to make politics. 
Geidar Alievich was a first-class policy-maker. A man of singular 
courage. He knew of his sickly heart, but he didn’t spare himself. 
He overcame himself by sheer will power and did the job. A 
worthy life it was… 
 311
Yevgeny Maximovich Primakov adds to what his old comrade 
and like-minded friend had to say: 
– Geidar Alievich was a born talent. He grew up as part of the 
Soviet system, it’s a fact. But he checked out as soon as he felt 
where we were heading. His son, Ilkham Geidarovich Aliev, 
inherited his talents. Like his father before him President Ilkham 
Aliev does not use notes in speech making. He’s pithy, clever. 
Geidar Aliev was always ready for a dialogue and 
compromise. But up to a definite limit. He never overstepped a 
borderline where the national interests of Azerbaijan were at risk. 
He never ceded it, be it to Moscow, Washington or Tehran. “True, 
someone may try and take a stiff stand on Azerbaijan. But we are 
an independent state, and one cannot play tough to us” (from his 
replies at a news conference on August 9, 1996, during his visit to 
the Russian Federation). 
On April 10, 1998, Geidar Aliev received Ivan Rybkin, then 
acting government head of the Russian Federation. They 
negotiated such issues as CIS, Russian-Azerbaijan relations, 
among other things. President Aliev recalled that on March 12 he 
had sent a detailed letter to Boris Nikolayevich Yeltsin concerning 
Russian arms deliveries to Armenia. 
– But today we are already in the tenth of April, and there is no 
reply yet. By the way, this is not the first instance when we send a 
letter to the leadership of the Russian Federation and get no reply. 
But we are an independent, equal state. Say, some time ago a 
[Soviet] republic could dispatch a letter to Moscow, to CC CPSU 
and get no answer. The situation is different now, see. 
– The answers came in time in those days, –Rybkin remarked. 
– Sometimes they didn’t. But even if we got replies, we should 
get them all the more so now. It’s a matter of principle to us. 
One of the first orders of President Aliev back in 1993 dealt 
with the reopening of the reception room for citizens. Up until the 
late 1980s it had been open in the 4th entrance of the building of 
the Central Committee of Azerbaijan’s Communist Party, but 
afterwards the doorway was nailed up. 
The reception room was reopened in October 1993, with 
visitors received by receptionists, state officials and presidential 
aides. The schedule and reception hours were published in the 
press beforehand. These regulations are still in force. 
Many letters were addressed to President Aliev personally. His 
resolutions were now extensive, now brief–sometimes with only 
one word in: “Bakhin” (“Consider”). 
Once a group of Baku residents complained about Seaside 
Boulevard being in poor shape. President Aliev instructed the city 
 312 
authorities to put it in proper trim. But he went beyond that by 
according the famous boulevard, dear to many generations of 
Bakinians, a national park status. The President also acted on 
letters about the malpractices at the Azryba Fishing Company. Its 
chiefs were taken to task after the facts of such malpractices had 
been confirmed. 
Surkhai Askerov, a fine, subtle performer of the Azeri mugam, 
is a big name in our musical world. At the very start of his career 
in music the gifted ninth-grader of the Baku School of Arts got 
support from Azerbaijan’s President. Upon reading a letter sent by 
the boy’s father, President Aliev ordered a good material 
allowance for Surkhai. 
There are plenty of facts like that. But here’s what is of special 
importance. In 1995 our people were discussing the draft of a new 
Constitution, which came to be adopted on December 12th of the 
same year. One of its articles, namely Article 57, proclaims the 
right of citizens, personally or collectively, to appeal to bodies of 
government. They can do it by word of mouth or in the written 
form. Undeniably the right of citizens to turn to government 
bodies with suggestions, applications and complaints is an 
essential part of human rights in action. And, what is also 
important, a written reply should be given to each appeal and 
application. The Constitution’s clauses, including those of Article 
57, had a follow-up in other legislative enactments. Incidentally, 
Geidar Aliev suggested the provision about the people’s right to 
apply to bodies of government. 
Accordingly, on June 10, 1997, the highest legislature 
endorsed the Law of the Azerbaijanian Republic “On the Practical 
Procedures of Handling Appeals from Citizens”. This law as well 
as several presidential decrees and instructions laid a groundwork 
for legal rules and standards: the President specified deadlines for 
examining letters, responsibility of officials for violations of the 
procedures, and defined regulations for reception of private 
citizens. Deadlines were cut to 15 days in accordance with the 
legislation for considering letters from army servicemen, 
participants in the Karabakh War and their family members. 
 
 
September 21, 1999, Baku 
 
The capital of Azerbaijan marks the fifth anniversary of the 
Contract of the Century. Many foreign guests have come to attend 
the festive ceremony. Russia has sent a small delegation headed 
by Viktor Kalyuzhny, Fuel and Power Industry Minister. At his 
 313
meeting with Geidar Alievich Aliev he recalls with pleasure about 
his Baku roots: “My grandfather and grandmother are buried here, 
my parents have lived here, and my sister was born here in 1938... 
We lived in the Stepan Razin settlement at Neftechal. Later on, 
with the outbreak of the war, as the “Second Baku” oil-mining 
district came to be developed in the Urals, my father, the oilman, 
went there, and I was born in the Urals. But historical roots have a 
hard pull. It’s a pleasure to be here.” 
But that was a lyrical digression as they say. Then the talk 
turned to substantive matters of oil transportation routes, problems 
of the Caspian and North Caucasus... 
“A quiet situation in the North Caucasus means a reliable link 
with Russia for us, says Aliev. –And what is a reliable link with 
Russia now? These are transport and other communications. This is 
trade, this is barter, and this is a possibility of free movement for 
people. 
...Daghestan is our next-door neighbor. We have always been 
interested in a quiet situation in Daghestan... Back in 1997–I have 
to recount these facts in the presence of the press today not to 
allow anybody to distort our stand–when I was on an official visit 
to Moscow and met President Boris Nikolayevich Yeltsin, I told 
him (and that was in the presence of our delegation) that the 
situation in Daghestan is grave and is further aggravated, please 
turn your attention to that.” 
And what was Yeltsin’s reply? Well, he said, we know, and we 
see about it. 
But how? A man who was the worthy target of sharp criticism 
in the world press. “For all our respect, a comparison with a living 
corpse invites itself,” – newspaper Reinisché Merkur, wrote about 
Yeltsin in August 1999. –He is revamped from time to time so as 
to ensure a survival of the Yeltsin system. As one does not 
manage to keep Lenin as a piece of visual agitation forever, so 
Yeltsin will not be able to outwit time even, if all timepieces in 
Russia were stopped.” 
“...Today I must say–no matter how unpleasant to anyone–that 
the Russian leadership has not taken necessary measures to make 
Daghestan secure. It has not! I have every reason to say that 
because I know the situation there... 
I regularly meet Daghestan representatives. And they tell me: 
one comes and meets this or that person, and he says everything is 
alright, and so forth. One of Russia’s most high-ranking officials 
had come to Daghestan long before these events started rolling, 
and he said, you know, the Wahhabis are very progressive people 
and that we should cooperate with them. Such statements are 
 314 
known in Daghestan, and they have reached us, too. You see, an 
inconsistent stand like that on the part of all the various services of 
the Russian Federation is the chief cause of the situation in which 
Daghestan finds itself now… The Russian leadership knew all that 
perfectly well. Why didn’t it take measures and permitted such a 
situation? We suffer from that. As neighbors and as partners we 
ought to speak openly about that...” 
Geidar Aliev was tactful and did not name one of “the most 
high-ranking officials”. He was Sergei Stepashin, head of the FSS 
(Federal Security Service), and prime minister from May to 
August 1999 (he held this post for 82 days, the record short time 
in the history of Russian governments). At Yeltsin’s orders he 
flew to Daghestan on the eighth of August as Shamil Basaev’s 
militants broke in. The Second Chechen War was underway. 
Yeltsin dismissed Stepashin on the ninth of August, appointing 
is his stead Putin, the third premier in just one year. 
“Russia is living through one of the most difficult periods in 
her history of many centuries. I think that for the first time in these 
last 200 or 300 years she faces a real danger of finding herself in 
the second or even in the third echelon of the world’ states. The 
nation has to tax to the limit all of its intellectual, material and 
moral potential not to let that happen.” 
Such were the closing words of Vladimir Putin’s policy article 
“Russia at the Turn of Two Centuries”. It was published a few 
days before Yeltsin’s resignation on the Cabinet of Minister site in 
Internet and then reprinted in the press. On the thirty-first of 
December 1999 Boris Yeltsin, in the presence of Patriarch Alexiy 
II (the Most Holy, it is said, did not know why he was urgently 
invited to the Kremlin) handed to Vladimir Putin the symbols of 
presidential power and the Parker pen. It is with this pen that he 
had been signing his ukases, including the very last one–on his 
own resignation. 
 
 
Thy Son Forever 
 
Political chronicles of the day also keep rather tough 
statements made by Geidar Aliev during his conversation with 
Viktor Kalyuzhny. And many other statements as well, which are 
eloquent examples of his readiness to arrive at mutually 
acceptable decisions, to make even certain concessions and 
consider other opinions. 
Yevgeny Maximovich Primakov recalls a truly remarkable 
episode. 
 315
– As I was Russia’s Minister for Foreign Affairs, –he says, –
the International Red Cross asked me to arrange an exchange of 
war prisoners between Azerbaijan and Armenia. Total exchange–
all for all. The Red Cross listed over one hundred prisoners of war 
in Azerbaijan. 
At first we flew to Baku. “Geidar Alievich, –says I, –I would 
like to take with me the war prisoners in keeping with this list.” 
He studied the list. –“All right, I will let everybody go except 
these three. They are in the death cell. Accused of killings.” –“But 
if you don’t let them go, I will not be able to make an exchange. 
The other side might cavil at that.” We kept silent for a while. 
And then he said: “Good, take everyone.” 
Primakov and Pastukhov, First Deputy Foreign Minister, arrive 
at the airport and learn that one prisoner has not been brought in. 
Geidar Alievich is there to see the Moscow visitors off. All the 
prisoners but one are aboard Primakov’s liner Il-62–that one is 
detained in spite of the President’s instructions. The airliner is still 
grounded. Aliev reiterates his decision. Well-drilled waiters in the 
VIP hall offer a third or fourth cup of tea to the guests. At last the 
last in the list is led in. 
Aliev assigned Deputy Minister of Justice Chinghiz Amirov to 
accompany the war prisoners to Yerevan where he was hand them 
over according to the list. He was to stay on in Yerevan and await 
Primakov’s return from Stepanakert. Yevgeny Maximovich, on 
seeing Amirov on the anxious seat, asked Russian diplomats to 
take him into the Russian embassy in Yerevan. “Look, not one 
hair should drop from his head.” The Armenian representatives 
felt sore; they said they would receive their colleagues properly. 
– All that was being done whole-heartedly, we felt, –Yevgeny 
Primakov stresses. –On our return journey to Baku the Deputy 
Minister was in a cheerful mood. We even took a shot of vodka 
aboard the plane, though, as he said, he had never taken vodka 
before. And I was grieved to learn that several months later this 
likable and kind man died. 
Yet another participant in that charity mission, Boris 
Nikolayevich Pastukhov, adds to Primakov’s testimony: 
– In Stepanakert, too, they didn’t want to hand over three men 
from among those included in the Red Cross lists. The pretext: 
“They know about the disposition of our air defenses.” A rerun of 
what happened in Baku. We shall not fly away, we said, until we 
get everyone. And we got them in the end. More than two hundred 
returned to their families. 
– Many of those people had a frightful look–hungry, in rags, 
beaten up, –Primakov recalls. –My eyes were in tears which I 
 316 
could not keep back as, getting into the plane’s passenger 
compartment, I heard them shouting: “Thank you, Russia!” There 
were a few Russian lads among the prisoners of war, –Primakov 
adds in an afterthought. –We turned them over to our embassies in 
Yerevan and Baku right away with instructions to buy air tickets 
and send them home, to Russia, immediately... 
...Primakov and Pastukhov happened to attend one of the last 
birthday parties of Geidar Aliev’s. It was a big family reunion. 
– ...And there I could see what Aliev was like, dad and 
granddad, –Pastukhov recalls. –In a way, he turned quite different, 
though it was the same man. He irradiated warmth all over. These 
several hours I enjoyed within Aliev’s family stay on in my mind 
as one of my sunniest days... 
Still in his childhood Pastukhov developed a passion for 
poetry, he recites readily his favorite verses. In this regard he is 
like Aliev. One day, while in the reception hall of Azerbaijan’s 
President, he glanced over the bookshelves. 
– I look and see: Samed Vurgun, different editions, in Russian, 
too. I took a collection of his poetry and asked Geidar Alievich to 
sign it, or else they wouldn’t let me out.  
He put his signature and asked: 
– But, why did you get interested in Samed Vurgun? 
– I know how Konstantin Simonov valued him. Wonderful 
lyric poems... “It may hap that a Bolshevik to London hurry 
must... –And further on: –Just say a few words to them, Samed, 
and spoil their devilish repast!” 
Aliev roared with laughter. 
– I thought Vurgun to be a “heavy metal” poet toeing the party 
line, –Pastukhov confided. –The Revolution, October, Mayday... 
– Perhaps they translated only that, and poorly, too. There was 
no room for Vurgun in the Pasternak vein. He has superb lyric 
verses. Now listen... –And Aliev recited several poems, one after 
the other, in Azerbaijani. –You feel the music? And what about 
his verses on Azerbaijan? 
 
Can one steal the soul from the heart? Never!  
Thou art my breath, my bread and water! 
Thy towns lie open before me. 
I’m thine all over, forever thy son, 
Azerbaijan, Azerbaijan! 
 
(Translated, from Azerbaijan into Russian by A. Adalis; 
From Russian into English by I. Kochubey) 
 
 317
– I recall the resounding impact of these lines on October 18, 
1998, –Pastukhov responded softly. 
Two momentous events concurred then–State Independence 
Day and Inauguration of the Azerbaijan President. Geidar Aliev 
took the oath and was sworn into office. Thereafter he made an 
inaugural address–without any notes, as usual–which staggered 
the audience by its in-depth, east-iron analysis of the situation 
within Azerbaijan and Caucasia in general, and of Azerbaijan-
Russia relations. For nearly an hour and a half the huge hall 
listened with bated breathe to a man who had turned seventy-five, 
though no one noticed his age. 
Attending the inauguration ceremony were many state 
personalities from the CIS, the Middle and Near East and Europe. 
“That was a tribute to the great prestige, which Geidar Aliev 
enjoyed the world over, –Alexander Sergeevich Dzasokhov, North 
Ossetia’s President, noted. –I must point in particular to his 
popularity in the Islamic world and in the Arab countries, where 
he is honored as one of the most experienced political 
personalities of the world scale.” 
A grand reception with congratulations and speeches of foreign 
guests followed the inauguration ceremony. 
– As they say, one cannot enter the same river twice, –were the 
opening words of Alexander Dzasokhov’s speech. –But Geidar 
Alievich has done it twice. We are happy that the Azerbaijanian 
people has a leader like him... Relations among political 
personalities are part of relations among common people. A strong 
and courageous man, Geidar Alievich was hurt as a human being; 
but like the famous Hellenic hero, Antaeus, he returned to his 
native land, and he touched it. He regained strength and captained 
his people. 
Speaking at the reception, Geidar Aliev brimmed with 
emotions. He recited the lines of the great Samed Vurgun: 
 
I’m thine all over, forever thy son,  
Azerbaijan, Azerbaijan! 
 
...“Though when I have a chance, I just recall some of the 
episodes”, –That’s how, if you remember, Geidar Aliev answered 
the question whether he aimed to get down to writing his 
reminiscences. Such episodes are but facts without which there 
will be no history. 
...A big durbar in Moscow. The speaker perorating on 
dissidents. “But we have no dissidents,” –Aliev whispers to his 
neighbor, the writer Anar. 
 318 
... Few people could hear Geidar Alievich telling jokes and his 
infectious laughter at a good joke. Here’s one he heard in 
Armenia. 
“They asked an Armenian: 
– Who is Karl Marx? 
– An economist. 
– Like our Aikanush? 
– You bet! Aikanush–she is the chief economist!” 
...On December 1999, Geidar Aliev received a group of 
Russian journalists. As their meeting was coming to a close, 
Secretary of the Journalists’ Union Gennady Maltsev asked the 
President to autograph the book of his (Aliev’s) aphorisms. 
“Where shall I sign?” –Aliev asked. –Let me do it here... 
Today we stick to Azerbaijani everywhere, but my signature is an 
old one, Russian.” 
When did he sign like that for the first time? In his college 
days or perhaps when working in the Narkomat (Ministry) of the 
Interior? Who knows? At any rate, his signature with a long 
flourish at the end followed him all his life long. Meanwhile Aliev 
confided that he had not known Russian up until he turned 15 or 
16. We could hear other opinions on this score. It depends. 
Probably many proceed from their own command of Russian, how 
fluent they are. Aliev learned Russian at school and college, and 
brushed up on his knowledge in independent private studies. So 
thinking back, he meant a perfect command of an alien tongue as 
one’s mother tongue–not the half knowledge of “Pidgin Russian” 
that one can use when talking to native Russians in the street. 
 
 
The late 1980s and early 1990s saw an exodus of the Russian 
and Russian-speaking population from Azerbaijan. 
Azerbaijanians, graduates from Russian colleges and universities, 
tucked away their diplomas, too–their learning was no longer 
needed in their native land. As the Popular (?!) Front took over, 
the steamroller of a “cultural revolution” ravaged Azerbaijan (may 
we use the notion born in China in the 1960s under Mao Dze 
Dong). The self-styled Azeri Hongweibings (“Red Guards”) went 
loose chasing professors and academy members and opening 
“universities” of their own. The world famous Oil Academy in 
Baku could begin its academic year in 1992 only in December 
(instead of September). 
This is how Geidar Aliev reminisced about those years:  
“...Do take me right–this is not self-advertising. But with my 
return to leadership in Azerbaijan many Russians came back... –
 319
And he continued: –Mutual relations between Russia and 
Azerbaijan are of great importance to us... Let me tell you that 
Azerbaijan takes a firm stand in furthering and tightening friendly 
relations with Russia.” 
 
 
January 9, 2001, Baku 
 
That day, standing at the ramp of the airliner Rossiya in Baku’s 
Bina Airport, Geidar Alievich Aliev welcomed Russia’s President 
Vladimir Vladimirovich Putin on an official visit to Azerbaijan. 
Flags, posters, anthems, children in national dresses, guard of honor 
and a report of its commander... As it belongs to an official visit. 
It was the first official visit of the Russian President to 
Azerbaijan in the post-Soviet years, and Putin’s first visit abroad 
in the year 2001 that ushered in a new century and a new 
millennium. Unlike his predecessor who in those ten years had no 
condescended to honor Azerbaijan with a visit, Vladimir Putin 
demonstrated his sincere readiness for furthering good neighborly 
relations with the independent Republic of Azerbaijan. Aliev 
would not conceal his bitterness over the pattern of two-way 
relationship in the recent past, and he spoke bluntly at the talks of 
the Russian and Azerbaijan delegations: 
– This is the first day of the official visit of the President of the 
Russian Federation to Azerbaijan, and I welcome you heartily, 
Vladimir Vladimirovich, in connection with this visit. I wish to 
express my deep gratitude for your accepting my invitation and 
arriving in Azerbaijan on an official visit. 
It would not be much to say that this visit is of historic 
significance given the fact that since Azerbaijan’s gaining its state 
independence... the Russian Federation’s head has never visited 
Azerbaijan. There might have been certain reasons for that, of 
course; be that as it may, it is an important factor to us, and 
therefore we wanted very much for this visit to take place. And 
this visit is realized by Vladimir Vladimirovich Putin whom we 
came to know fairly well during our joint work within the CIS, at 
the Council of the CIS Heads of State and at our bilateral 
meetings; we came closer together and found very good mutual 
understanding on all issues. 
The range of topics discussed was large: economic ties, the 
status of the Caspian, Karabakh, terrorism and organized crime. 
Russia’s President felt duty bound to thank Geidar Alievich Aliev 
and all Azerbaijan leaders for the extradition of persons 
implicated in the explosion of residential houses in Daghestan... 
 320 
“We know, –he noted, –that after the extradition of the criminals 
to Russia there came threats of terrorist acts to be committed 
against you personally. But you were not scared, you showed 
courage and temper.” 
The Russian President offered special thinks to Geidar Aliev 
for his regard for the Russian language: 
– As far as I know, working in Baku are actually all schools of 
the Soviet times, and the base for the development of the Russian 
language has been preserved. This goes to show once again that 
our cooperation is indeed–the way the Azerbaijan leaders see it–
targeted at the future. 
Geidar Aliev: “Not only schools but also college departments 
working.” 
Vladimir Putin: “That is the sphere of application of the 
Russian language does not shrink. This shows indeed that we have 
a good base for further progress in our relations. We count on 
culture and art to continue as a consolidating link of our 
relations.” 
A group of regional leaders–of Daghestan, Astrakhan and 
North Ossetia–came with President Putin to Azerbaijan.  
Vladimir Putin: “In our view, cooperation of the Russian 
Federation’s and Azerbaijan’s regions is an important area of our 
interaction...” 
Geidar Aliev: “Your idea about cooperation of the regions is 
likewise of exceptional significance. May I recall history: the 
desire of the Russian Federation’s regions and of Azerbaijan for 
economic cooperation emerged several years ago. I must say, 
however, that when some of the members of the //Russian// 
Federation close to Azerbaijan displayed initiative toward such 
cooperation and we lent our support for that, Russia’s central 
government reacted painfully and even objected to that.” 
Vladimir Putin: “Geidar Alievich, we have this disease behind 
us...” 
Geidar Aliev: I emphasize it because now you offer this. 
Guzhvin (governor of the Astrakhan Region at the time, died in 
2004.–Auth.) is here, and he remembers that when we invited him, 
he arrived here. We were getting ready an agreement as came 
inquiries from Moscow–now why this has happened, the matter has 
not been cleared with so-and-so, and the like. But all that 
notwithstanding, we reaffirm our readiness. The same applies to 
Daghestan and other members of the Russian Federation. Your 
opinion fully dovetails with ours because Russia is a huge country, 
and some members of the Federation, including those near us, may 
be even equal to Azerbaijan in the economic potential.” 
 321
At a joint news conference of the two presidents held after the 
negotiations, Vladimir Putin said this in part: 
– The very fact that in the course of these last ten years the 
Russian head of state has not been to the Azerbaijan land now 
appears as an immense minus sign in the development of bilateral 
relations. And this means in the development of regional 
cooperation in the Caucasus... 
Nine of these ten years were in the Yeltsin epoch. 
Before leaving for Baku, Vladimir Putin had prepared an 
unusual and pretty precious gift for the Azerbaijan President. And 
he handed it over while meeting students of Slav University in 
Baku. 
– Geidar Alievich spent a considerable stretch of time in my 
home city Petersburg/Leningrad, –the Russian President said. –
While being there he finished a special school... I asked my 
colleagues to delve into the archives. Here is the graduation 
certificate issued by the special school. It says: “Certificate of 
Senior Lieutenant Geidar Aliev. May 16, 1949.” And here are the 
grades. I shall not read out everything, but cite some of the results. 
Dialectical and historical materialism–excellent, chekist training–
excellent, economic and political geography of the USSR and 
foreign countries–excellent, criminal law–excellent, literature–
credit, military training–credit, Russian language–excellent. And 
there are no other grades here, just top marks… If all students of 
your university performed just as well as did Azerbaijan’s President 
in his time, the country’s prosperity will be in reliable hands… 
Two years upon his gradation from the Special (State Security) 
School in Leningrad Geidar Aliev got enrolled in the Department of 
History at Azerbaijan University. Because of his service duties 
Aliev had to complete the university course extramurally, by 
correspondence, for he had to make haste and catch up on the years 
stolen by the war. His graduation diploma of a historian got an A. 
 
 
As President of the International Monetary Fund Monsieur 
Michel Camdessus and his wife were visiting Baku, President 
Geidar Aliev received them. He presented a small Azerbaijan rug 
to Madam Camdessus. 
– May it remind you of our land? 
– Monsieur Aliev, –Madame Camdessus thanked, –you are a 
mind reader indeed: that’s the design and color gamut I love. 
Her high-placed husband added: 
– Somehow I feel scary to stay on here. Mr. President reads 
my wife’s thoughts. –And he smiled: –We’d better leave sooner. 
 322 
Their friendly talk drifted back to the years of Aliev’s work in 
Moscow, at the USSR Council of Ministers and at the Communist 
Party’s presiding body, Politburo. Aliev said he occupied the 
Kremlin office where Vyacheslav Molotov, one of Stalin’s closest 
associates, had been working for many years (in 1930 to 1941 
Molotov headed the Soviet Government, then became Stalin’s 
First Deputy as Premier and Foreign Minister). M. Camdessus, not 
at all indifferent to history, showed an interest in Vyacheslav 
Mikhailovich Molotov as a person. He felt that this political figure 
opposed to Nikita Khrushchev was wronged. Aliev explained his 
stand and described some of the scenes of Politburo’s sittings. 
M. Camdessus listened intently and wondered: “How can you 
remember all that?” 
Many other people, too, wondered at Aliev’s astounding 
memory. A truly remarkable observation from Fatima 
Abdullazadeh. 
– Well, one can learn and remember lots of things. Geidar 
Alievich, however, could draw out information at the most 
appropriate moment. For instance, visiting some village, he might 
see a person whom he had met fifteen or twenty years before, and 
call him or her by name. “Remember, Vagif, you had a collective 
farm chairman so-and-so, and there was a good crop, and you 
complained about the harvesting being messy?” 
– Aliev did not play for the public, –Fatima-khanum says. –He 
must have been proud of his memory, that’s understandable. He 
was like a bogatyr, a Hercules, who would show his muscle. His 
brain was akin to a supercomputer not manufactured yet. 
Geidar Aliev could recall a chance encounter in some out-of-
the-way village or oil fields elsewhere when meeting writers or at 
a big party conference. He could recall his conversation with an 
oil-drilling technician, shepherd, with men and women usually 
called common people but who have outgrown in their political 
vision those who look down on them as “goofs”. 
But here’s what Geidar Alievich himself said about his 
phenomenal memory: 
“You know, I never write any speech, any report of mine 
beforehand. What I have in my memory it is there. But if I need 
reference materials and figures, I just call for them and I get them... 
My memory is good, Thank God, and so I can remember a lot. 
Neither in the Soviet times did I use texts when speaking–in 
my home republic anyway. Once I tried the same thing in Moscow 
and spoke right off the bat, but they told me not to do that 
anymore. What, trying to be clever while everybody using notes? 
Each man has his habits, and mine are of long ago... If you know 
 323
your job and do it every day, this sinks into your memory and 
molds thoughts. They take body and form not in one single day, 
not on the spur of the moment when you have speak somewhere. 
They take form step by step, gradually; they sink in and come up, 
when necessary. That’s what I think” (from a conversation with 
Russian journalists on December 25, 1999). 
 
 
“I Know Well All Streets in Baku” 
 
...June 2000, the sweltering days of the Bakinian summer. 
Azerbaijan is the venue of Russia’s Culture Days. World-famous 
performers are in. All of them deeply moved by the sincerely 
warm welcome accorded to them, amazed at the changes that have 
occurred in Baku, Sumgait, and Nakhichevan... 
– I, for one, am surprised at all these changes of late, –Geidar 
Aliev said in those days. –I’m not a stranger to Baku. Since my 
young days I’ve been here when I went to school at sixteen. Now, 
what does a student do? Re learns and goes about streets looking 
around. All the more so as I was a boy who came from the 
backwoods? Therefore everything looked interesting to me. 
Somewhat later, when I grew up (a young man not married yet!), I 
still would walk around and glance, at pretty girls, too. So I know 
well all these streets... 
Geidar Alievich showed his guests about Baku–its hilly part, 
the oldest, with its fortress Icheri-shekhar put up in the Middle 
Ages; he took them up and down Seaside Boulevard which back 
in the 40s “still had a pier and bathing-places, too, where all 
townspeople took dips...” 
Geidar Aliev looked at Baku with the eyes of an artist, 
architect and builder. 
He compared Apsheron Peninsula on the map to an eagle’s 
beak cutting deep into the sea. Apsheron is the eagle’s head; and 
extending the simile, we might say that Baku is the eagle’s orb. 
Cutting across the heights in Baku’s northwest is a mountain 
neck, the only passage to the sough, seawards, and to the north, 
inland. These heights are a natural rampart of Baku, Allah’s gift. 
The Wolf’s Track of old, today this pass is known as Wolf’s Gate. 
This mountain pass bore yet another name–after the man who 
had hacked through the steep slopes and cliffs: Gasym chapdyran 
(“Cut Through by Kasum”). What a pity that people don’t 
remember that now... 
The path leading upwards, to town, became a road for horse-
and-buggy travel and later on, a motorway. Geidar Aliev often 
 324 
took it when coming back from his business trips about the 
republic. Talking to quests he told them that the Patamdar Ridge 
stretches as far as the seashore. And where this ridge slopes off 
toward the seaside lays the village of Shikhovo, now a suburb of 
Baku with its amazing mosque, Bibi-Eibat. Shikhovo–this name 
derives from the word sheik (sheikh). In olden times people who 
wielded much respect and authority were called reverentially 
sheiks–men of great learning, wizards and highborn. The people’s 
spiritual fathers and shepherds. 
Standing at Wolf’s Gate you can take a bird’s-eye view of 
Baku and its environs. The city descends to the sea in a semicircle. 
Rising in the middle is the old citadel Icheri-shekhar (“Inner 
City”) hugging the sea? 
Baku had yet another bastion, the Sebayl castle. Today this 
district is known as Bayl (or Baylovo in Russian). The Caspian 
has engulfed that stronghold. Letters cut in stone and fragments 
retrieved from the sea bottom are now displayed in the courtyard 
of the restored memorial complex of Shirvanshakhs in Icheri-
shekhar. 
 
 
In the Azeri mugam melody our people give vent to their 
innermost thoughts and desires. And so it is with the hoary stones 
of the Bakinian citadel telling the tale of the people’s soul and 
destiny in their cryptic language. Icheri-shekhar’s silence is 
eloquent. Silence is a language, too. 
Our poets draw inspiration from the historical monuments of 
Icheri-shekhar. Here are a few verses from A. Khalafli’s poem 
Icheri-shekhar: Stones, People, as translated into Russian by 
Siyavush Mamedzadeh: 
 
Wrought by a sculptor much in love 
The maiden beauty towers above. 
“Uzzal”, fervent in the “Rast” mugam 
A fleeting moment of history alive. 
A brook down Karadag streams, 
Shah-kyagrizi singing a mournful lay. 
An arrow of love has pierced my heart 
It bleeds and scalding tears sheds… 
The Maiden Tower soaring to the skies, 
Our sacred memory incarnate in bones, 
And no fury of the Caspian 
Can drown the proud silence of these stones. 
 
(English version by I. Kochubey) 
 325
The people’s tragic history is vibrant in the “Rast” mugam. 
“Rast” is an epic in music, and “Uzzal” is a part of this epic. 
Icheri-shekhar can be likened to an epic. An epic embodied in 
stone… 
Geidar Aliev was a custodian of this historical and spiritual 
memory of the people, its caretaker and protector; he had done his 
utmost to keep this memory alive. 
In the lines we have cited above mention is made of Karadag 
in the sense of a big, not black, mountain. Shah-kyagrizi (“the 
Shah’s Spring”) is a bourne whose water flowed down the pipes 
made of tile to the Palace of Shirvanshakhs. As local historians 
say, this brook gushed forth at the side of the monument to the 
poet Aliagi Vakhid (in the park near the Philharmonic). 
At Geidar Aliev’s initiative two monuments have been erected 
on Karadag, the Big Mountain: an obelisk to the Turkish asker 
warrior and a memorial to Motherland’s defenders. 
The poem (we have quoted but an excerpt) also mentions the 
names of Masud Davud ogly, an architect who lived in the 12th 
century A.D., the putative creator of the Maiden Tower; it 
mentions Mohammed Abu-Bekr ogly (11th century), who built 
the Synyg-gala Minaret within Icheri-shekhar (Inner City). 
Thence, from hoary antiquity, stretches a spiritual thread into our 
days, the twenty-first century. 
Geidar Aliev did whatever he could and even more to keep in 
joint the living fabric of time. He brought Hussein Djavid back to 
the people. Alexander Dzasokhov can well remember “Geidar 
Aliev’s efforts to have the mortal remains of Nasimi transferred to 
Baku. Nasimi, an outstanding Azeri poet and thinker, was buried 
centuries ago in what is now the Aleppo Province in Syria”. 
Azerbaijan, as we have told you, has celebrated the 600th jubilee 
of the great poet. May we recall that Nasimi is well known 
throughout the Arab world? His works are translated into dozens 
of languages; his poems and his philosophy have a topical ring in 
this day and age, too. At Aliev’s recommendation a delegation 
headed by Alim Keshokov, Secretary of the Soviet Writers’ Union 
went to Damascus, Syria. The Syrian authorities did not consent to 
Nasimi’s reburial. Subsequently, when working as the Soviet 
Union’s ambassador to that country, Dzasokhov, acting on Aliev’s 
request, approached the Syrian leaders again, but they replied it 
was impossible to translate Nasimi’s remains to Azerbaijan. 
– On two or three occasions we talked this matter over with 
Geidar Aliev when he was working at the USSR Council of 
Ministers in Moscow. Nasimi was tortured and executed with 
much brutality. He was flayed alive. He was victimized for his 
 326 
ideas, ostensibly out of keeping with the canons of Islam. Not at 
all opposed to the Islamic teachings, he contended nonetheless 
that Man was all-important in the world created by the Maker, –
Dzasokhov recalls. 
 
 
...You feel reinvigorated and cheery on coming out onto the 
renovated waterfront. Is it the action of the mountain ridge on 
which Baku rests? Or is it the breath of the sea suffused with the 
bracing ozone? You cannot tell. Because the earth and the 
elements, mount and sea are conjugated, coupled together. Baku is 
the child of the two elements, the sea and the land, the Caspian 
and the mountains. 
Everything here reminds us of Geidar Aliev, a man endowed 
with an architect’s gift. 
...At the roadside you may see storks that have built their nests 
on top of the tall poles of electric transmission lines. The storks 
fly away and seek asylum elsewhere when land, water and air 
come to be polluted. But their homecoming is a good omen. 
Seaside Boulevard, the favorite haunt of the townfolk, is 
always crowded. Moms and dads taking their little ones to shows, 
swings and merry-go-rounds. You can hear all kinds of names. 
But one–Geidar! –comes up the oftenest. 
Geidar Aliev always spoke with great love about Baku, our 
capital, now attired in green and decorated with new magnificent 
buildings: 
“Baku is one of the world’s nicest cities. The people, who have 
been building and creating Baku over many centuries, have laid a 
fine town for this generation and generations to cone. We are 
proud of its natural beauty, its architecture.” 
Baku is a city of winds, the “windy city”. The violent 
northeasterly is quite a nuisance now and then–it whines and 
howls. You better stop your ears! But with its rage and fury spent, 
the air is calm and placid again... A traveler, driving through 
Wolf’s Gate in the morn, hails the sun rising above the sea. It kind 
of rolls out from the sea depths. That’s why our forefathers, who 
have left their drawings on Gobustan’s cliffs, believed it to be 
born of the sea… 
 
 327
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 12 
ONE YEAR OF THE PRESIDENT 
 
 
Leafing Through the Calendar 
 
People have always been clambering up to the Olympus of 
power. Always, at all times. Some even manage to crawl to the 
top to vanish overnight into thin air, leaving as good as no trace in 
popular memory. Where are they, the men who had been 
dominating Azerbaijan’s political arena in the 1990s? They had 
their innings, and one will hardly remember them in a decade or 
two. Why did they, Geidar Aliev’s opponents, land on the losing 
end? Because our people, turning down sundry demagogues, 
windbags and embezzlers of public property, followed Aliev. Like 
the Hellenic hero Antaeus, he drew strength from his native land, 
his love for it, for its sons and daughters. His fellow citizens and 
compatriots came to appreciate that. 
Yet another reason why Geidar Aliev became a national 
leader: his lofty moral virtues merged with a gift of a political 
figure and thinker. “One can be in opposition to the authorities, 
but one cannot be in opposition to Motherland, to the people, to 
morality and lofty ideals.” He was true to this precept by word and 
deed. The German philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer has said that 
man’s genius is in that his abilities for cognition… happen to be 
developed far above of what is necessary. So, a man of genius has 
an excessive abundance of intelligence, and this abundance finds 
an application domain in general laws of actual reality; thereby he 
devotes himself to the service to all of the human race, while a 
man of ordinary intelligence serves particular individuals, no 
more. 
Yes, Geidar Aliev’s outstanding intelligence served the entire 
people. The President shared the views of the great thinker of the 
East–Djemal-ad-din al-Afghani and like him believed there could 
be no happiness outside the people. 
Someone will take this for granted, as an inalienable part of a 
big political personality, while others will have second thoughts 
about it–cut it out, this sweet hollow rhetoric... Well, let’s leaf 
 328 
through the President’s calendar for one year only. But which one 
to choose? 
There were eleven years of his presidency... Each year, though 
like all the others in some respects, has particular milestones of its 
own. The obligatory daily routine makes them common: the 
working schedule, visits, receptions, news conferences, and 
speeches... But the impress of Geidar Aliev’s personality is there, 
giving new body and form to every event in his routine duties as 
head of state. We can pick out any year at random–1995 or 1999, 
and so on… I feel we should go through the calendar of the year 
2002–Aliev’s last full year in office. 
One of the first documents, which Geidar Aliev signed in 
2002, dealt with the Memorial Day on the 12th anniversary of the 
tragedy of January 20, 1990. Just Twentieth January–we need not 
name the year, though. These two words are eloquent enough, 
they tell a lot to the Bakinians and all the Azerbaijanians. They 
carry the same message as Bloody Sunday, the Ninth of January; 
for Russian: on that day in 1905 czarist troops shot at a peaceful 
demonstration of workers in St. Petersburg going with a petition 
to the czar. Hundreds were killed and wounded. 
President Aliev insisted, way back in March 1994, on an 
exhaustive legal and political assessment of the tragic events 
staged in Baku on January 20,1990. A government decision was 
adapted to this effect. On that day, on Gorbachyov’s orders, 
Soviet troops marched into Baku and other districts of Azerbaijan, 
without declaration of a state of emergency. 
 
 
January 24, 2002, Moscow 
 
January 24, 2002, was the first day of the visit of President 
Geidar Aliev of the Azerbaijan Republic to the Russian 
Federation. “When the Russian capital is visited by political 
figures of a caliber like this, it is a big event in itself,” wrote the 
Russian newspaper Izvestiya in those days. “This personality, 
shelved by Mikhail Gorbachyov, was claimed back by big politics 
and his land. Today he has been able to get over the wrongs done 
by Yeltsinist Moscow.” 
As Izvestiya saw it, few, if any, could expect that “the first 
acquaintance of a shrewd and wise policy-maker like Aliev with 
the young Russian President would yield such positive results”. 
Thinking back to their first meeting, Aliev confided he “reckoned 
only on a 30-minute meeting with Putin. But we talked as long as 
nearly four hours”. “They must have made a good impression on 
 329
each other,” Izvestiya commented. –Aliev, as eyewitnesses spy, 
parted with Putin having an express desire to meet him again. In 
the upshot the high guest was accorded a special honor yesterday 
night (January 24, 2002. –Auth.) Vladimir Putin received him in 
the countryside dacha at Zavidovo. It was a supper in a close 
family circle. Informed sources say the present Russian leader did 
not deem it superfluous or humiliating to seek advice from Geidar 
Aliev on different international issues.” 
A state visit–this is a lot of ceremonial, protocol acts, meetings 
and talks, eye-to-eye negotiations and those held together with 
delegations; this is receptions and news-conferences... One of us, 
then editor-in-chief of the newspaper Tribuna, had the luck to 
attend the meeting of Geidar Aliev with heads of Russia’s mass 
media–that get-together was arranged by Vitaly Ignatenko, 
Director General of the ITAR-TASS News Agency. The official 
visit was drawing to a close, that was the last function culminating 
those three tense days immediately after the big press conference. 
The President’s dryish face did not betray any trace of fatigue. It’s 
amazing how a man nearly 80 years old stand such kind of loads. 
These sit-round gatherings at TASS had a longtime ritual. The 
host, Vitaly Nikitich Ignatenko, welcomed the guest and proposed 
to drink to the health of Geidar Alievich Aliev. President Aliev 
had a glass of red wine. Taking a sip, he recalled his meetings 
with journalists after his resignation; he spoke about Azerbaijan’s 
oil strategy, about relations with the press... When we were about 
to take leave, I told him I had met his former aide Alexander 
Timofeyevich Gavrilov a few days before. “My best greetings to 
him,” the President said. “I do remember him well.” 
On that long day President Aliev met journalists again, for the 
third time, now back in Baku. 
– Moscow television gave a fairly good coverage of my visit, 
our meetings, negotiations and the talks we had. I may just as well 
say that this visit was exceptionally important to Azerbaijan. First, 
the Russian state and the President of Russia had invited the 
President of Azerbaijan to Russia, to Moscow, on a state visit. 
This status and invitation were realized in compliance with the 
demands bearing on a state visit. You must have seen all that on 
television. You couldn’t see all, of course, but what you have seen 
should leave a definite impression in you... 
I am very satisfied with the outcome of the visit... We have 
signed important documents. 
President Putin and I have signed a joint declaration on our 
ties, on the substance and principles of our ties. Thereupon we 
have signed a treaty on Russian-Azerbaijanian economic 
 330 
cooperation up until the year 2010 providing for long-term 
cooperation, and yet another two documents as addenda. Finally, 
we have signed an agreement on he Babalin radar station as well 
as agreements on other matters. All these are very important 
documents for Azerbaijan, which, I think, also give a powerful 
impulse for the progress of Russian-Azerbaijanian cooperation. 
 
 
All that was on Saturday, January 26, 2002. Next Wednesday, 
on the 30th, President Aliev was flying to the United States where, 
as his news service reported, he was to attend a session of the 
Davos Economic Forum meeting in New York. On the eve of his 
departure, on January 29, Geidar Aliev received US 
Undersecretary of State Ms. Elizabeth Jones. 
Talking with Ms. Jones, the President mentioned his Moscow 
talks about the struggle against international terrorism. 
– President Putin told me the United States and Russia were 
cooperating closely enough in this field... I felt Russia would keep 
up this cooperation. Mr. Putin likewise knows that we are 
participating in this alliance, that aircraft of your country fly over 
our territory. All this is common knowledge. Thus, I believe your 
cooperation with Russia opens up broad opportunities for work, 
which you would be carrying out in Afghanistan and all over the 
region as a whole. 
Bidding farewell to his guest, President Aliev asked her to 
convey his best regards to his friend Mr. Armitage. “Tell him I 
wish him the best of success in the work of the joint Russian-
American commission. I hope it will be a success.” 
Now Richard Armitage was US Deputy Secretary of State. 
Small wonder that both could well remember their meeting in the 
early 1990s. Forgetting the protocol, Richard said suddenly, and 
quite sincerely at that: “My father was very much like you, 
Mr. President!” That’s how good relations were born. Richard 
Armitage was heading the US-Azerbaijan Chamber of Commerce 
and during Aliev’s visit to the United States introduced him 
former Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger. 
– Earlier, as I saw you on television, you were pictured as our 
enemy, –Aliev smiled. –But what a pleasure to meet you now! 
Richard beamed on hearing these words: Weinberger was his 
teacher and friend. 
 
 331
February 1, 2002, New York 
 
Flying in to New York, President Aliev laid a wreath at the 
obelisk put up over the ruins of the World Trade Center. It seemed 
this wreath was also laid on the scorched ground of Knodzhaly, at 
the foot of the machine-gunned monuments in Shusha, on the 
lacerated land of Karabakh. Grief and memory of the slaughtered 
innocents is but one, no matter where. 
The motto of the World Economic Forum was Leadership in 
the Troubled Times: Common Look into the Future. Klaus 
Schwab, the forum’s founder and president, said speaking at the 
opening ceremony that the choice of New York as the venue of 
the forum “prosecuted above all the aim of giving support to the 
city that sustained the worst of damage on September 11, 2001.” 
On February 1 Geidar Aliev spoke in the hotel Waldorf 
Astoria at a session on “Stability in Central Asia”. He was the first 
to take the floor. Touching on the problems facing the world in the 
globalization era, President Aliev enlarged on separatism and war 
conflicts that had enveloped Caucasia. 
“Separatism takes on the form of terrorism and, what is more, 
poses a threat of territories seized by separatists being turned into 
uncontrolled zones. Let us take, for example, the Nagorny 
Karabakh region of Azerbaijan. The conflict on this territory 
began exactly because of separatist intentions, it grew into a war 
between Armenia and Azerbaijan and, as a result, a part of the 
Azerbaijan land, about 16 thousand square kilometers large, 
became an uncontrolled zone–in brief, it remained under the 
control of illegal armed detachments. Neither the world 
community nor any international organization controls this 
territory. Naturally a lot of weaponry is concentrated there, with 
drug trafficking not excluded either. Which means this is a flash 
point of conflicts. A flash point of terrorism. 
Therefore when waging a struggle against international 
terrorism, one should consider the sources, various forms and 
stripes of terrorism. Elimination of war conflicts is a very serious 
and important measure toward restricting the possibility of 
international terrorism emerging on the arena.” 
New York is far away from Karabakh. And yet it seemed its 
mountains moved closer in those minutes. The three thousand 
delegates to the forum from a hundred and six countries must have 
understood a little better what it all meant–one’s Motherland taken 
away. 
On February 27, 2002, the Swiss newspaper Matin carried an 
article titled: “History Shall Not Forget: the Azerbaijan People 
 332 
Marking the 10th Anniversary of the Khodzhaly Genocide”. In 
connection with the tenth anniversary of the Khodzhaly massacre 
the Milli Mejlis of the Azerbaijan Republic issued a statement 
made at President Aliev’s initiative. It said this in part: “The 
Armenian Republic, ignoring the four resolutions (Nos 822, 853, 
874 and 884) of the UN Security Council on liberation of the 
occupied lands, the documents of the Parliamentary Assembly of 
the European Union, of the Budapest, Lisbon and Istanbul 
summits of the OSCE, refuses to recognize Azerbaijan’s territorial 
integrity. Set up on the territory of Nagorny Karabakh are camps 
for training terrorists who arrive not only from Armenia but also 
from other countries for committing fresh crimes against the 
Azerbaijan people. The profits drawn here from drug dealing and 
trafficking, from arms sales are used for terrorist purposes.” 
 
 
Fatima Abdullazadeh can well remember a night phone call 
from the President. 
– It was two o’clock in the morning. We did net turn in yet, 
seeing something on the video. Geidar Alievich asked a perfectly 
concrete question. After I answered it, he remembered suddenly, 
embarrassed: “O my, what did I do, it’s two o’clock in the 
morning!” I told him we were not asleep yet, were seeing a film. 
“And I’ve been burning the midnight oil over the document...” 
Shortly before that, at about midnight, Aliev rang up one of the 
ministers and asked the same question. It came out later in the 
morning that Fatima-khanum was the one who had supplied 
trustworthy information. President Aliev did not forget to thank her. 
Fatima-khanum remembers something else as well–the 
gorgeous bouquet from the President on her birth jubilee. 
– Geidar Alievich phoned me up. It was a wonderful 
conversation... By the tone of your voice he could understand how 
matters stood with you. And he asked again and again: “Any 
problems?” He had insights, which even I, Doctor of Physics and 
Mathematics, could hardly explain, from positions of reason… 
Fatima Abdullazadeh had worked side by side with Aliev for 
ten years. It was a gift of the fates, she says. 
Fatima-khanum recalls how once, at midnight, Aliev asked her 
to attend talks with the State Secretary. At that time, in 1993, they 
worked until daybreak. 
– I talked to him and went home, I didn’t fee like going back to 
the party’s Central Committee where I was working then. 
Meanwhile things started spinning. It became clear that someone 
was rocking the boat overmuch. 
 333
I lived in an apartment house on the waterfront, and we could 
well hear Suret Guseinov’s guns. We had Russian-speaking 
tenants in our section of the house. Geidar Aliev went on the air, 
live, and I translated his address into Russian right off the bat. I 
shall always remember one phrase of his: “I have no military 
personnel, what I have is my political will and my experience.” 
And the people backed him up. 
 
 
Novruz, the Spring Holiday 
 
March 13, 2002. President Aliev signs a decree on general 
pardon. A significant gesture from the head of state that has done 
his best toward civil accord and peace. May the amnestied 
prisoners appreciate that? The President has pardoned them. But 
will Allah forgive them? It will depend on their subsequent life. 
Eighty-one inmates were set free, and eight had their term 
commuted by half. Nearly all the pardoned convicts were 
implicated in crimes committed against the independence, 
statehood and territorial integrity of the Azerbaijan Republic. 
Some took part in a coup attempt at Gandzha in October 1994, 
and others tried to seize power in Baku, Kazakh and Akstaf in 
March 1995. Three made an attempt on Aliev’s life on September 
30, 1993. 
President Aliev timed this act of goodwill for Novruz, they 
holiday of the vernal equinox. For years and years the powers that 
be had been seeking to strike it out of the popular calendar as a 
holdover of the past. 
But action breeds counteraction. Cur people have always 
treasured their customs and transitions. On the occasion of Novruz 
President Aliev addressed the Azerbaijanians all over the world: 
“The Azerbaijan people have eagerly been awaiting this holiday 
which they have been cherishing throughout their history, 
nourishing it in their heart of hearts–in the hard times full of 
travails, too. And today, too, our people are celebrating with much 
joy the holiday of spring, which has turned into a symbol of our 
national being. The Novruz holiday, which is a treasure-trove of 
our culture–now, upon the reinstitution of the traditions of our 
national statehood and the regaining of our independence–has 
entered into our calendar for ever as an official holiday of the 
Azerbaijan Republic.” 
On that festive night the Alievs had a big family reunion, with 
brothers and sisters, in-laws, nephews and nieces. They enjoyed 
Novruz in their native and hospitable home at Nakhichevan and 
 334 
thought back to the days when ana (mama) and ama (papa) were 
still alive. 
 
 
The willow growing back of the house came as the first 
messenger of spring. All of a sudden, despite the snow here and 
there, its branches shot up white fluff all over. Izzet-khanum, the 
ana, was very fond of the willow, the bedmshyuk. She rejoiced 
like a small girl as the tree was out in blossom. Once Shafiga 
asked the mummy why she loved the willow as much as that. 
– O my dear, who does not love the willow! Every time as it 
blossoms out, I think of the spring at Zanghezur... We were 
picking willow blossoms in gullies and brewed them into sweet 
water, the gyulab. 
This childhood memory always stayed with Shafiga. In 
districts where she worked in later days, she always looked out for 
a little willow. And whenever she came to see its drooping 
branches, she always recalled mama’s eyes, radiant with joy. 
There came an all-out house-cleaning operation well before 
Novruz–a week before Wednesday, the great holiday. Everybody 
got busy whitewashing the walls, washing the windows and 
scrubbing, swabbing, polishing the doors. The blankets and the 
pillows were ripped open and fluffed up... The earthen floor was 
covered with a mat and carpets and cozy cushions, the mutakki, 
put up above–stuffed with wool, these nice pillows were meant as 
elbow-rests. 
As always, the jovial family party recalled the happenings of 
long ago, the dear niceties of the bygone days. 
– Now do you remember? –Shafiga, the youngest of the house, 
burst out. –Remember the snowfall just on the eve of Novruz? 
– Well, that’s a common thing for our parts, –Djalal 
responded. 
Shafiga remembered, that March snow for he rest of her life. 
Mum and dad took out the biggest carpet, spread it out on the 
snow while the kiddies–in bare hands, without their mittens on–
were strewing the fresh snow above, in handfuls, one after the 
other. Sure, during that jolly merry making someone would 
contrive to get a handful of snow down the scruff of your neck, 
making you, the poor thing, yell like hell, while Izzet-khanum 
made as if she were angry in good earnest. 
Then everyone took besoms to sweep the snow away. Brought 
in, the carpet felt fresh and cool to tread on. 
Everything was spick-and-span at the Alievs’–let the dirt, dust 
and rubbish stay in the past. That’s the folk custom. On festive 
 335
Wednesday all of the family sat down to table adorned with green 
wheat seedlings and candles. There came the obligatory sabzali 
ash (pilaf with herbs–leek and tarragon), and uchar (pilaf and 
chicken stuffed with sultanas, raisins, plums and apricots). 
It was mama who laid the table. The daughters set out fancy 
fatiras–buns, flat cakes and the kecha pies, the family dainty. 
Mama baked them from fancy pastry on milk, butter and eggs 
laden with chicken, ginger, cardamom and cloves. The round 
pastry cakes and fillings were baked in the tendir earthen stove.  
Treating the family to pilaf, Izzet-khanum put up rose petals 
jam and syrup, the gyul-gend. 
And next came the emotional, thrilling moment of gift giving. 
The parents got the gifts ready well in advance–dresses for little 
girls, shirts and boots for the boys. No money for toys, one could 
afford bare necessities only. In years Geidar could bestow gifts on 
his dear ana–the sisters remembered him bringing a dress length 
of navy-blue flowered voile. Izzet-khanum sewed her best 
yashmak (veil) from it. 
Dressed up, the kiddies ran out and built a bonfire in the 
backyard. Meanwhile the costumed mummers made rounds of the 
folks–they, the young men for the most part, impersonated Kesa 
and Kechal (Beardless and Baldy), the pet heroes of Azeri 
folklore. 
 
 
In his address to the Azerbaijan people on March 31, 2002, the 
Day of the Azerbaijanians’ Genocide*, President Aliev stressed 
this point: 
“We are against importing the events of yesteryear into this 
day and age, something that the Armenian nationalists are doing 
systematically and in an ugly form, and against making use of 
these events for sowing discord and animosity in people-to-people 
contacts. In the present-day world war propaganda, the ideology 
of the hatred of mankind, territorial claims to other states–all this 
is impermissible to us. Capitalizing on the opportunities of our 
independence, we are striving for our country’s steady progress, 
we seek to build a happy life for our citizens.” 
                                                 
* The Decree of the President of the Azerbaijanian Republic “On the 
Azerbaijanians’ Genocide” was promulgated on March 26, 1998. Geidar 
Aliev declared March 31 the Day of the Azerbaijanians’ Genocide. It was 
on this day that the Azerbaijanian Democratic Republic, in 1918 and 
1919, commemorated the victims of the wholesale slaughter in a national 
day of mourning. 
 336 
We do not choose our neighbors. That’s the gospel truth. We 
should live in peace and agreement with them. This is wholly true 
of peoples, too. Fate has brought the Azerbaijan people with 
different neighbors–different, in their national temper, mentality 
and ethnic roots. There is but one sky above us and above them. 
But it is not always clear, this sky. 
 
 
March 3, 2002, Baku 
 
Speaking about Geidar Aliev, journalists have often uses 
colorful similes. For instance, by comparing him to a mighty age-
old plane tree rooted, in the native soil and drawing strength and 
power from it. 
Man-the-Plane-Tree. Quite an apt metaphor... 
On the third of March Geidar Aliev hosted in the Presidential 
Palace the cellist Mstislav Rostropovich and his spouse, the opera 
diva Galina Vishnevskaya. Their names are known the world over. 
– Dear Slava, –the President addressed Mstislav Rostropovich 
by his first name in the diminutive. –I am happy beyond words 
that the festivities devoted to your 75th birth jubilee have got off 
to a good start in Azerbaijan, your Mother Country. The year 2002 
is the year of the 75th birth anniversary of Rostropovich, and the 
month of March is the month of the 75th birthday of 
Rostropovich. And it is here, in your native land, that this pleasant 
event is off to a good start; and I know it will carry on in other 
countries, too, and in other cities where you enjoy great respect 
and prestige, and where people love you so much... You have 
come to us with a delegation of the Global Vaccination Fund and 
have brought in vaccine to the sum of more than a million dollars. 
This is good assistance to our republic. What is more, this is good 
assistance in the most vital sphere, the children’s health. 
“For your signal activities in promoting international ties with 
Azerbaijan, and for your contribution in fostering Azerbaijan 
music you, dear Slava, are awarded with the highest order of 
Azerbaijan, the Order of Istigal, or Independence...” 
The famed musician must have heard plenty of compliments 
and superlatives during his long and fruitful career. He must have 
got used to thunderous applause. But he is a bit embarrassed 
nonetheless: 
– …I am overwhelmed indeed, and I feel I should collect my 
thoughts first. And the first thing that comes to my mind is the 
deep gratitude to my parents, for what they have given me–
education, and all. But I thank my mother ever so much because 
 337
she chose the best place on earth for my birth. That’s why I offer 
special thanks to her, exactly for that. 
I, for one, inherited my love for Azerbaijan and Baku from my 
father. He, my father, settled down in Moscow upon leaving Baku. 
Here, in Baku, there is a museum of the man whom I met. I was a 
small child then as my father brought us together–that was Uzeir 
Gadjibekov, my father’s friend. It was when the Azerbaijan Arts 
Decade was on in Moscow. My father took me to the Moskva 
hotel and said: You are going to meet a great musician. And I still 
remember what Uzeir Gadjibekov looked like. Uzeir Gadjibekov’s 
museum has a letter, which my father sent to him just before the 
outbreak of the war. My father wrote in that letter: “I dream about 
leaving Moscow and coming back to Baku.” 
Father did not come back to Baku only because the war broke 
out. We had to move to Orenburg in the hinterland, where my 
father died in 1942. This sorrow and these travails are still with 
me. Every year that I visit Baku is eventful to me. And when I 
leave this place, I get thinking–when at last I could catch another 
plane bound for Baku and come back.” 
And here’s what Mstislav Rostropovich said about Russia and 
Azerbaijan during the reception. 
– ...The happiest moment to me recently was your meeting 
with President Putin. 
It was the moment of my jubilation and my happiness. You 
know that I am one who has got education in Russia and who has 
spent the larger part of my life there. Azerbaijan and Russia, I feel, 
are two halves of my own selves. Thai is why I am perfectly sure 
we should never lose our musical contacts, cultural contacts, 
contacts among artists and writers. They were won in mutual 
suffering. So thank you. Everybody knows you are a very wise 
man, the whole world knows it. This meeting has reasserted your 
reputation as the truly great President of you country and as a far-
sighted, noble and very kind man. I thank you from the bottom of 
my heart.” 
The same night, in the Respublika Palace, Mstislav 
Rostropovich conducted the Azerbaijan State Symphony 
Orchestra named after Uzeir Gadjibekov. If words written on 
paper could express that holiday of music which Mstislav 
Rostropovich granted to his hometown! 
Since that hapless year of 1985 as his dear Zarifa-khanum 
departed from this world the fifteenth of April had come to hold a 
peculiar place in the life of Geidar Aliev, of all the Aliev family. 
On that sad anniversary in 2002 Geidar, his son Ilkham, his 
children and a11 the kith and kin who happened to be in Baku 
 338 
came to the grave of Zarifa Azizovna. They stood silently and, by 
the old custom, laid their hands on the bronze warm with the 
spring sun. 
At first the Alievs were going to set up the marble monument–
built by the talented Azerbaijanian sculptor Omar Eldarov–in 
Moscow, where Zarifa-khanum was buried. But bringing it to 
Moscow–“became a big problem” to Geidar Alievich at the time. 
– What is going to happen next, in the future? –This question 
worried me. So I told Omar Eldarov that I was grateful to him, but 
let him keep his work for a while at his place. The situation was 
bad, we could not pin hopes on the morrow. I thought should I not 
be able to carry this work to the end, some of my children might 
do it. Omar Eldarov kept this monument in his workshop for as 
long as eight years. 
Back in Baku I often visited his workshop and looked at the 
monument with much admiration. You know, on the one hand this 
admiration was in reverence of Zarifa-khanum’s memory, and on 
the other, it was a worthy tribute to the masterpiece of the high art 
of sculpture. Things changed as Zarifa-khanum’s remains were 
brought from Moscow to Baku. On second thoughts we decided to 
leave the monument where it was–as a work of art it belonged in a 
museum. Omar Eldarov advised me to do that, and I agreed. This 
conversation took place in 1994. So a bronze replica of the 
monument was mounted on the tomb (from Geidar Aliev’s speech 
at the Baku Center of Arts at the presentation of Elegy, a marble 
memorial to Zarifa Alieva and a dedicatory album on April 15, 
1997). 
 
 
On April 25 the President met entrepreneurs. The lists of those 
invited were not drawn up in camera, in the silence of government 
offices. Well before the event the newspapers published a 
communiqué on the forthcoming meeting and invited all persons 
concerned to apply to the Ministry of Economic Development, 
with phone contacts supplied accordingly. That’s how the 
audience came to be formed. 
– One of the main goals of our meeting today is to get reliable 
and objective information on the state of affairs directly from you, 
the business community, –Geidar Aliev addressed the audience. –
Let me stress it once again–reliable objective information. That is 
you must speak the truth only. 
We have invited to this meeting only local entrepreneurs of 
Azerbaijan. None from among the government bodies and their 
officials involved with enterprise and the nascent market economy 
 339
in Azerbaijan is present here. Aside from myself, present here are 
the prime minister, the head of the presidential executive 
administration, the state counsellor on economic affairs and a 
presidential aide–they alone. Now why did I do that? To get you 
to speak up freely and not feel the pressure or see the angry looks 
of government ministers and officials from the law enforcement, 
internal revenue and other departments... The communications 
you are going to make today will be studied and analyzed in due 
course, and on their basis our final conference will be held. 
 
 
Gyulnar, the Peace Envoy 
 
The tenth of May, Geidar Aliev’s birthday. On that day he 
received many official letters and telegrams. But the most 
precious of all was a letter from a Bakinian schoolgirl, Gyulnar 
Guseinova, a ninth-grade pupil of School No. 106 named after 
S. Magerramov. She sent cordial congratulations to the President 
and asked–with touching candor proper to children alone–to 
protect her agemates. “The 20th century, the century of science 
and technology, is also the century of wars at the same time, –she 
wrote. –Although the development of science has brought 
progress, it has also brought such things as the atom and neutron 
bombs, and nuclear weapons. All this could mean death to 
millions of people. And the worst blow in all wars is dealt at 
children. 
I am one of those who have seen war at first hand, in my 
hometown... Like all people torn away from their hearth and 
home, I pine for my native parts. 
I want to see our morrow clear and cloudless, without wars, 
children–with their mamas and papas, and people–in their family 
nests and homes...” 
Gyulnar called her message this way: “If I were a peace 
envoy…” 
On May 13, 2002, the President of Azerbaijan released a 
decree providing for relief for displaced persons (“forced 
migrants”) in the district of Bilyasuvar. Geidar Aliev took 
personal care of the social and living conditions of refugees and 
displaced persons camping out in tent settlements, he showed 
much concern for their daily needs. We were loath to delegate this 
job to anyone else. 
Wheelers-dealers and politicos, out to cash in on the plight of 
people in distress, clamored for a war settlement of the Karabakh 
problem. Clearly, such calls stem from sheer irresponsibility for 
 340 
the most part. War always means bloodshed, and it is the helpless 
and defenseless that suffer most. 
 
 
On May 22, on the eve of the tenth anniversary of the 
recognition of the independent Azerbaijan Republic, Pope John 
Paul II arrived in Baku on an official visit. According to the 
Italian newspaper La Stampa, all told there were only 130 Roman 
Catholics in Azerbaijan. So one could not reckon on huge crowds. 
But La Stampa had a point by noting it was a momentous event. 
Both the Pope and Geidar Aliev assessed this event; exactly this 
way. 
– Your visits to countries with a large Islamic following serve 
peace and mutual trust between these two great world religions, –
said, the President addressing the Pope. –You are advocating the 
ideas of mercy and compassion among people; you wish patience 
and comfort unto people in dire straits. Azerbaijan likewise has 
victims of such calamities. These are over а million of Azerbaijan 
refugees chased from their homes in consequence of the seizure of 
Azerbaijan lands by neighboring Armenia. These people need 
kind words of solace. They count on your assistance, too, in their 
just cause. 
– I have come to your ancient land full of admiration for its 
cultural wealth and richness, –Vatican’s head said in reply. –This 
Caucasian country has internalized many ethnic cultures, the 
Persian and Altai-Turan cultures in particular. This land has seen 
many religions, present to this day: Zoroastrianism coexisted here 
with the Christianity of the Albanian Orthodox Church, which 
played a very important role in antiquity. Subsequently Islam 
came to play an ever more growing role, and in our days it is a 
religion worshiped by the overwhelming majority of the 
Azerbaijan people... Even with the loss of some of the original 
luster of their church the Christians kept on living shoulder to 
shoulder with the worshipers of other religions. This became 
possible owing to the spirit of tolerance and mutual understanding 
which this country cannot but take pride on. I invoke God and 
pray to Him–may the remaining hotbeds of tension go out as soon 
as possible, and everybody gain peace in truth and justice. 
...The Pope officiated at Mass in the Sports Palace, for the 
Roman Church building was still under construction in Baku. But 
what matters most of all is that the Pope did visit Baku. This very 
fact signified the recognition of Azerbaijan and attested to the 
high authority of its leader in the world. 
 
 341
The 45th European championship on free-style wrestling 
brought representatives of nearly all countries of Europe to Baku. 
President Aliev addressed the participants with a message of 
greetings. 
President of the Azerbaijan National Olympic Committee 
Ilkham Aliev opened the championship. He was a worthy 
representative of our republic in the International Olympic 
Committee. 
The Azerbaijani language has an apt word similar to what the 
Russians call “father’s darling” in the sense “he who has a father 
with a pull”. We in Azerbaijan say: dedelilar. 
“In the Sixties as we entered the world of literature many 
people looked askance at us,” wrote Vagif Samedoglu, a well-
known poet and political personality. Many of our generation 
were scoffed as dedelilar. This little word denoted a social type. I 
believed such bias was buried in the annals of the latter half of the 
last century. But I was wrong. The same kind of bias staged a 
comeback in the beginning of the twenty-first century with regard 
of Ilkham Aliev: as Geidar Aliev’s son, he should not go into 
politics. But why? He behaves like a mature political figure; I 
could see that during our visits to Strasbourg, France, together 
with him. He did the best job over there–no one in Azerbaijan 
could have coped just as well, I guess.” 
 
 
Lessons of History 
 
In his works and public addresses President Aliev often turned 
back to the lessons of the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic 
(AzDR). 
He had on his desk books on the history of that short-lived 
republic along with documentary publications. 
In 1919 the chairman of the peace delegation of the Azerbaijan 
Democratic Republic and President of the ADP Parliament, 
Alimardan bek Topchibashev wrote this from Paris to the 
Azerbaijan government in Baku: 
“They do not recognize us as a state yet, that’s true. But 
wherever we are we tell everybody that for a year and a half 
already we have been existing de facto as a state, that Azerbaijan, 
which has a parliament of its own, a government, administration, 
courts of law, schools and the army is living in sovereignty. This 
Azerbaijan has stood the remorseless struggle against the 
Bolsheviks and, consequently, the Azerbaijanians are viable and 
can build an independent state of their own. Within our powers we 
 342 
should carry on and defend our self-affirmation. We would like 
everybody, all of our people to realize that we are standing the test 
in proving our capacity for independent social-political and 
economic life. 
I believe that we can cope with that. Ours is a capable people, 
and our land is rich in natural resources. However, we still have 
no political school relying on moral values... We should restore 
order within our country, in its administrative structures, in courts 
of law, and foster respect for legality. 
Only given such orderliness in its domestic life will Azerbaijan 
be able to become a state in its own right. A state that will need no 
recognition from anyone. Because a strong, stable Azerbaijan will 
per se gain recognition as a real and indisputable fact.” 
According to Topchibashev, the “orderliness of the country’s 
home life” was a prima condition for building a viable state. And 
Geidar Aliev pursued the same objective in all his activities. 
Geidar Aliev sponsored an ideology capable of uniting all of 
society. This ideology is materialized in Azerbaijanianism. In his 
report to the First Congress of the Azerbaijanians of the world 
President Aliev made it clear: “We are Azerbaijanians. Azerbaijan 
is a Motherland to all of us. This land has reared us as a people, as 
a nation, as human personalities. Therefore the spirit of 
Azerbaijanianism is alive in each of us. The spirit of 
Azerbaijanianism, the idea of Azerbaijanianism should become a 
bond linking us together and prodding us toward a still tighter 
cohesion. Every state has a national ideology of its own. The 
national ideology of the independent Azerbaijan Republic is the 
ideology of Azerbaijanianism.” 
Geidar Aliev reverted time and again to this idea in his public 
statements and speeches, and deliberations. He had supporters; 
true, but also opponents–both at home and abroad. “...Two lines, 
or trends are clearly at work in the present ideological life of the 
republic, –wrote in this connection Academician Afrand 
Dashdamirov. –The first one aims at dissolving the Azerbaijan 
idea in the Pan-Turkic and Pan-Islamic idea. The other champions 
the formula of Azerbaijanism that integrates the multilayer ethnic 
culture of Azerbaijanism, including the Turkic roots, Caucasian 
realities, national-democratic traditions and Islamic sources.” 
 
 
May 28–the Republic Day. On that day in 1918 the 
groundwork was laid for the first democratic state in the East. In 
1918, by concerted efforts of Fatali-khan Khoisky, Nasib-bek 
Yusifbeili and Mamed Emin Rasulzadeh, the Azerbaijan 
 343
Democratic Republic was born. The words that Mamed Emin 
Rasulzadeh uttered on October 26, 1917, at the First Congress of 
the Mussavat (Equality) Party–these words came true. “A new 
independent Azerbaijan state will be established, and this new 
state will enter an alliance of independent states.” Time has borne 
out the shrewd prediction of this active politician who–all the way 
back in 1902, then a seventeen-old student of the Baku Technical 
School, set up a Moslem youth organization, to be followed by the 
Social-Democratic Organization Gummet (Energy) that 
cooperated actively with the Bakinian Committee of the Russian 
Social-Democratic Workers’ Party. The Azerbaijan Republic of 
today has inherited the traditions and positive experience of the 
Azerbaijan Democratic Republic and Soviet Azerbaijan alike. 
 
 
On June 6 President Aliev received a US delegation headed by 
roving ambassador Steven Mann, the presidential counsellor on 
the development of energy resources of the Caspian basin. 
Welcoming the guests, President Aliev noted their useful work at 
the 9th International Exhibition and at the Conference Caspian: 
Oil, Gas, Oil-Refining and Petrochemistry. 
– Mr. President, –Steven Mann said. –During my work as 
ambassador I got only two letters from President Bush which I 
was to forward to addressees. In both cases those were the letters 
addressed by President Bush to Your Excellency. This way we, 
the Americans, express our respect and gratitude for your support 
in implementing the Baku-Ceyhan project. We assess just as 
highly your assistance in achieving such a level of relationships 
between our two countries.  
Geidar Aliev thanked the ambassador: 
– These two letters are of much significance to our country. 
The promulgation of President Bush’s letter at the opening of the 
9th International Exhibition and Conference showed how much 
the USA and its President are concerned with the exploration and 
mining of oil-and-gas deposits in the Caspian, and the export of 
energy resources... In 1994 we signed the Contract of the Century 
and, at all subsequent stages, we felt support from the US 
government. The fact that the US President put his signature to the 
agreement endorsing the blueprints of the trunk export pipeline 
Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan that we had signed in Istanbul in 1999–this 
fact demonstrates what great significance the US government 
attaches to our work. 
– We are making a new history in using the oil and gas 
potentialities of the Caspian Sea, –Geidar Aliev emphasized.  
 344 
–I am satisfied very much that we are among those who are 
creating this history. Our job has a great future. This history will 
be continued after us, too... 
 
 
In June 2002 the Azerbaijan State Economic University turned 
70 years. “In order to advance the economy of Azerbaijan and 
have it integrated into the world economic system, we need high-
skilled specialists,” President Aliev said at the jubilee 
celebrations. He outlined the milestones of economic pickup. 
“You know that since about 1994 as much as 9 billion dollars has 
been invested. Just stop to think: this is a very big figure for a 
small country like ours... We have already set up an Oil Fund. 
This Oil Fund has close to 580 million dollars. Our hard currency 
reserve is up to 1 bullion 200 million dollars. But in 1993, nine 
years ago, on June 12, and in a hard situation at that, I pondered 
over the proposal on assuming the burden of responsibility for 
Azerbaijan. At that time we had not even one dollar’s worth in our 
hard currency reserve. All we have done is only the first result. In 
the next few years our incomes will increase, the people’s well is 
being improved, and earnings will go up. Now we have steady 
budget revenues, no problems here. 
... A few days ago I told the President of the Oil Academy of 
Sciences, and I want to say it today, too, that I am about to raise 
the salaries of the Academy’s personnel, and I have instructed the 
Prime-Minister and the Finance Minister accordingly. They will 
table proposals, and I shall consider them in a few days’ time. 
Don’t worry; there will be a pay rise! Salaries will be raised in 
other spheres as well. 
Just two days ago I signed a decree. I have fixed a life pension 
to 150 prominent professionals in the arts and literature of 
Azerbaijan, and to people active in other areas, too. Five years ago 
I had no opportunity like this. I couldn’t do that much as I 
wanted... Today, as you see, we’ve got the wherewithal, see, how 
generous I have become suddenly! I have allocated 150 pensions. 
Each and everyone from among these people embody the history 
of Azerbaijan literature, arts and culture, and in other spheres, too. 
Each and everyone! 
And something else as well: the works created by their genius, 
their legacy makes history. They are the makers of our history.” 
 
 
 345
June 25, 2002, Istanbul 
 
The conference, the Legend of Three Seas, took place in 
Istanbul within the framework of the summit held by heads of 
state and government of member countries in the Organization of 
Black-Sea Economic Cooperation. The very name of this 
conference is an apt reply to sceptics of little faith who deemed 
impossible cooperation of the Black Sea countries with Azerbaijan 
that did not heal war wounds yet. But life has confirmed the 
practicability of our plans and hopes for Azerbaijan’s renaissance. 
All this came to be reflected in Geidar Aliev’s address.  
– It is five years how of the conference, the Legend of Three 
Seas–the Caspian, the Black Sea and the Mediterranean. But why 
was it not held before? Because there was scant information on 
the tight interconnectedness of this work of ours, and there were 
but few who believed in that. But... with the signing in 1994 of the 
treaty named Contract of the Century there came broad 
discussions of the Caspian Sea problems. Few, if any, the world 
over knew about the richest deposits of oil and gas in the Caspian. 
But we in Azerbaijan know it. 
Then the Azerbaijan President came up with a brilliant lecture 
that could have graced even a career oilman. 
– The legend of three seas has but one mother, the Caspian 
Sea. And near this mother lies Azerbaijan, –Aliev said 
emotionally. 
Azerbaijan is an inalienable part of the Turkic world. In the 
Soviet years strict restrictions applied to Azerbaijan’s ties with 
Turkey, to cultural contacts and mutual exchanges of spiritual and 
intellectual values. But the ideological swing-beam barriers were 
gone with Azerbaijan gaining independence. 
Turkey was the first to recognize Azerbaijan’s independence. 
Geidar Aliev recalled that time and again. One event moved him 
overmuch: a park and a boulevard in Kars were given his name. 
 
 
July 9,2002, St. Petersburg 
 
The Sunday of July 9, 2002, will always remain a red-letter 
day in the records of Russian and Azerbaijan culture. On that 
sunny day a monument was unveiled on Kamenny Ostrov 
Prospekt to the great Azerbaijan poet and thinker Nizami; 
Geryush Babaev, an Honored Artist of Azerbaijan, sculptured the 
statue. 
 346 
– Nizami was more than a poet; he was a great humanist, –said 
Russia’s President Vladimir Putin at the unveiling ceremony. –In 
this sense Nizami’s creations belong to all of us, to all of mankind. 
– On the twelfth of October last year a monument to the genius 
of Russian poetry, Alexander Sergeevich Pushkin, was unveiled in 
Baku, –Geidar Aliev recalled. –And today, a monument to Nizami 
has been erected in the city which Pushkin called a creation of the 
great Peter. 
We might just as well add: it’s fine when countries and states 
could exchange Ambassadors like Alexander Pushkin and Nizami 
Gandzhevi. 
 
 
Taking a stroll about St. Petersburg, Geidar Aliev could find 
Gorokhovaya ulitsa (street) hands down. One of its buildings, 
No. 6, once housed an advanced training school for commanding 
officers of the Ministry for State Security, the MGB. He was 
pleased to have his photo taken–in memory of the good old days–
within the walls so much familiar to him. On his way back to the 
hotel Astoria he talked readily with city residents and compatriots. 
It had always been that way on his trips, be it in Paris or Berlin, 
St. Petersburg or Moscow. 
 
 
...Leontyevsky pereulok (lane) is а calm, quiet street in the 
beehive of central Moscow. This alley dives under the arch next to 
City Hall (formerly Moscow Soviet, the Mossovet) facing the 
busy Tverskaya Street, one of the main thoroughfares of Moscow. 
You find sundry office-buildings here and three embassies–of 
Cuba, Ukraine and Azerbaijan; in former times several union 
republics of the USSR had their missions here. Sundays 
Leontyevsky pereulok is virtually asleep–you see only drowsy 
puffing on their cigarettes outdoors. On weekdays crowds line up 
in front of the embassies and consulates. But that Sunday people 
flocked to the Azerbaijan embassy not for documents, visas or 
passports. They were guests, Azerbaijanians resident in Russia. 
President Aliev had invited them. 
He began his address in Azerbaijani, the mother tongue of the 
Azeris from the cradle. 
– My dear compatriots! Dear sisters, brothers, friends! 
I am much pleased to meet you here today. I greet cordially all 
of you. In your person I greet heartily all Azerbaijanians resident 
in Russia, each and every Azerbaijanian. I wish you good health 
and success in your work. Good luck to your families! 
 347
President Aliev spoke softly, but each of his word could be 
heard even in the backbenches. 
– Azerbaijani is your language, your native language, and the 
state language of independent Azerbaijan... I want 
Azerbaijanians–and I say that to the youth in particular–to have a 
good command of Russian and English, French and German, 
Spanish and Arabic. But let them have a perfect command of 
Azerbaijani, too. The more languages you know, the richer you 
are. He who speaks one tongue only will have it hard in our 
present world, an interconnected world. 
Considering all this and in token of my respect for you, I shall 
continue my speech in Russian...” 
They who could hear Aliev, noted: his Russian was perfect, 
impeccable. Unlike the Russian of some other well-known 
Caucasian politicians, Shevardnadze, for one. What is behind all 
that? School? Family? Self-education? 
 
 
The Alievs–all of their family–had spoken only their native 
tongue, Azerbaijani, ever since childhood. There were but few 
people at Nakhichevan in the early 1920s with any command of 
Russian. As Fatima Abdullazadeh, one of Geidar Aliev’s 
biographers, says, “Geidar Aliev began studying Russian rather 
late. He first heard Krylov’s fables and Pushkin’s poems at 
Nakhichevan School only.” 
But we might suppose something else as well. Namely that the 
great realist writer and satirist Djalil Mamedkulizadeh was one 
who had influenced Geidar Aliev in his school years–more than 
Krylov and Pushkin did, much as we respect the geniuses of 
Russian and world literature. This classic of Azerbaijanian 
national literature must have instilled in Aliev the zealous regard 
for the mother tongue–in particular, by his drama piece The Book 
of My Mother. 
...Three sons return to their mother, an Azeri woman, from 
alien parts. One interlards his Russian words, another speaks a 
breed of Azeri-Turkish, and the third flaunts Iranian and Persian 
idioms. 
A well-nigh migrant, international story. At this point we could 
recall the dull-witted seminarist described by Nikolai Gogol in 
Village Evenings Near Dikanka. On having picked up a few Latin 
words, he became quite a “latynist” (latinist) for that matter; 
latinized so much so as to forget his native Ukrainian mova, the 
mother tongue. He hanged us to all his nouns. A spade thus 
became a spadus, a wench–a wenchus. Laying his eyes on a rake, 
 348 
the bastard latynist asked his father, now, dad, how do you call 
that in our tongue?” Gaping at the thing, he stepped on the rake’s 
prongs and–lo and behold! –got a good blow with the rake-stick 
on his pate. “On this darned rake! –the hapless scholar hollered 
with pain and jumped up as high as two feet. –A plague on its 
damned father-of-rake, it hits real bad!” 
So, as the saying goes, the three Azeri youth stepped on the 
selfsame rake. The three brothers, once back in the home of their 
fathers, were unable to speak their mother tongue, the tongue in 
which their mother had told their first fairy-tales. The Mother’s 
Book was Greek to them: picking up a smattering of alien idiom, 
they lost the sense of the native idiom and the spiritual memory of 
their fathers together with it. Those “lettered gentlemen” were 
actually of the same kidney as the ignoramuses portrayed by 
Mamedkulizadeh in Happenings in the Village of Danabash. 
 
 
In June 2000 the grand hall of the Azerbaijan embassy in 
Moscow brought together Azeri compatriots domiciled in Russia. 
Geidar Aliev could see many a familiar face–people he had met in 
the line of his duties in Moscow or on business trips, and them 
whom he had sent for Big Science abroad, away from their native 
land. 
– ...I have always said–I said it in the former times as I was 
still working in Azerbaijan, and I am saying this today–that no 
people can advance at the rates of the entire world system if it 
shuts itself up within the space of its territory; that is I have 
always come out against the narrow-minded moods of ethnic 
isolationism” 
In those times by far not everybody, both in our republic and in 
Moscow, supported him; First Secretary of the Central Committee 
of the Communist Party of Azerbaijan, when he proposed sending 
young Azeri people for knowledge to Russia and other republics 
of the Soviet Union. But he, Aliev, got the upper hand and today, 
with a sense of legitimate pride, thinks back to his project, 
because Azerbaijan was the only one from among the other Soviet 
republics “that had succeeded in gaining certain advantages in this 
regard.” 
– As of the year 1970 I set the task of sending more 
Azerbaijanians to Russia, to Moscow and Leningrad above all, 
and to other major centers of higher education, centers of science 
and culture. 
Even he, First Secretary of the Central Committee of the 
Communist Party of Azerbaijan, and member of the CPSU Central 
 349
Committee, did not have it easy. At first, after so many 
consultations and solicitations, the Republic of Azerbaijan was 
granted a quota of 100 student vacancies at college and university 
in Soviet republics. Those one hundred youths and girls were 
surely free to go where they wished–to Moscow or Leningrad 
(now St. Petersburg), Kiev or Sverdlovsk (now Yekaterinburg) 
and seek enrollment like everybody else. And get flunked as a 
rule. Young Azerbaijanians could not compete on a par with their 
agemates in big cities–especially Azerbaijanians coming from 
backcountry districts. They were unable to stand the stiff 
competition among applicants. 
In the long run Aliev managed to obtain the right for Azerbaijan 
young people to enter higher schools of the Soviet Union without 
competition at entrance examination. At first there were 100 
reserved vacancies, and then, in the 1978/79 academic year, the 
number was raised to 800 (at that time Aliev was elected candidate 
member of the CPSU Politburo). As a matter of fact, Azerbaijan 
was no exception–the issue involved the vocational training of 
ethnic personnel from other union republics. Quotas were accorded 
to youths and girls of Turkmenia and Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan and 
Georgia, Moldavia and Tajikistan. Aliev appears to be the only one 
from among top officials to take the matter in hand. 
– You know, –he said at that eventful meeting of June 200 in 
the Azerbaijan embassy in Moscow, –much of my archives of the 
past is gone, I had to move here and there, sometimes I was 
unable to keep everything and had to destroy it for lack of space. 
But I have kept the files of those young people who went each 
year to different cities of the Soviet Union for enrollment without 
competition. Even today you can find their personalia in my 
archives–which in particular and from what town and district 
came to be enrolled in this or that college. Many of these people 
have shown a worthy performance. 
Now why was I doing that, you may ask? First, let me tell you 
frankly, the level of education at Moscow University is much 
higher than that at Baku University. That’s the way things were in 
those days, and that’s the way they are now. I am citing just one 
example out of many. Second, we had no higher-school training 
for some specialties at all. So we had to use the possibilities of 
higher schools in other republics for training specialists in this or 
that line. And third, I wanted people to get out of their shell. You 
see, they could tear down the barriers of ethnic narrowness; they 
could break out into the open and get in touch with other people. 
This thing, like you or not, makes one study Russian to begin 
 350 
with, and many found time to learn English and other languages 
here, in Moscow, Leningrad and other cities. 
By the way, I took care of that daily and on several occasions 
gathered students of Moscow colleges here, in our mission. But in 
time their number rose so much that there could be no room 
enough for everybody here, in this hall. And then we went to the 
new building of MKhAT (Moscow Art Theater) on Tverskoy 
Boulevard and brought everybody there; and I invited the Moscow 
leadership–the head of the Moscow city authority, the minister for 
higher education, the top people from the Central Committee of 
Komsomol and officials from the CPSU Central Committee.” 
That get-together in the new MKhAT building is still in the 
memory of many of those who took part. And one of those who 
hade the floor and spoke was a boy taking a course at Moscow 
State University. Aliev could well remember the chap–who came 
from an out-of-the-way hamlet of the Djebrail mountain district; a 
bright student, as his professors said, he spoke but poor Russian–
at home school his class had no teacher of Russian at all–the 
pupils got a passing grade, free. Geidar Aliev met this lad again, at 
the embassy meeting, and he took a special liking for this youth, 
now mature and grown up to manhood. A straight-A student, he 
spoke fluent Russian now. 
– I kept looking at this lad, and nearly wept with joy, –the 
President confided. –I rejoiced that much. 
That’s what only a father could say about his beloved, son. 
 
 
A book exhibition opened in the Akhundov National Library. 
It displayed books donated by President Aliev–reference books, 
dictionaries, volumes of Samed Vurgun, Sergei Yesenin, 
Bakhtiyar Vagabzadeh, Bazhov and Nietzsche, collections of 
fantastic tales... More than 500 editions in all. 
Geidar Aliev had been fond of books from his childhood years, 
he understood the importance of books in societal life, valued 
highly the role of libraries. He visited this largest library of 
Azerbaijan three times. 
– He was here on the third of July 1995, on the fourth of March 
1996, and on the twentieth of November 1997, –the director, Leila 
Gafurova specifies. –In 1997 the president signed the law “On 
Library Management in Azerbaijan”. This is certainly immense 
support for music lovers. –You know, –she adds, –they say now and 
then that Geidar Alievich has planted, his own people everywhere–
fellow countrymen, kinsfolk and that sort of cronyism. But I admire 
him, though I don’t belong to any of the bunch. 
 351
…Should the President of the Azerbaijan Republic leave his 
post before his established term, an early presidential election is to 
be held. This is stated in Article 105 of the Constitution of the 
Republic. The President suggested an amendment: for the prime 
minister to carry out presidential duties prior to the election. 
Should the President be unable to discharge his duties, his official 
powers were to be transferred to the prime minister. 
But the opposition spoke out against. Why? Abel Magerramov, 
the rector of Baku State University and Corresponding Member of 
the Azerbaijan National Academy of Sciences, wrote in this 
connection that the handing over of powers is fully in compliance 
with international legal standards. “By Articles 7 and 99 of the 
Constitution the executive power in the Azerbaijan Republic is 
vested with the President of the Republic. The President exercises 
government of all the executive structures, including the Cabinet 
of Ministers. He is both the head of state end the head of executive 
government. As to Nilli Mejlis, it is a different body, that of the 
legislature. The transfer of powers to the executive branch of 
government is more expedient, for it is the prime-minister who is 
concerned with executive matters.” 
 
 
On August 24, 2002, Azerbaijan had a referendum on the 
amendments to the Constitution. As testified by international 
observers, in this referendum the people placed their trust in 
Geidar Aliev. 
The Central Electoral Commission received no complaints 
about any violation of the law either in the course of the 
referendum or in after days. Still and all, on August 26 the leaders 
of some parties in the opposition circulated information “full of 
slander to the address of TsIK (Central Electoral Commission).” 
This was said in a statement of the Central Electoral Commission. 
The Commission also gave a worthy rebuff to the hullabaloo 
raised in Washington and Brussels over the matter. 
“The reply of a spokesman for the press service of the US State 
Department to the question of newsmen about the referendum and 
the position set forth by the OSCE representative in Azerbaijan 
stem from the rash and subjective approach formed on the basis of 
wrong information fed by the opposition party. We maintain that 
the stand taken by the press-service of the US State Department 
and by the OSCE representative in Azerbaijan on the referendum 
of August 24 is not objective, it is but biased and groundless, and 
is in disregard for the Azerbaijan people at large and for millions 
 352 
of voters who have voiced their attitude to the changes in the 
Constitution. 
As much as 83 percent of Azerbaijan’s citizens took part in the 
referendum of August 24. Most of them supported the 
constitutional amendments. 
 
 
General Akhundov’s Birthday 
 
September 16, 2002, General Vagif Akhundov’s birthday, 
happened to be a Monday. This event, however, in no way 
interfered with the general’s daily routine. As usual, he reported for 
work by nine o’clock in the morning. He ran up lightly upstairs to 
the first floor of the old building that once housed the Council of 
Ministers and now, the headquarters of the Chief Directorate. He 
did not get short of breath–no! As if he scampered on a smooth 
sidewalk. Lean and wiry, the general did look his age, on he wrong 
side of fifty though he was. No sooner he stepped into his office 
than the phone rang. A direct government line! 
– Hullo! Yes, Mr. President! 
– Good morning, Akhundov! Could you come to me right 
now? 
In a few minutes the general mounted to the fourth floor of the 
white building on the hill known to all of Baku. Geidar Aliev 
stepped forward. 
– Congratulations! Happy birthday! 
Recalling that Monday, Lieutenant General Akhundov did not 
conceal his emotions: 
– Geidar Alievich was considerate of everybody, near and 
distant folks. He didn’t forget anyone. 
They first met in 1978, when the YCL committee secretary of 
the Azerbaijan Ministry of the Interior, Senior Lieutenant 
Akhundov got a new job offer–that of the political instructor at the 
Directorate in charge of security of party and Soviet bodies–this 
department was dubbed a “niner”–for officially it was the Ninth 
State Security Department. Geidar Aliev, the First Secretary of the 
Communist Party’s Central Committee of Azerbaijan, asked for a 
young man showing promise for the job. Arif Geidarov, the 
Interior Minister, recommended Akhundov. There might have 
been other proposals, from the KGB (State Security Committee), 
too. But Aliev chose Akhundov. The general remembers: 
– He //Aliev// asked where I worked and in what position... I 
told him about my record. An Oil Institute graduate, with honors. 
Called up right upon graduation, saw service in Engels, with the 
 353
Air Force, in the logistics department; saw to gas and lubricants 
supplies in my unit. 
That’s how a new page was turned in the biography of Senior 
Lieutenant Akhundov, then 28 years of age. Meanwhile Aliev was 
promoted to a top government post in Moscow. And Akhundov, 
now a career state security officer, continued his service in Baku. 
In 1985 he became a department head. Head of the Government 
Security Directorate now. 
– Is it true, sir, that you prevented several attempts on Geidar 
Aliev’s life?  
– There were such attempts indeed, in October 1994, in March 
1995 and later, just before the visit of Leonid Kuchma, the 
President of Ukraine. Terrorists were about to blast a big bridge 
on the highway between the airport and Baku. They put about a 
hundred kilos of explosives under the bridge. Had this charge 
gone off, it would have wrecked all the houses nearby. Inspecting 
the bridge just on the eve of the visit, our officers noticed one 
nonstandard concrete pier–it misfitted the overall structure. We 
found the explosive charge with a 500-to-600-meter fuse attached 
to it... There were also other episodes,” the general smiled, “when 
the fates protected the President... 
On yet another occasion, too, the fates saved President Aliev, 
General Akhundov and many other people flying home after a 
visit abroad. Because of the strong head wind the pilot decided to 
land elsewhere, not on the regular runway. This sudden maneuver, 
as it came out afterwards, saved the plane. The bandits detained 
for another crime confessed they were preparing a terrorist act in 
the airport. They were the people implicated in the turmoil of 
1993. And they could not launch a Stinger on that eventful day. 
President; Aliev was fond of strolling about Baku... 
– Only a few security guards accompanied him, General 
Akhundov recalls. –He talked with Bakinians in the streets, in 
cafés. 
– They say Geidar Aliev was a good wit, wasn’t he? Of course 
you remember some episode… 
– There were all too many, it’s hard to choose any particular 
one. He was a genius, a man of many parts... And yet always 
eager to learn and consult competent, knowledgeable people. I 
could see him many times asking about what was new and 
unknown to him. Aliev never considered himself a great know-all, 
he was never shy of admitting he didn’t know this or that. Live 
and learn? In such cases he would draw people out and ask to 
explain some matter and go deeper into it. 
 354 
General Akhundov’s small office has portraits of the two 
presidents–Geidar Aliev and Ilkham Aliev–as well as many books 
and souvenirs... There ought to be a special, most intimate 
memento? The general replies right off the bat: 
– Here, this shot. –He takes a framed photo from the shelf 
above the telephones: Geidar Aliev in a red life jacket bursting 
with laughter, and General Akhundov behind him wearing the 
same jacket. 
– It was in Norway. We were to fly to a floating drilling-rig 
out in the North Sea–300 kilometers by helicopter. They, the 
Norwegians, briefed us and fitted us out with jackets. Some of our 
companions tried to talk Aliev out of it–better not risk flying over 
the rough sea. But he didn’t fear anything. Said he: “I am not 
afraid of death. Let my foes know: I understood where I was 
going. God protects me!” 
Before flying off we had to sign papers that each of us did it of 
his own free will. That’s by the book... Gasan Gasanov, the 
foreign minister, would not sign–should he go under, he said, his 
family would get no insurance money anyway. But Geidar Aliev 
took it easy and put his signature. He just laughed it off. So we 
flew out.” 
– When was it? 
General Akhundov leafs through his logbook. Here it is–this 
trip occurred on April 24-27, 1996. That year Aliev made 18 visits 
to other countries. The following year, in 1997, there were as 
many as twenty. In 1998–ten. In 1999–thirteen. Just as many in 
2000. Nine visits in 2001. Sixteen trips in 2002: Moscow, USA, 
Turkmenistan, Turkey, Iran, St. Petersburg, Istanbul, Ankara, and 
Yalta... 
Rafael Bagirov, the President’s personal photographer (a great 
master of documentary photography!), accompanied Geidar Aliev 
on each of these trips, now memorialized in the photos. Rafael 
Bagirov: 
“...The first days of August 1997. President Aliev on an 
official visit in the United States. After meeting US President Bill 
Clinton we arrived in Houston. And here good news: he, Geidar 
Aliev, had another grandson born to him. Granddad again! Ilkham 
and his lovely wife Mekhriban had a son. Geidar Alievich was 
beside himself with joy. He met all of our delegation and received 
our congratulations. I had never seen Aliev as jubilant as that. On 
his home journey to Azerbaijan the President made a stopover in 
London and called at the clinic to see his newborn grandson. 
Geidar Alievich, I might say, rushed there. Tears welled in his 
eyes as he saw the baby, and he uttered in a loud, quivering voice, 
 355
‘I name this baby boy Geidar!’ At those moments I took a few 
snapshots, quite impressive, I think. I am proud to have made the 
first photos of the infant Geidar Aliev. 
Geidar Aliev Senior loved all of his grandchildren immensely. 
But he was especially soft on the little one, his last grandson 
named after him, and took much pride in the toddler, Geidar Aliev 
Junior.” 
President Aliev was in this mad race day in and day out, all 
through his incumbency, year after year... He liked very much 
going on business tours. There is hardly any town, village or other 
place in Azerbaijan, which he did not visit. Aliev had a special 
liking to Nakhichevan, his hometown where austere nature molds 
such sturdy characters as his one. 
 
 
Tenth of August... The presidential plane touches dawn in 
Nakhichevan Airport after an hour-long flight from Baku. The 
overland routes to this autonomy still cut off, one had to go by air 
only. Everyone. The President, college students, those on business 
trips–everybody! Ten daily flights of large aircraft in 
summertime–even that was not enough! 
The airport, once up to the mark, was now clearly out of date. 
The blueprints of the new air terminal were shown to he President. 
He remarked bluntly on hearing what the architects had to say: 
– A jerrybuilt affair again! 
The design had to be overhauled, from A to Z. He was so eager 
to attend the opening ceremony of Nakhichevan Airport! Building 
crews worked apace and did their best. But it was Ilkham Aliev 
who came to the opening of this wonderwork of architecture... 
Five August days in the hometown. Airport construction. The 
museum of the talented Azerbaijan artist Bakhruz Kengerli. It was 
opened at the President’s initiative in the same good two-storey of 
brick where a long time ago Geidar Aliev, a college student then, 
had heard the artist’s name for the first time. “He was a man of rare 
talent,” President Aliev said at the inauguration ceremony. “His 
works are precious indeed.” Next, the Baikhyr artificial lake–the 
canal had already been laid through, the arid steppe was thirsty for 
water... Ground-breaking for a new school building, opened by the 
new President of Azerbaijan, Ilkham Aliev... 
 
 356 
September 23, 2002, Moscow 
 
That was President Aliev’s second visit to Russia within a 
year. A case that had no precedent in diplomatic practice. But 
such contacts may become commonplace for neighboring friendly 
states. In January the Azerbaijan President had been on a state 
visit to Moscow; on June 9th he had met Vladimir Putin while on 
a working visit in St. Petersburg when both presidents attended 
the opening ceremony of the Nizami monument. And now, a third 
Russian-Azerbaijan summit, the signing of agreements between 
the Russian Federation and the Azerbaijan Republic on the 
delimitation of contiguous sites of the Caspian sea floor. 
– We have traveled a long path toward this settlement, –
Russia’s President said in his statement. –There have been many 
disputes and much strenuous work on both sides; but I want to 
stress that this was the work of interested partners. And I am very 
glad that it has ended in such positive results. 
Considering the agreements signed earlier between Russia and 
Kazakhstan, and also between Kazakhstan and Azerbaijan, we can 
say with certainty that from now on the interaction of these three 
countries in the exploration and development of the mineral 
resources of the bottom of the Central and Northern Caspian has 
gained a solid international-legal basis. I am positive that the use 
of the formula, ‘we divide the floor, but the water is common’, 
and of the principle of stage-by-stage approach will ultimately 
bring us to the mutually advantageous solution of the problem of 
Caspian status with due account of the interests–let me stress it–of 
all the Caspian states. 
Other intergovernmental agreements were signed–on the 
reciprocal recognition of education certificates; on continued 
specialization of enterprises and institutions involved in the 
manufacture of military-related equipment... 
Geidar Aliev did not list all the documents signed. 
– Vladimir Vladimirovich has been speaking about what we 
have done today and what documents we have signed. I would 
rather not tire you but say it is important that what Vladimir 
Vladimirovich has said here is one to one what I would have said 
myself. That’s what our relations mean today... 
I wish to say once again that the Russian-Azerbaijan relations 
represent a priority trend in our foreign policy. Being together for 
nearly two centuries we have grown so much together and come 
so much close together that it would be wrong to break these 
bonds. The fact that we have become independent states now does 
 357
not at all mean that we should move away from each other–quite 
the contrary, we should strengthen and foster our ties... 
On September 24 President Aliev met the faculty and students 
of the Moscow State Institute of International Relations (MGIMO) 
who presented him a diploma of MGIMO’s Doctor honoris causa. 
The young diplomat Ilkham Aliev, a graduate of this college, had 
been among its faculty. Their came other times, however, 
something we have told you about. The son of the disgraced 
politician was dismissed. –Now, Ilkham Geidarovich, you can no 
longer work at this college. 
Anatoli Torkunov, the rector, would not recall this sad episode 
of the past. 
– We are pleased to note that the mutual interest shown in 
Russia and Azerbaijan in studying scientific achievements and 
cultures of our two peoples, their languages and literatures, keeps 
on and grows. Esteemed Mr. President, there is your personal 
contribution in all this... 
High-level meetings and your visits to our country since 1993 
have been exerting much influence on our relations. As a result of 
these visits and this meeting with Vladimir Vladimirovich Putin, a 
number of important interstate agreements have been signed. The 
agreement on the division of the contiguous sites of the Caspian 
sea floor that you and the Russian President signed yesterday is 
likewise in this number. 
We are well aware how important this agreement is both for 
promoting two-way relations and for the development of the entire 
Caspian region in stability and peace. And it is of no little 
significance to us, college professionals, that yesterday the two 
education ministers signed an agreement between Russia and the 
Azerbaijan Republic on the mutual recognition of graduation 
diplomas, academic degrees and titles. 
Unlike his shortsighted political opponents Geidar Aliev 
understood perfectly well the role of good, friendly relations with 
the great northern neighbor. 
“Russian-Azerbaijan relations are a priority line to us,” he said. 
“These are the relationships of strategic partnership and 
cooperation. Looking back into the history of Russian-Azerbaijan 
relations after the Soviet Union’s breakup, we must say it has not 
always been smooth riding... 
With the election of Vladimir Vladimirovich Putin to the 
presidency we felt immediately a change in our relationship. His 
first visit abroad in 2001 he made to Azerbaijan. Our public 
assessed it highly. In this past period our domestic situation has 
been stable, and our relations with Russia have been developing 
 358 
with much success. Speaking about the history of our relations 
with the gaining of independence by us, we should say that 
President Putin’s visit to Azerbaijan ushered in a new stage.” 
We may find different pages in the two-century history of 
relations between our two countries. We can pick out all sorts of 
documents to fit any occasion. Say, about the long-standing pro-
Russian orientation of Azerbaijan. Here is, for example, a dispatch 
sent to Empress Catherine I in February 1727 by Prince Vassily 
Dolgoruky: “I was met with great joy in all the provinces where I 
was traveling... Everybody asked that I should take them under the 
Russian Empire’s protection…” And another message, half a 
century later: “All the indigenous peoples are awaiting with 
impatience the arrival of Russian troops and are eager to become 
Russia’s subjects…” We could continue in the same line. Or come 
up with the opposite version and quote from the stuff about 
invaders and occupationists barging in from the North. Neither of 
the versions would be true. Because there cannot be truncated 
truths, half-truths. History, as Geidar Aliev used to say, “should 
know the whole truth”. 
 
 
The holy month of Ramadan (Ramazan) began. A month 
sacred for the Islamic world. 
In independent Azerbaijan, Islam emerged into the open as part 
and parcel of the nation’s spiritual fabric. The historic role of this 
old creed is reflected in our state insignia–the green band in 
Azerbaijan’s Tricolor is a symbolic testimony thereof. President 
Aliev addressed warm greetings to the people on Ramadan’s eve. 
He paid homage to the heroic sons and daughters of Azerbaijan 
who sacrificed their lives for the sake of freedom, sovereignty and 
territorial integrity of their land, and wished “peace and repose for 
their souls, and patience–to their kith and kin, to all our people.” 
Geidar Aliev conveyed his best greetings and congratulations to 
all our compatriots abroad. 
– I wish all of you success in the work you are doing toward 
the strengthening of Azerbaijan’s independence, and in the work 
to build democratic society and achieve well-being for our people. 
According to Islam, in this month of Ramadan Allah chains the 
sheitan (iblis, the devil) so as to forbid him from entering people’s 
souls and making them stray from the straight and narrow path of 
truth; thus the fiend is rendered impotent before man. Ramadan is 
a month of sublime thoughts about human life and good deeds; in 
all his doings man invokes his Maker. 
 359
In just one week of November 2002 President Aliev signed 
several decrees and orders, including one on the celebrations of 
the 80th birth anniversary of the composer Fikret Amirov. A 
memorial plaque was installed on the wall of the house where the 
creator of magic music lived; a five-volume edition of his works 
was to be published, and a documentary film released. One of 
Baku’s schools of music was named for Amirov. 
Meanwhile the Baku Metro (subway) marked its 35th 
anniversary. President Aliev conferred decorations on a large 
group of engineers, workmen and managers. Azerbaijan, like it 
was in the Soviet times, awards high distinctions to citizens for 
their labor feats. There are but few examples like that in other 
countries. In the Soviet years inventors and innovators were 
awarded the title of Hero of Socialist Labor, they merited the 
orders of Red Banner of Labor and Labor Glory, and Valliant 
Labor medals... Now pause to think: the key word of each award 
and distinction is LABOR. That’s the way it should be in people’s 
life. In the life of everybody. 
Today’s Azerbaijan also has a similar title, the Hero-of-Labor 
title. Omar Agayev is one such hero. This man is a living legend 
and chronicle of the republic’s accomplishments. On the first of 
January 2003 he turned seventy-five. 
– Although I am not fond of marking my birthdays, my friends 
and acquaintances assembled at the Council of Aksakals of the 
Sabayl District to greet me, –the old man says. –The following day 
Geidar Aliev rang me up at home and congratulated me both on my 
jubilee and on the First of the Year. He wished goal luck and health 
to all my family and me. I, for one, was glad to greet our much-
esteemed President... I have many decorations. But it is a most 
precious award to me that my modest services to the people are not 
forgotten and that the head of state himself hailed me. 
 
 
A Girl With the Flag of the Republic 
 
The history of flags, banners and standards mirrors popular 
history. As in the year 1918 the flag of the first Azerbaijan 
Republic was hoisted, one of its leaders proclaimed, “A banner 
raised once will never fall.” But history willed it otherwise. On 
November 17, 1918, British troops moved into Baku. Their 
commander was General Thomson. On spying the flag of the 
Azerbaijan Democratic Republic flying at the waterfront side by 
side with the flags of Great Britain, the United States, France and 
Italy, the haughty Briton ordered to pull it down then and there. 
 360 
But neither did the Union Jack flutter long. A red flag replaced it 
in 1920. 
Geidar Aliev recalled the national holy when meeting the 
public of the town of Sheka. 
“I’ve been long looking at the little girl holding the flag. 
Watching her. Now look. She’s holding the flag in one hand only. 
The wind waving it this and that side, but she keeps it straight. My 
little daughter, I kiss you, I hug you. If you love this flag as much 
as that–the symbol of our independence–if you hold it tight in 
your hand, I bow to you in respect and reverence. In love and 
affection. This is our people’s independence.” 
October 18 is Azerbaijan’s Independence Day. On October 18, 
1991, Azerbaijan proclaimed its independence. Proclaiming your 
independence is one thing–you should be able to defend it. That’s 
what history teaches us to do. 
In 2002 just on the eve of this holiday, Geidar Aliev returned 
from his official visit to Turkey. A crowd of journalists jostled, 
their way to him in Bina Airport. 
– I believe this meeting will lay a good foundation for a new 
influx of business people of Turkey to Azerbaijan and for big 
investments from them, –the President said. –I am satisfied very 
much. 
As always, he was peppered with questions. He replied pithily 
and precisely, just stopping to think for a moment now and then. 
– The commander of NATO troops in Europe is now in Baku. 
His meeting with you is scheduled for today. What areas of 
Azerbaijan-NATO cooperation are going to be discussed? 
President Aliev smiles. 
– Really and truly, I love you all very much. I want you to 
become good journalists. Getting ready and asking good 
questions. Now you say he is in Baku, but I don’t know if he is 
going to meet you or not. You ask what areas of NATO’s 
cooperation with Azerbaijan we shall be talking about. Even if we 
do, I won’t tell you that. But why do you steal both your and my 
time with questions like that?” 
He said it half in-joke, a man who had never spared time for 
meeting journalists. He understood the impact of the press better 
than many other leaders. He did not regard newsmen as 
“underlings of the party”, as they were once called, he saw in 
them comrades-in-arms, comrades in the common cause. Years 
ago, as Aliev still headed the Central Committee of the 
Communist Party of Azerbaijan, a local chief had the total print of 
the district newspaper destroyed, put to knife: he, the secretary of 
the party’s district committee, did not like some critical article, 
 361
and so he ordered it that way... As soon as Aliev learned about the 
thing, he taught a good lesson to the district party boss, in fact, to 
the entire republic. All those guilty of that misdemeanor were 
relieved of their duties and punished, as party members, with no 
exception made for ranking officials of the Central Committee, 
too. Aliev, First Secretary, played tough in reinforcing respect for 
the press. 
 
 
– Geidar Alievich always worked Saturdays and Sundays, –
General Akhundov recalls. –But he worked shorter hours than on 
weekdays that are the only difference. 
Quite often–before work or after–he visited his wife’s grave. 
Standing for a long time at the monument, all alone, musing... 
The general knew better: that Geidar Aliev designed the 
memorial all by himself–down to every tree and its particular 
place... He, the general, would step aside–he could well 
understand those precious moments of spiritual communion that 
cannot be expressed in human words. 
 
You leave me in the dusk of this painful time, 
The sun so much in love with me and mine. 
The birds, black swans up in the wintry sky 
And heavy snowfall in our southern clime. 
Your fleeting shadow hovering on the edge and lip of time 
Escapes and melts away in the tender arms of mine... 
 
These lines are from the song Come Back, My Love. The 
daughter, Sevil Geidarovna Alieva–put the lyrics by the poet 
Nikolai Dobronravov to musicor Seva, as her dear mother liked to 
call her.... 
 
 
Baku came to be the venue of an international conference on 
the role of religion and creed in democratic society and on 
exploring ways of combating terrorism and extremism. President 
of the Azerbaijan Republic Geidar Aliev made an opening 
speech. 
– In this globalized world of ours we have come closer 
together. Consequently, the dialogue among nations, cultures and 
religions has acquired a deeper meaning and dimension. Fostering 
and sustaining this dialogue, we should... strive to expose and nip 
in the bud all seats of nascent terrorism. 
Today terrorist forces, in a bid to achieve their self-seeking 
political objectives, will turn now and then to universal human 
 362 
values sacred to all of us; they work to justify terror in protecting 
the interests of this or that group... Humankind, having said “No!” 
to terrorism and pooling all its forces, should seek to destroy the 
spiritual, economic and political roots of terrorism. 
The President pointed out that the occupation of 20 percent of 
the republic’s territory is not only a sequel to the Armenian-
Azerbaijan conflict. This is also the result of the activities of 
international terrorism in the region. 
By its Constitution, Azerbaijan is a secular state... We, Geidar 
Aliev stressed, perceive religion as a natural phenomenon, as an 
inalienable part of our national culture, historical heritage and 
self-identity. 
 
 
Three days–November 21, 22 and 23–President Aliev spent in 
Golden Praha (Prague), the capital of the Czech Republic, 
attending a summit of the NATO countries. It was not his first 
visit to this kind and hospitable city where he could admire its 
lovely sights–the Karlåv Most (Bridge), Staré Mĕsto Square and 
Hradčany wherefrom a breath-taking view opens on the crooked 
medieval lanes and greenish roofs of the old city... This time too, 
in spite of the tough schedule of official meetings and 
negotiations, he managed to put in a few minutes and stand for a 
while by the ancient walls of the Praha Grad. 
 
 
November 24, 2002, Baku 
 
He returned to Baku on Saturday, November 24, toward the 
close of the day. He could have taken a bit of rest on Sunday, the 
day off. But this is no good for Aliev, the live wire. On Sunday 
morning he phoned up General Akhundov. 
– I’d like to drive out to town. 
In 10-15 minutes the general showed up in the presidential 
quarters. 
– The President was all set to go out, with his sweater and suit 
on. I told Geidar Alievich that lately he had been taking all too 
many rides about town, someone might be out waiting for him, 
and it was not safe for security reasons.” 
“Don’t worry. Make ready, let’s drive to the monument to 
Djabarly.” 
Geidar Aliev liked this monument put up and unveiled at his 
initiative in 1981. He often spoke with much gratitude about the 
great contribution of Djafar Djabarly, who died in 1934, to Azeri 
 363
literature and in promoting Azeri national selfhood. By the by, a 
solid block of granite was brought from the Ukraine at Aliev’s 
persistent request. 
The presidential car pulled up at the Oil Academy on the 
square where the monument stands... Passersby flocked 
immediately. Some saluted the President and wished him good 
health. “You’ve brought back human dignity to us”; and others, 
out to seize the opportunity, approached him with their private 
requests. 
Geidar Aliev never took his aides on such unscheduled trips, it 
was General Akhundov who had to do their job. Having his note 
pad at the ready, the general put down the applicants’ names, 
home addresses and telephones. “They shall ring you up and tell 
about the measures taken.” 
As General Akhundov sees it, Geidar Aliev was eager–
especially after his trips abroad–to meet his country fellows, the 
Bakinians, informally, face to face. 
– Next, the President asked to stop his car at the Portofino café 
at the corner of Street May 28 and Byul-Byul Avenue. The café’s 
open veranda is always full of people. Young boys and girls, 
family couples, kids... Geidar Alievich took a free table, invited 
me to take a seat next to him and ordered an ice cream. 
Hanging in this café are photos taken on that memorable day. 
Geidar Alievich wearing a light sweater, his eyes behind 
sunglasses. We paid the bill (“The general will pay for the ice 
cream, he’s got my money”) and walked down Nizami Street to 
Fountains Square–that’s about two kilometers. He looked into 
shops end talked with passersby. 
Children, young people and adults kept dogging us and asking 
for permission to take photos. Geidar Alievich did not say “no”. 
This stroll took two hours or so. It was a big headache for security 
guards, and an unexpected welcome encounter for Baku townfolk. 
To the President it must have been a rare and thus dear chance to 
mix with the townspeople. 
 
 
On November 28th Geidar Aliev received a delegation from 
Turkey, it was headed by Sharyk Тага, an honorary president of 
the Turkish company Enka. The guest said that his company had 
built Europe’s biggest electric power station; that it aimed to 
invest into Azerbaijan’s economy, in particular, into streamlining 
the Sumgait thermal-power station. Geidar Aliev thanked the 
guest for his proposals and said he knew Enka since the days of 
his work in Moscow. 
 364 
– When you had renovated the Petrovka Arcades in Moscow, 
everybody said, what; topnotch builders these Turks are... Though 
formerly one did not think much of the Turks–good-for-nothing, 
ne’er-do-well.... When some poor bungler botched this or that, one 
blamed him: What? Are you a Turk? But you have built many 
nice houses in Moscow. And I am pleased to learn Enka has put 
them up. 
 
 
Those who had ever been to Baku might have had a chance to 
admire it at night, its “golden beehive of lights shining”, as the 
lyrics of Tofik Kuliev’s song go; the older generations remember 
it in the matchless rendition of Rashid Beibutov, the nightingale of 
Azerbaijan. 
...An old building in the heart of Baku houses the academic 
Institute of Manuscripts named after the great thinker Mohammed 
Fizuli. Priceless ancient texts are in custody there. A museum was 
opened in the rooms in which Hussein Djavid, a magician of the 
word, lived in the nineteen-thirties. President Aliev spoke at the 
opening ceremony. Recalling the tragic lot of the great poet and 
philosopher, he said no power and no force could ever deprive a 
people of its history and culture. 
May the soul of great Djavid rejoice... 
 
 
When aides of the First Deputy Chairman of the USSR Council 
of Ministers begged off from work earlier, they said they were 
going to the theater. They knew for sure–he, Geidar Aliev, would 
give permission and then ask how good the performance was. 
Geidar Aliev had been an ardent theatergoer from the tender 
nail. Therefore he could not miss the first night of Hamlet in the 
academic National Theater. After the show the President met with 
cast and congratulated them on their wonderful performance. 
Aliev’s meetings with the artistic and literary community had 
been a longtime tradition ever since the Soviet times. 
On December 12th Geidar Aliev invited to the Presidential 
Palace the sisters Fidan and Khuraman Kasimovs, People’s Artists 
of the Republic and State Prize laureates. They had their debut on 
the opera stage twenty-five years before. Here’s a fragment of the 
President’s conversation with the two Azeri opera divas. 
Geidar Aliev: “You have achieved a good deal. You have done 
very much for the Azerbaijan arts and music. You’ve got a rare 
natural talent. Both of you. Allah does not bestow this on 
anybody.” 
 365
Fidan Kasimova: “Mr. President, do you remember in 1975 
you heard the opera Kyorogly? After the second act you came out 
into the foyer. I stood there at the corner with my father and 
mother. By that time I had won two or three competitions... You 
came up, saluted my parents and asked, ‘Fidan, when shall we see 
you in Nigyar’s role?’ Do you remember that?” 
Geidar Aliev: “Yes, I do, I remember it quite well.”  
Fidan Kasimova: “Believe it or not, but I still remember that 
day. I’ve been elated by what you instilled in me–perseverance 
and a sense of responsibility. Your words overwhelmed me and 
spurred to learn Nigyar’s role, and I sang it.” 
 
 
We shall not err against the truth if we say: each of the great 
masters of Azerbaijan culture keeps fond memories of Geidar 
Aliev and feelings tinged with personal emotions. The singer 
Muslim Magomayev, for instance, remembers how after one of 
the concerts Geidar Aliev came over and asked: 
– Maybe I can do something for you? Any needs? 
– No, –the young singer replied, –it’s all right. –But he lived in 
a tenement-house in cramped lodgings, in what is known as a 
“communal” flat (in which kitchen and toilet facilities are shared 
by several families). 
“I deem he appreciated my tact, –Muslim Magomayev 
confided years later in his kind and radiant book Melody, My 
Love; –and that inspired his respect and love. I feel the same way 
about him.” 
 
 
“All Azerbaijan Children Have Got Together With US” 
 
The year 2002 was drawing to a close. The folks were getting 
ready for the New Year holidays. But Aliev knew no respite, it 
was all work and no holidays to him. 
General Akhundov: “I can’t recall a day when he stayed away. 
In all those years after 1993 he had never been on leave. And he 
never changed his schedule. Breakfast at eight in the morning. By 
ten o’clock he drove to his workplace. No lunch for him. His work 
schedule was tight–meetings, interviews, documents, phone calls, 
letters... Light dinner at eight in the evening. I’ve been working 
25 years here and I know–such was his daily routine. 
We believed: things would be going on like that in the new 
year, 2003, when the President was to turn eighty. 
 366 
On New Year’s Eve, December 31st, he arrived at the 
Republic’s Palace where kids from Baku children’s homes got 
together for festivities. There was a lot of music, dancing and 
singing. The children listened intently what Geidar-baba (grandpa) 
had to say. 
– As I meet you to attend these festivities, I feel as if all 
Azerbaijan children and young people had got together with us. I 
feel I’m hugging all of our younger set. Good luck to all of you! 
– We can say with legitimate pride that the year 2002 has been 
a success for the Azerbaijan people. –Geidar Aliev cited quite a 
few substantive figures on the republic’s economic growth, on the 
rising state budget, wages and pensions. –But we have many 
problems, too. Yet one problem is our nagging pain, and this is the 
Armenian-Azerbaijan conflict, the Nagorny Karabakh conflict, 
still outstanding and not settled.” The President recalled the 
balance of the outgoing year and said Azerbaijan “will make the 
best of the possibilities of the peace pathway”. –We have seen to 
it that our people could live in peace, and we shall keep working 
for improving people’s standard of life every year, every month. 
 367
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 13 
IN THE EYES OF THE WORLD 
 
Prominent politicians, statesmen and public leaders often 
assess each other. If you judge by their official addresses and 
messages, you gain the impression of wizards and heroes. 
Whereas behind there backs they describe each other in such 
terms that you would think they were speaking about entirely 
different individuals. 
The attitude of US President George W.Bush, Sr., to the Soviet 
leader Mikhail Gorbachyov serves as an excellent illustration of 
the fact. After their talks on Malta in 1988, Bush exclaimed in the 
circle of his assistants: “Oh, God! He’s such an ignoramus in 
economics!” We can’t say if Washington experts specified the 
field in which, in their chief’s opinion, the loquacious General 
Secretary was well versed in. 
Political propriety and ordinary calculation are of course of no 
small importance in the actions of the leaders of states, socio-
political movements and diplomats. General de Gaulle taught a 
classical lesson in his time to FRG Chancellor Adenauer. 
The chancellor received a red-carpet treatment in Paris in July 
1962. De Gaulle awarded him with the Grand Cross of Legion of 
Honor and addressed many flattering words to him. Two months 
or so later the President of France paid an answering visit to the 
FRG. According to Nikolai Molchanov, who was the author of a 
book about General de Gaulle, what followed was a strange but 
impressive spectacle. 
Konrad Adenauer met the French President at the airport in 
Bonn. Quite unexpectedly de Gaulle embraced the stunned old man 
and kissed him on both cheeks. The chancellor later said that “it 
was the first time in his life that he was kissed by a foreign 
statesman, and, moreover, a Frenchman!” Then de Gaulle addressed 
the audiences in German in the five days of his visit to West 
Germany’s largest cities–Hamburg, Cologne, Munich, Stuttgart, 
and Düsseldorf… The Germans made a great fuss over him. “De 
 368 
Gaulle arrived in Germany as a French President,” noted Der 
Spiegel, which never displayed warm feelings for the French. “He 
returns as the Emperor of Europe.” And later the general confessed 
to one of his close associates: “I told the Germans: ‘You are a great 
nation.’ But that’s a lie. Had the Germans been a great nation, they 
would not have met me in that way.” 
The general regarded his own performance as a prelude to the 
conclusion of a treaty of French-German cooperation. De Gaulle 
and Adenauer signed the treaty in Palais de l’Elysee on January 
22, 1963. It was “Europe’s greatest wedding ceremony”, as 
someone remarked aptly. French-German relations took various 
turns subsequently, they sometimes quarreled and drifted apart 
and even had serious conflicts. But it’s quite clear in retrospect 
that de Gaulle made each move in line with the national interests 
of France. 
 
 
…On April 10, 2000, Geidar Aliev received deputy of the 
French Parliament Jacques Baumel who acted as a reporter of the 
Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) for 
Azerbaijan. Mr. Baumel compared Aliev to former President of 
France General de Gaulle: “Taking the same stand as he did, you 
pursue a policy which is outside of all blocs. It seems that it is 
precisely for this reason that the further rapprochement between 
Azerbaijan and Europe is of special importance. Europe in 
substance supports you in all spheres. And this contributes to the 
preservation of Azerbaijan’s independence.” 
The golden-mouthed Paris orator generously complimented 
Geidar Aliev on his being in good trim and good health. Geidar 
Aliev paid him in the same coin: “Mr. Baumel, I can see that you 
look well and you have such an excellent memory… Yesterday 
evening when you watched our dances with such lively interest at 
the official reception I was once more convinced of it.” 
And he went on seriously: 
“Each time you speak about General de Gaulle’s policy and 
you’ve also touched the subject now. General de Gaulle is naturally 
among the most outstanding personalities in the world. All that was 
done by Charles de Gaulle in the period of World War II and after 
it, will be remembered for ages without losing its significance. 
General Charles de Gaulle is an ideal and model for me. 
“To conduct a balanced policy you were speaking about, a 
policy of upholding Azerbaijan’s independence–is the basis of my 
policy today.” 
 369
And this policy, it should be added, has become a reality. 
Aliev found a balance of his country’s and great powers’ interests. 
 
 
What does the image of Geidar Alirza ogly Aliev look like as 
presented by statesmen and public leaders of other countries, 
leading world politicians? Let’s look through the press of the 
period and memoirs, and ask our interlocutors to answer this 
question. 
President of Turkey Suleiman Demirel described Aliev, in line 
with Oriental florid style, as “my brother who, having transformed 
his breast into a shield, acts bravely in order to lead Azerbaijan 
persistently and by democratic ways to the goal”. 
UNESCO Director General Federico Mayor declared 
addressing Geidar Aliev: “You are an outstanding leader 
recognized throughout the world.” 
And that’s really so. There were many flattering words–sincere 
and sly. Mrs. Albright, former US State Secretary, paid a 
compliment to Geidar Aliev, with a share of it in her own favor, 
by saying that in the period of holding the post of US state 
secretary she “never met another president to be received here 
with such honors”. The implication was that it was to the State 
Department’s credit. 
Henry Kissinger, Mrs. Albright’s colleague, outlined a whole 
program in his speech. “President Geidar Aliev’s activities are 
worth of approval, he is striving to develop close relations with 
the USA and Western countries, spares no efforts to promote 
market economy and democracy. Geidar Aliev is zealously and 
resolutely fighting for maintaining independence.” 
Geidar Aliev’s image presented by President of France Jacques 
Chirac stands out among all other characteristics: “This no 
ordinary personality has steered Azerbaijan to the path of 
prosperity. I praise highly his boldness, wisdom and determination 
displayed in the course of our meetings, in particular, in 
conducting discussions around the Nagorny Karabakh conflict for 
the settlement of this conflict amicably. 
“It’s Azerbaijan’s good luck that the country is led by such a 
wise, sagacious and authoritative statesman as Geidar Aliev, with 
his great political will power and a wealth of political experience.” 
It’s a comprehensive and precise evaluation. A wealth of 
guiding experience–this refers not only to post-Soviet years but 
also to those of the Soviet epoch when Aliev emerged as a 
statesman. It was precisely this aspect that was stressed by 
President of Russia Vladimir Putin when he said that Geidar Aliev 
 370 
was widely known in the Russian Federation as an outstanding 
statesman not only of Azerbaijan but also of the Soviet Union as a 
whole. 
In his capacity as Chairman of the Federation Council of the 
Federal Assembly of Russia, Yegor Stroyev pointed to Aliev’s 
wisdom and optimism, his daring manner in formulating questions 
and ability to resolve problems in the most complicated situation. 
“To find a way for settling a conflict amicably, “ Yegor Stroyev 
stressed, “means to be at the top of political thought.” 
Moscow Mayor Yuri Luzhkov said this about Aliev as a 
politician: 
“Geidar Aliev was a great man of the Soviet and post-Soviet 
period throughout the territory of the former USSR, a remarkable 
internationalist, wise and profound, who believed by his mind and 
heart, not through calculation, that Azerbaijanians would always 
benefit greatly from Russia.” 
Alexander Dzasokhov, President of the Republic of North 
Ossetia-Alania, regards Geidar Aliev as “a great son of the 
Azerbaijanian people whose wealth of experience as a statesmen 
his country was in great need of after the political earthquake 
which culminated in the disintegration of the union state”. 
FRG Federal Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder and Japanese 
Prime Minister Zyunichiro Koidzumi primarily stressed, of course 
quite independently, Aliev’s historic services for his country’s 
independence. 
According to US President George W.Bush, “for a long period 
of time Geidar Aliev was a central figure in Southern Caucasia. 
His personal efforts were of vital importance for the establishment 
of friendly relations with the United States of America, which are 
maintained by Azerbaijan today, and for the preservation of 
Azerbaijan’s independence”. 
Boris Oleinik, head of Ukraine’s delegation to the EC and an 
outstanding Ukrainian poet, described Geidar Aliev as a genuine 
rescuer: “It was precisely at the time when Azerbaijan’s 
independence was threatened, the steering wheel of the country 
was taken by Geidar Aliev, a true son of his people. As a true 
rescuer, he was able to steer Azerbaijan clear of a critical situation 
owing to his wisdom, bravery and fortitude.” 
President of Kazakhstan Nursultan Abishevich Nazarbayev 
was probably the most circumstantial in his letter among those to 
whom we had applied. He did not confine himself to a cursory 
though an expressive formula, but offered an all-round political 
portrait of “a man relying on a wealth of experience gained in his 
life and in the sphere of economy and big-time politics and who 
 371
was at the same time quite open and cordial”. We mentioned this 
letter while speaking about the 1986 events in Alma-Ata, about 
the initial peals of the impeding storm in Karabakh. Gorbachyov 
turned a deaf ear to Aliev’s warning words about miscalculations 
in the nationalities policy, it was easier for Gorbachyov to deal 
with obedient and subservient people. So the man who was firm in 
upholding his views and his stand was dismissed. 
“Nevertheless, the crisis broke out, tension and public 
perturbation were mounting, separatists and nationalists raised 
their heads,” Nursultan Nazarbayev writes. “And one could only 
marvel at Geidar Aliev’s fortitude, great patience and staunchness, 
for attempts were made to lay the responsibility for the incipient 
dislocation and strife at his door. But they failed to break his 
spirit. 
“In spite of his enemies’ threats and his friends’ warnings and 
even of the simple instinct of self-preservation, he couldn’t keep 
aloof, did not observe the situation ‘from the distance’, but 
returned to his native land. As a citizen and patriot he wished to 
face the mounting difficulties jointly with his people. Not simply 
face them but by relying on his experience and authority, to take 
part in the improvement of the situation. 
“In those hard times Geidar Aliev conducted such a competent, 
weighed and open policy that in 1993 the people asked him to take 
up the post of President of a new independent state showing in this 
way their boundless trust in their leader, for they could see no 
other alternative in the face of the most difficult crisis the country 
was gripped by. 
“I may state in general terms that when departing for Moscow 
in 1982 he left behind an economically and politically stable 
republic which was on the upsurge in its development. Ten years 
later, in 1993, having been elected President, he stood at the helm 
of a country which boasted independent status but had its 
economy in ruins, was torn asunder by national strife and conflicts 
leading to brutal carnage, a country with thousands of refugees 
and ransacked by bandit formations, with its population in despair. 
“He performed a veritable feat by having rapidly restored and 
consolidated all institutions of power, stabilized the political 
situation, stopped the carnage, rehabilitated the economy 
practically from scratch, launched radical market reforms and 
substantially improved the people’s living standard. 
“A man who grew up in the Soviet Union and was brought up 
on the basis of socialist ideas but who, by the will of fate, was 
confronted with radically new conditions, he managed to bring 
together what seemed to be incompatible. It was purposefulness, 
 372 
inexhaustible trust in the people’s strength and reason, fidelity to 
duty and great responsibility for the entrusted cause that he had 
brought from the past life and set about with youthful vigor 
developing principally new social and economic relations. And he 
had attained this goal. 
“He had managed to ensure proper answers to the challenges 
and threats of the globalization age which were sometimes far 
from humane and hardly in harmony with the preservation and 
further development of the heritage of the past, of the rich culture 
and national traditions of his native land. 
“I’d like to lay stress on a most important aspect which reflects 
Geidar Aliev’s wisdom and foresight as a statesman and politician 
of worldwide stature,” President of Kazakhstan points out. “It 
should be recalled that by the time he again stood at the head of 
the country, Azerbaijan lived practically in isolation from the rest 
of the world. The opposition forces led by Elchibei, which ruled 
the country for several previous years, had managed to strain 
relations not only with neighboring countries but also with many 
other foreign countries by staking on the policy of isolationism 
and national exclusiveness. 
“As a staunch pragmatic and advocate of cooperation and 
integration, Geidar Aliev exerted titanic efforts to improve the 
situation and establish relations with the international community, 
primarily with the CIS. I point out with gratitude that he also 
treated with understanding many of my integration efforts and 
undertakings. I could always count on my senior colleague’s wise 
advice and support. 
“We discussed problems of the Caspian region for many hours 
on end. We were unanimous in the realization of the fact that the 
region’s resources had in no circumstances to be used as an apple 
of discord, considering that the region’s conflict potential was 
really great. And we did, just as we are doing now, our best for the 
Caspian to become a sea of friendship and mutually advantageous 
cooperation. All Caspian states and our partners throughout the 
world are interested in it. 
“I mean no offense, but I can firmly assert that it is the political 
will of the leaders of Russia, Azerbaijan and Kazakhstan, our 
good will for interaction and mutual understanding alone that 
helped to set in motion the process of determination of the 
Caspian Sea’s legal status. 
“Today Azerbaijan is again on the upsurge, and I hope very 
much that the country’s new president, Ilkham Aliev, Geidar 
Aliev’s son, will carry on his cause. I have no doubt that 
Kazakhstan and Azerbaijan will, just as before, act not only as 
 373
good neighbors but also as efficient partners, and not only in the 
Caspian region.” 
 
 
In 1986 Vladimir Kuzmich Gusev was appointed Deputy 
Chairman of the USSR Council of Ministers. Prior to that he held 
a job at Russia’s Council of Ministers, acted as First Secretary of 
the Saratov Regional Party Committee. Two years (before Aliev’s 
dismissal) Gusev and Aliev worked in the same team. 
“I often met with Geidar Aliev, I could observe him at work,” 
Vladimir Gusev shares his recollections of Geidar Aliev. “He was 
a well-organized man. He was demanding and wanted his 
instructions to be preformed carefully. We had the same approach 
on this point; I believe supervision to be among the main 
components of the leader’s activity. I can’t stand the absence of 
control, although you come across it everywhere now. Geidar 
Aliev was never like that. The builders of the Baikal-Amur Main 
Line even now remember Aliev’s demanding style. 
“As distinct from some other leaders who preferred the 
comfort of their offices, he systematically inspected state of affairs 
on the spot. Contacts with workers, specialists, and study of the 
actual state of affairs were typical features of Aliev’s work. A 
leader of such scale is a rare occurrence nowadays.” 
Vladimir Gusev often visited Azerbaijan in the period when 
Aliev worked in Moscow. 
“It was pleasant to hear that the people in his native republic 
held him in high esteem. He maintained contacts with his native 
land and visited it… I know certain episodes of his family life. He 
took care of his wife, Zarifa Azizovna–to her last days! This also 
shows that he was a real, strong-willed man. 
He was quite dynamic even at the age of 80 and confidently 
guided the country. State control was preserved over many key 
sectors in Azerbaijan, which made the country governable. You 
cannot rule in the absence of such levers. On the basis of all this I 
can safely assert, without flattery, that he was a real big-time 
statesman and politician of the Soviet Union and of independent 
Azerbaijan.” 
 
 
Anar, Chairman of Azerbaijan’s Union of Writers, recollects: 
“In Soviet times Geidar Aliev went by train to the Republic’s 
remote regions. Specialists usually accompanied him; sometimes 
there were also poets and actors among the group. On one 
 374 
occasion Nodar Shashigogly, a popular actor, made his 
appearance on the platform. 
Geidar Aliev asked him why he had come. 
“I’ll watch you,” Nodar replied. “It may well happen that some 
day I’ll have to impersonate you.” 
Geidar Aliev was quick to parry: 
“You needn’t impersonate me. I can do it myself pretty well.” 
Yes, he played the role he was cast in by the destiny to the best 
of his ability. And it is not only his contemporaries but also future 
generations who will have their say in terms of history. They will 
probably view something from different positions than we, his 
contemporaries. That’s the way things are. And quite 
understandable is also a desire of historians and scholars to look 
for the testimony of the great people’s contemporaries. And those 
people from Nakhichevan, Baku, Moscow, Azerbaijanians and 
Russians, people of various professions, age, men and women, 
shared their recollections of Geidar Aliev with us, and their 
testimony served as a basis of this book. 
 375
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AFTERWORD 
 
 
Two worlds are now a part of me 
Although for me this world is small. 
Nasimi 
 
They say bad news travels fast. So the bad news flew across 
the ocean: Geidar Alirza ogly Aliev died in a Cleveland hospital, 
in the United States. 
 
 
He was called Geidar when he came to this world. Geidar 
stands for an epithet name of St. Ali, a symbol of strength and 
might in the world of true believers of the East, the incarnation of 
wisdom and righteousness. The role of parents, environment and 
upbringing is indisputable in people’s destiny. But the choice of 
one’s name is also a kind of sign, predestination. So all their life 
people carry the imprint of this predestination.  
Can you find a trace of light? Can you imagine the Sun that 
has gone out forever? Stars go out with the passage of time, but 
their light can be seen even after for eons of time. 
Life is unthinkable without light. 
Geidar Aliev was born under Azerbaijan’s sunlit sky and his 
soul was full of the native sun’s light–for this light to be returned 
to all people, to his native land. He was destined to die at 80. But 
Aliev’s star will shed its light to Azerbaijan for ages. 
 
Nature was quite generous to you. 
You might have lived a hundred years 
But for troubles and life’s vicissitudes, 
But for deep scars concealed from view. 
 
Those are lines from poet Siyavush Mamedzadeh’s poem in 
tribute to the President’s memory. Yes, life was not a bed of roses 
for Geidar Aliev. There were much more thorns in it. He had lived 
through many dramatic trials, balancing on the verge of death–not 
only for himself but also for Azerbaijan. 
 376 
But he had won. He had stood all trials. He had overcome his 
pain. 
 
You’ve never bowed your proud head, 
And saved the life and honor of Azerbaijan, 
You viewed the sland’rers with contempt 
With valiant dignity of Coriolan… 
 
Even his opponents gave his political experience, will power 
and intellect their due. He came back to power in 1993–at the 
critical time when his country was ravaged by the enemies and 
torn asunder by internal strife. And he used to repeat ashug (folk 
singer) Abbas Tufarganly’s words: “If the people join their efforts 
they’ll move mountains!” 
His people were orphaned in the early hours of December 13, 
2003. In the morning of December 13 great crowds flooded the 
streets of Baku and other Azerbaijan’s cities, towns and villages 
wearing black-and-red mourning ribbons and carnations. Black 
ribbons could be seen everywhere: on flags, buses and attached by 
scotch to turnstiles in the underground. The crowds were 
converging on the Presidential Palace. First carnations and 
burning candles appeared there, on the parapet, immediately after 
midnight, when the TV announcer interrupted the program and 
said that Geidar Aliev had died. Geidar Aliev was very fond of 
carnations, so the people carried them to the Presidential Palace. 
…Not long ago he easily ascended its steps. Until his last days 
he looked vivacious with no traces of pitiful, weak old age. They 
liked to tell the story of the President’s refusal to approve the 
appointment to the post of one of the new ministers: “He’s a 
clever lad, but why so fat? He should first take care of himself.” 
The nominee to the post of minister went on a diet, lost extra 
weight and the President was, just as ever, as good as his word. 
That was how one more Aliev’s “godson” took his post in the 
government. 
Mournful music was broadcast on television, with sequences 
shown on the screen of Aliev’s life as first secretary of the CC of 
the Communist Party of the Republic, first deputy Chairman of 
the USSR Council of Ministers and as the country’s President. 
– We would like to take a still stronger independent Azerbaijan 
state into the 21st century. We want a happier life for the coming 
generations. By making an effective use of Azerbaijan’s potential, 
by developing the economy we aim to improve the Azerbaijan 
people’s living standard… Azerbaijan will develop as a free, 
democratic country and will display its historic attainments on the 
border of Europe and Asia. 
 377
Dear Compatriots! You may be confident that I am well aware 
of the difficult and responsible duties of mine and I’d like to tell 
you that I highly value your trust. I accept this trust with a great 
responsibility. I assure you that I’ll try to justify this trust and 
ensure headlong development for Azerbaijan in the next few years. 
The people’s stream seemed to be endless. That was the 
people’s caravan of grief. 
A gray-haired woman was treading heavily; she couldn’t stay 
at home and had come to share common grief. A young mother 
with her newborn baby and a carnation–she was clasping the only 
flower close to her breast like a baby. A veteran soldier was trying 
to keep straight, with his sons looking much like him walking next 
to him. The people of Azerbaijan, whom he had never deceived, 
paid tribute to their Aksakal, to their Geidar-kishi. 
– We live as an independent state and repeatedly stated that 
our independent state would exist as such forever. That is, we will 
never live as a part of some other country, under the patronage of 
another state… This independence should have not only a moral-
political but also material result, that is, to ensure the people’s 
high living standard. 
In the period of the break-up of the Soviet Union many 
economists … came to the conclusion that if two or three of the 
fifteen Soviet republics were able to be completely self-sufficient 
in the period of independence, Azerbaijan would be one of them. 
That was said even at that time both by Soviet scholars and 
Western Sovietologists. That’s not wishful thinking. The idea is 
associated with Azerbaijan’s rich natural resources and economic 
potential. 
Geidar Aliev pronounced those words with deep trust and 
optimism!  
The city on the Caspian coast has lived through various 
periods in the long years of its existence. Alien hands were 
stretched “to the burning oil described as nafta” both in old times 
and at present. 
In those uneasy days the country looked much like the Caspian 
in storm, so the President had to turn repeatedly to the people. Not 
that he couldn’t use force. No, the law authorized him for that. But 
he had always chosen the force of law, conviction, not the law of 
strength. He asked for his compatriots’ advice. 
– There are many forces seeking to dismember Azerbaijan, 
with some of them inside and other outside the country. One has 
to make a compromise on certain points, and on other occasions 
some things should be forgiven. Today I say it again: I used to 
forgive many things. Some people are even astonished, saying that 
 378 
they know Geidar Aliev; there is a certain difference between 
Geidar Aliev of the 1970s and the man of today. The difference 
consists in the fact that then he was more resolute, strict and 
sharp, whereas now he has become soft and forgives certain 
things. 
There are a number of reasons behind all that. The fact is that 
now we live in conditions of democracy. There is a difference 
between the former and present state systems. I follow the path of 
democracy. As a man asserting the principles of democracy in 
Azerbaijan, I am prepared to compromise on many points. In 
following the path of democracy, you need to promote peace, 
security and civic accord… 
Much like a sensitive seismograph, Geidar Aliev could feel 
political trends of the times and took them to heart. In May 1987, 
as mentioned above, he had a heart attack. “An extensive 
infarction,” Yevgeny Primakov specified in one of our talks. 
Laura Vasilyevna, Primakov’s late wife, a cardiologist of the 
Kremlin Clinic, told him about it. Soon after Aliev was pensioned 
off. “But he managed to restore his health after the heart attack,” 
Primakov added, “and this also serves as a testimony to his will 
power, ability to muster his vital resources.” On that black 
Saturday, December 13, 2003, Primakov was among the first to 
visit the Embassy of Azerbaijan in Moscow in order to pay tribute 
to his close friend. “He was an epoch-making man,” Primakov 
wrote about Aliev in the book of condolences. “He was a man 
who would do credit to any nation,” State Duma deputy Sergei 
Baburin wrote. “A man of genius”, “a great son of the Azerbaijan 
people”–these words were often repeated in the book of 
condolences. 
… They remember in Azerbaijan the idle “prophets”, who 
often repeated that after Aliev had regained power, he would set 
about settling accounts with his former offenders. But that is not 
in the nature of great people. 
Today we, of course, may speak about repressions of the past 
period; speak about the evil caused to the people, about 
injustice… That’s our history. One should always tell the 
historical truth. But along with this, why do you gloss over our 
achievements? The Azerbaijani language among them. Now you 
may describe it as you like but the Azerbaijani language has been 
enriched in the past sixty years as never before in its history… 
Think of the unprecedented quantity of books, novels, poems and 
stories written in those years. That’s a part of our history, that’s 
our historical gain… 
 379
…We should always highly value our national awareness. 
National awareness has always helped me in difficult situations. 
Owing to my national awareness I was able to follow the chosen 
path, attain the desired goal and serve my people. 
President Geidar Aliev was fond of taking strolls in Baku 
streets in his last years. “He could drop in a small restaurant he 
liked, just like anyone else,” Izvestiya journalists noted in their 
reports. His guards were anxious, saying that they had no chance 
to examine the meals. “That’s all right, that’s all right,” Aliev 
smiled and noted jokingly to the guard chief: “That’ll be your 
fault if anything is wrong.” He was great and simple in his ways at 
the same time, sincere and responsive and attractive to the same 
degree. Geidar Aliev won the people’s hearts by his sincerity. 
Creative personalities–writers, composers and artists were 
attracted to him looking for his moral support and regarding him 
as their spiritual guru. And they often stressed it. We may refer to 
the testimony of writers Anar and Mamed Araz, Vagif Samedoglu 
and Elchin, their Russian colleague Ivan Polikarpovich Tretyakov, 
a veteran of the Great Patriotic War who fought at the front. 
Tretyakov was one of the groups of men of letters to receive the 
Presidential Scholarship. “I will remember Geidar Aliev as long as 
I live,” Ivan Tretyakov wrote to us. “He appraised people by their 
work, people were prepared to work as hard as they could for 
him.” 
Aliev highly valued friendship and despised turncoats. He 
never forgot those who had stood by him in the bitter days of the 
Moscow disfavor, at the time of trials, who had not taken the side 
of the seemingly more promising patrons. He knew how to be 
grateful and valued this trait in other people. 
On December 19, 1995, Geidar Aliev addressed a meeting in 
the Gyulistan Palace devoted to the 60th birth anniversary of 
Yusif Samedoglu, a people’s writer and prominent public figure 
who died so early. 
– Today I deem it necessary to tell you about an interesting 
episode. In 1990 I came back to Azerbaijan from Moscow. It was 
impossible to live here (in Baku. –Author’s note.) and I went to 
Nakhichevan. At that time, on the one hand, I was persecuted, 
isolated from the public, had to bear injustice committed against 
me, while, on the other hand, and I constantly met with respect 
and often with the people’s love. I’ve never forgotten and will 
never forget the people who in the period of my life in isolation in 
Nakhichevan, breaking the siege, came to see me. For that was far 
from simple. Many people came to Nakhichevan. They paid brief 
visits to me, for an hour or two, and after our talk, having 
 380 
expressed their attitude; they would go back–either to Baku or 
Gandzha, or to other cities. 
One day something quite unexpected happened. The gate was 
opened and Aibeniz-khanum entered. At that time I was sitting in 
the yard. I thought that Aibeniz-khanum must have arrived in 
Nakhichevan to meet somebody for her own affairs… Probably 
she had heard that I was staying here and decided to drop in and 
greet me. But it transpired later that she had flown from Baku to 
Nakhichevan together with her relations with the only aim in 
view: to visit me…You know, I repeat, many people came at that 
time to see me but that meeting was especially valuable to me. For 
she was one of Samed Vurgun’s family. Moreover, Nakhichevan 
then lived through hard times and flights by air were made 
difficult. Just imagine, the woman had come for the only reason to 
greet me. I was very excited and happy and was convinced once 
more that good people, people with a pure heart are in majority in 
our society… 
That was exactly what he was like–a man with a pure heart. 
God was generous to have created him as a man of good 
physique, high intellect, phenomenal memory, orator’s gift and 
creative flair, physical attraction and spiritual beauty. 
In March 2003 destiny had a severe trial in store for him. He 
was paying a visit to Military School named after Djamshid 
Nakhichevansky, which was pioneered by him back in the Soviet 
period. The President was making an address and all of a sudden 
he clutched at his heart, swayed… The whole country could see 
these moments in a live TV broadcast…then followed five, ten, 
fifteen minutes of resonant silence when even a whispered word 
seemed like a shout. Twenty minutes later, in spite of the doctors’ 
protests, the President again mounted the rostrum and said a few 
parting words to the audience and to future officers, independent 
Azerbaijan’s hope. He couldn’t have acted otherwise. It was his 
will power, Aliev’s unbending will power that made him then rise 
to his feet and come back to the hall packed with young people. 
…Baku residents remember that in the early 20th century 
thousands upon thousands of people attended revolutionary 
Khabdar Safaraliev’s funeral. The city paid its last respects to 
General Aslanov in its time. The great Uzeir Gadjibekov’s funeral 
was attended by a mammoth crowd, which even “swept” the 
mounted militiamen. The people in the same way mourned over 
the death of their poet Samed Vurgun and composer Kara 
Karayev… They paid their last respects to Kara Karayev in the 
Philharmonic Society and he was interred in the Alley of 
Honorary Burial Places. The road leading to the Alley is long and 
 381
steep. The coffin with the great composer’s body was carried 
along it. Geidar Aliev was the first to offer his shoulder to carry it. 
And he covered the entire mournful road. “I believe that such 
things are rare in the world, it’s probably something unique,” said 
prominent Azerbaijan composer Arif Melikov, Kara Karayev’s 
student. “ But this also serves as a testimony to Geidar Aliev’s 
exceptional attitude to outstanding people, those who had brought 
glory to our republic, our people.” 
On the third year of the third millennium the people’s grief 
reached its climax when millions of his compatriots paid their last 
respects to Geidar Aliev. 
On December 14 endless streams of people were converging 
on the Presidential Palace. It was clear that the mammoth crowd 
was too big for the city’s limited space, so the stream stretched 
along the highway to Bina Airport. Azerbaijan was waiting for its 
son’s return. The lowered flags with their black ribbons were 
fluttering in the wind. They seemed to be saying: “The banner 
raised by you will never fall… We are lowered in tribute to your 
memory… We are offering our last respects to you.” 
The Azerbaijan people’s leader came back to his Motherland 
to rest in his native land’s embrace. 
Troubling ripples suddenly covered the Caspian, which had 
been napping under the bright skies. 
Veteran soldiers carried on their shoulders mournfully and 
sternly the burden as heavy as the gray Caucasian Mountains. 
Mountains of grief. 
Oh, God, the light of sorrow was so blinding. The light of this 
sorrow attracted the people. 
The December wind tore yellow leaves from the trees and 
drove them along the pavements. The trees could tell us many 
stories. They cannot talk but they have memory. The Apsheron 
steppes advanced to standard five-story apartment houses carrying 
in their train dried salt lakes, sands, camel’s thorns, oily pools, 
lakes of waste water at the old mines. Green was ousting yellow 
and sandy gray color in the landscape of Apsheron thanks to 
Geidar Aliev. Green color symbolizes Islam’s spiritual values in 
the republic’s tricolor. But this color also reminds us of green 
gamut in the palette of Azerbaijan’s nature, improved by Geidar 
Aliev’s will, his efforts and care…If only he could see his beloved 
city, compare it to the former ugly conglomeration of stone 
blocks, flat roofs, cobblestone pavements, gray asphalt with islets 
of dwarfed trees! 
The road leading from the airport to Baku was lined on both 
sides with live human walls. 
 382 
True, very often on holidays people would line the roads he 
was driving along, waited for him, greeted him, wished him 
farewell with flowers in the hope of exchanging a few kind words 
and were happy to hear his words of greetings and see him smile. 
On that day he again returned to Baku Airport. Thousands of 
people simultaneously glanced at their watches: 13:55. But he was 
not destined to descend from the airliner again… Bitter sagebrush 
aroma was wafted in the wind. The heavy silence reminded of the 
silent requiem.  
Each person could hear its sounding in his heart. The burden of 
pain and sorrow had merged into common grief. 
The people had lost their national leader. And Ilkham Aliev 
had also lost his father. The mournful news reached him when he 
attended the World Information Community Summit. 
He was to approach the plane’s ladder, go up to the plane, to 
his father. They would spend the last 15 minutes alone. Who 
could say what Ilkham was thinking about at that moment, what 
words would be pronounced and heard by the son’s heart? 
Probably only those who had paid that mournful duty, who had 
accompanied on the last way their father or mother… 
The mournful prayers sounded in the Teze-Pir Mosque. The 
age-old rites bequeathed by Prophet Mohammed were performed. 
The Prophet insisted that the people should not mourn over 
those who had departed from this world, for all creatures were 
pilgrims on this road. Do not weep over those with whose 
departure you lose so much. But how could they?! 
Geidar Aliev’s last and chief concern was: whom he could 
entrust the state to. Would the country’s young democracy cope 
with the task? Wouldn’t they snatch at the opportunity to test their 
luck, those temporary rulers and past masters of secret political 
intrigues? 
He could see a new and worthy generation of politicians, 
graduates of his school. As a tutor and educator he rejoiced in 
Ilkham’s success in the public sphere, his son enjoyed increasing 
recognition in society, among the people. And his heart told him: 
your son. His experience, however, protested: his recommendation 
would be accepted in various ways, and the radical opposition, 
those engaged in political verbiage would certainly accuse the 
President of “parental protectionism”, “introduction of succession 
to the throne” and of God knew what… But that was the case 
when the proposed successor was in possession of all traits of a 
promising and competent leader. When the heir of his own blood 
was also the heir in spirit. Geidar Aliev was well aware of it. The 
people supported his choice. 
 383
His choice was appreciated throughout the world. On 
December 15, the day of his funeral, Vremya Novostei, a Moscow 
newspaper, wrote: “Geidar Aliev ‘departed’ in the manner worthy 
of an Eastern statesman. He had managed to set up a dynasty of 
power in the country. And no matter how indignant his political 
opponents might be, he has done it in an extremely legitimate 
way, so far as it was possible in conditions of Azerbaijan today. 
And whether or not this dynasty will survive, for it is utterly 
unique not only for the CIS but also for Europe as a whole, now 
depends on his son Ilkham. Incidentally, Ilkham has his own son, 
little Geidar.” 
We won’t argue on the subject of assertions, which are not 
entirely appropriate in our opinion, about the dynasty. Quite a 
different aspect is most important. Ilkham was following his 
father’s coffin, and many people repeatedly pointed to the fact that 
he looked much like his father. And it wasn’t only his appearance. 
“He has inherited many of his father’s traits and one is quite 
impressed by him,” Yevgeny Primakov noted. “Ilkham Aliev is a 
broad-minded and intelligent man. I’m confident: he will be a 
worthy President of the country, just like his father.” 
One could see not only sorrow in the eyes of the people who 
lined the road to the airport but also a soft light of hope. 
…December 15. The coffin with Aliev’s body was placed in 
the Palace of the Republic, which was built on his initiative and 
with his direct participation in the 1970s. He was a great builder, 
architect of Azerbaijan. The buildings erected on his creative 
advice now serve as symbols of a new Baku. 
The Republic Palace, the Presidential Palace, the Gyulistan 
palace, palaces of culture, plants, chess schools, clubs, educational 
establishments, residential areas–are immortalized “author’s 
certificates” of his style as a statesmen. 
The endless line of mourners marched past the stage where he 
lay in state in the coffin covered with the national flag. Some of 
them wept and other prayed while walking. And each had his own 
image of Aliev in his soul. Some of them had seen only his screen 
image, while others were lucky to have met him in person and still 
others, just as General Vagif Akhundov, had worked together with 
him every day… 
September 16 was the lieutenant general’s birthday. The 
President used to invite him to his place and warmly congratulate 
him on this day… In September 2003 they were both in 
Cleveland. The President had been placed in a Cleveland hospital 
ward and his and American guards occupied the adjoining wards. 
The last thing General Akhundov expected on that day was that 
 384 
the President would invite him to congratulate him on his 
birthday. 
– I bid farewell to Geidar Aliev on September 27, –Vagif 
Akhundov said to us later. –He looked excellent and was in a 
good mood. I kissed his right hand, while his left hand was 
connected to the system. He drew me closer to him and also 
kissed. He said: “See you later!” And I replied, “As soon as the 
elections are over, I’ll come back and we’ll fly together to Baku.” 
My task was to ensure Ilkham Aliev’s security; at that time he 
held the post of chairman of the government. I called from here to 
Cleveland, reported to him and we talked… And then came 
December 12, when the tragedy occurred… 
The final minutes of paying the last respects. Close relations 
and General Akhundov were standing at the open coffin. 
– I was looking at Geidar Alievich and he seemed to be alive… 
He even looked younger as if he was 60-65. “Why have they 
brought you here?” –I thought. In the past few months of his stay 
at the hospital he had even put on some weight, but when I bid 
him farewell he looked thinner… And now as he lay in state his 
cheeks were pink and he looked tranquil… As if bathed in the 
light of the skies. 
Foreign delegations paid their last respects, with President of 
Turkey Akhmet Nedjdet Sezer and Prime Minister Redjeb Taib 
Erdogan among them. 
President of Kazakhstan slowed his pace and lowered his head 
respectfully to the coffin. 
President of the Russian Federation Vladimir Putin deemed it 
his duty to fly to Baku to pay his last respects to the outstanding 
politician of our days–on his own behalf, on behalf of all the 
country’s residents and of the Russian people. 
Before his departure from Baku Putin said in press interview: 
“I held Geidar Alievich in high esteem. I felt not only great 
respect but also affection for him. He was a prominent statesman, 
a colossus–it’s not an overstatement.” 
Telegrams of condolences poured in to Baku from all over the 
world: from Berlin, Washington, Tokyo, and Beijing, to name but 
a few. 
The caravan of sorrow marched around the Presidential 
Palace… 
In the far-away transoceanic clinic Aliev must have learned in 
his last hours that would replace him at the post of head of state 
and he must have smiled happily. 
Sabir, a poet of genius, wrote these lines in his time: 
 
 385
– You should be blind! 
– And I shall close my eyes. 
– You should be deaf! 
– My ears I’ll cover with my hands. 
– You shouldn’t argue! 
– Forgive me, your lies 
I dismiss!.. 
 
That’s the nature of man’s thought. You can’t zombie it. And 
then you’ll hear the words coming through the ages: “And still it 
rotates!” The people’s poet of Azerbaijan Rasul Rza gave the 
following title to one of his books I Can Feel Earth’s Rotation. 
Geidar Aliev also felt Earth’s rotation.  
After Aliev had come back to power, dilettantes in politics, 
caliphs for an hour felt ill at ease. They were irritated by the 
consolidation of the disorderly state machine; they sought to 
remove him at any cost even resorting to lies and fabrications. 
The caravan of sorrow marched past the tombs revered by all 
people. The eternal fire fluttering in the wind seemed to stretch its 
hands to the man who had devoted all his life to Azerbaijan. There 
was a lot of red color on the flags and on the republic’s tricolor. 
Red color symbolizes blood spilt in the fight for freedom. 
 
Banners turn red like the blood spilt  
for their sake. 
The land you die for 
be comes your Native Land. 
 
Geidar Aliev was buried to the accompaniment of gun salvoes 
in the Alley of Honorary Burial Places. His native land, sanctified 
by his last resting place. This land will be forever a sacred site for 
the Azerbaijanian people. 
Land seemed to breathe and its warm pungent breath, mixed 
up with the aroma of fallen leaves, was wafted above the sea of 
people. 
He was laid to rest next to his wife Zarifa-khanum. The two 
souls reunitedforever. Zarifa-khanum’s soul seemed to be soaring 
over the mournful children and entrusting their destinies to the 
Creator of Worlds. 
The people buried their leader, their Aksakal. But can you bury 
Faith, Hope and Love?! 
…“The land you die for becomes your Native Land.” Quite 
right was Turkish poet Namik Kemal, the author of these lines. 
The man our book is devoted to had lived a happy life. The 
Prophet urged us to compete in good deeds. That was precisely 
 386 
what Geidar Aliev was doing–both in the years when the Koran, 
just as the Bible, was banned and after these great books had been 
returned to the people. He had lived to see his cherished desires, 
his grand good deeds incarnated. He died being convinced that he 
had fulfilled his mission predestined by Allah. He liked to read in 
his free moments these Samed Vurgun’s lines: 
 
Death won’t have reason to rejoice! It won’t 
Capture those who loved their Native Land. 
And those who lived with love and died beloved 
Will be revered by custom and the world… 
 
Baku–Moscow–Baku 
2003-2005 
 
 387
BASIC DATES OF GEIDAR ALIEV’S 
LIFE AND ACTIVITY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
May 10, 1923–Geidar Ali Rza ogly Aliev was born in Nakhichevan. 
1936-1938–Student of the Nakhichevan Pedagogical Technical School. 
1938-1941–Student of the architecture department of the Azerbaijanian 
Industrial Institute (at present the Azerbaijanian State Oil 
Academy). 
1941-1943–Head of the secret division of the Archives Department of 
the People’s Commissariat of Internal Affairs of the Nakhichevan 
Autonomous SSR. 
1943-1944–Head of the general department of the Council of People’s 
Commissars of the Nakhichevan ASSR. 
1945–Joined the CPSU. 
1944-1949–Work with state security agencies of the Nakhichevan 
Autonomous SSR: operative authorized officer; senior operative 
authorized officer, and department chief of the NKGB-MGB. 
1949-1950–Student of the Leningrad School of the USSR State Security 
Ministry (MGB) for leading personnel retraining. 
1951-1969–Work with state security agencies of the Azerbaijan SSR: 
department chief of the MGB, department chief, deputy chairman 
of the KGB, Chairman of the KGB under the Council of Ministers 
of the Azerbaijan SSR. 
1951-1957–Studies at the correspondence course of the History 
Department of Azerbaijanian State University. 
1954–Married Zarifa Alieva. 
October 18, 1955–Daughter Sevil was born to Geidar and Zarifa Alievs. 
December 24, 1961–Son Ilkham was born to Geidar and Zarifa Alievs. 
July 14, 1969–Elected to the post of First Secretary of the CC of the CP 
of Azerbaijan. 
1971–At the 24th Party Congress elected a member of the CC CPSU. 
Was also elected a member of the CC CPSU at the 25th CPSU 
Congress (1976), at the 26th CPSU Congress (1981) and at the 
27th CPSU Congress (1986). 
March 1976–Elected a candidate member of the Politburo of the CC 
CPSU. 
1976-1987–Member of the Chief Military Council under the USSR 
Defense Council. 
August 24, 1979–the title of Hero of Socialist Labor conferred upon him. 
 388 
November 22, 1982–Elected a member of the Politburo of the CC CPSU. 
November 24, 1982–The Supreme Soviet of the Union of Soviet 
Socialist Republics assigned Geidar Aliev to the post of First 
Deputy Chairman of the USSR Council of Ministers. 
1983–Awarded with a second Gold Star of the Hero of Socialist Labor. 
Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet resolves to put up Geidar 
Aliev’s bronze bust in his native town of Nakhichevan. 
April 15, 1985–Zarifa Azizovna Alieva, Geidar Aliev’s wife, dies. 
1986–Re-elected as a member of the Politburo of the CC CPSU. 
1986–Approved (to held two positions) to take the post of Chairman of 
the Bureau of the USSR Council of Ministers for Social 
Development. 
August 1986–Appointed to the post of Chairman of the State Committee 
for Investigation the Tragedy of the S/S Admiral Nakhimov. 
October 1987–In connection with his retirement relieved of the duties of 
a member of the Politburo of the CC CPSU and of First Deputy 
Chairman of the USSR Council of Ministers; appointed to the post 
of state advisor under the USSR Council of Ministers. 
November 1988–Relieved of the duties of state advisor under the USSR 
Council of Ministers. 
April 24, 1989–Withdraws from the CC CPSU as one of the group of 
persons of pension age. 
January 21, 1990–Makes a statement at the permanent mission of the 
Azerbaijan SSR in Moscow in connection with the entry of Soviet 
Army troops to Baku. 
July 20, 1990–Returns to Baku. 
July 22, 1990–Returns to Nakhichevan. 
September 30, 1990–Elected deputy to the Supreme Soviet of the 
Azerbaijan SSR and deputy to the Supreme Soviet of the 
Nakhichevan ASSR. 
July 19, 1991–Withdraws from the CPSU. 
September 3, 1991–Elected to the post of Chairman of the Supreme 
Soviet of the Nakhichevan ASSR. 
1992–Elected to the post of Chairman of the Eni (New) Azerbaijan 
party. 
June 10, 1993–At the insistent requests of President of the Azerbaijan 
Republic Elchibei arrives in Baku in connection with the state 
crisis. 
June 15, 1993–Elected to the post of Chairman of the Supreme Soviet of 
Azerbaijan. Geidar Aliev is entrusted with the task of exercising 
the powers of President of the AR. 
September 24, 1993–Attends the Moscow Meeting of the CIS Heads of 
State and Government. 
 389
September 20, 1993–Signs a resolution “On Joining of the Azerbaijan 
Republic with the Commonwealth of Independent States. 
October 3, 1993–Elected to the post of President of the Azerbaijan 
Republic. 
October 10, 1993–Inauguration of a new head of state in the Palace of 
the Republic in Baku. 
November 2, 1993–First address to the people of Azerbaijan in a live TV 
broadcast. 
December 11-12, 1993–A trip to frontline regions. 
December 19, 1993–First trip abroad as the head of the Azerbaijanian 
state–official visit to France. The Treaty of Friendship, Mutual 
Understanding and Cooperation signed. 
May 1994–End of the hostilities in the Karabakh Armenian-
Azerbaijanian conflict zone. 
September 20, 1994–The Contract of the Century signed in Baku. 
September 30, 1994–Address made at a UN General Assembly session 
in New York. 
July 1997–First official visit to Russia. 
August 1997–First official visit to the USA. 
February 1998–Man of the Year prize presented to Geidar Aliev and to 
President of Turkey Suleiman Demirel in Istanbul. 
October 11, 1998–Elected for a second term to the post of President of 
the Azerbaijan Republic. 
October 18, 1998–Inauguration in the Palace of the Republic in Baku. 
January 2001–Talks with President of Russia Vladimir Putin in the 
course of Putin’s official visit to Baku. 
May 28, 2001–Meeting with Patriarch of Moscow and All Russia 
Alexiy II. 
November 9-10, 2001–The First Congress of Azerbaijanians of the 
World held in Baku at the President’s initiative. 
January 24-26, 2002–State visit to the Russian Federation. 
January 30-February 3, 2002–Attends the World Economic Forum in 
New York. 
May 19-20, 2002–Official visit to Iran. 
May 22, 2002–Meeting in Baku with Pope John Paul II. 
June 9, 2002–Presidents Putin and Aliev unveil the Nizami Monument 
in St. Petersburg. 
September 23-24, 2002–Working visit to the Russian Federation. 
July 30, 2003–Letter signed on Ilkham Aliev’s nomination to the post of 
Chairman of the Government of Azerbaijan. 
September 2003–Withdraws his nomination for running for the post of 
President of the Azerbaijan Republic in the elections. 
December 12, 2003–Geidar Aliev dies. 
 390 
December 15, 2003–Burial of Geidar Alirza ogly Aliev in the Alley of 
Honorary Burial Places in Baku. 
 
Geidar Alievich Aliev–twice Hero of Socialist Labor, decorated with 
five Orders of Lenin, Orders of the October Revolution, of the Patriotic 
War (1st Degree), of Red Star and with 13 medals and also with the 
orders of the Azerbaijan Republic, Russia, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Turkey, 
Ukraine and of other states. 
 
 391
LITERATURE 
 
Aliev G., Our Independence is Forever. Addresses, Speeches, 
Statements, Interviews, Letters. In 13 volumes, 1993-2005, Baku (in 
Azerbaijanian). 
Aliev G., Personal Stand, 1996, Baku. 
Aliev G., Russia–a Great Country, 1997, Baku. 
Academician Zarifa-khanum Alieva. A Collection of Scientific 
Works, 1999, Baku. 
Zarifa-khanum Alieva. 1998, Baku. 
Aliev I., Muradverdiyev A., Azerbaijanian Oil in World Policy. In five 
volumes, 1997-1998, Baku. 
Aliev I., Azerbaijan’s Caspian Oil, 2003, Moscow. 
Alieva Sh., My Mother, 2000, Baku (in Azerbaijanian). 
 
Azerbaijanian Republic in the Commonwealth of Independent States, 
2001, Baku. 
Azerbaijan-Russia. New Relationships, New Horizons, 2002, Baku. 
Azerbaijan. A Historical Ethnographic Essay, 1998, Baku. 
24th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. Verbatim 
report. In 2 volumes, 1971, Moscow. 
25th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. Verbatim 
report. In 3 volumes, 1976, Moscow.  
26th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. Verbatim 
report. In 2 volumes, 1981, Moscow. 
 19th All-Union Conference of the Communist Party of the 
Soviet Union. Verbatim report. In 2 volumes, 1988, Moscow. 
 
Abdullazadeh F., Geidar Aliev, 1997, Baku. 
Abdullazadeh F., Geidar Aliev. A Political Portrait, 1998, Baku. 
Aliev D., Science Is True, 1999, Baku. 
Andriyanov V., Chernyak A., The Lonely Tsar in the Kremlin, 1999, 
Moscow. 
Andriyanov V., Chernyak A., The Lonely Tsar Impersonating a 
President, 2000, Moscow. 
Andriyanov V., Chernyak A., The Lonely Tsar Departs, 2000, 
Moscow. 
Akhundova E., Moments of Truth, 2003, Baku. 
Baibakov N., From Stalin to Brezhnev, 1998, Moscow. 
Biryukov V., Life of Special Designation, 2004, Moscow. 
Bobkov F., KGB and Power, 1995, Moscow. 
Boldin V., Downfall of the Pedestal, 1995, Moscow. 
Gadjiyev K., Geopolicy of Caucasia, 2003, Moscow. 
Gasanly D., Southern Azerbaijan: Cold War Breaks Out, 2003, Baku. 
Dashdamirov A., National Idea and Ethnicity, 1996, Moscow. 
History of Azerbaijan. In 3 volumes, 1958-1963, Baku. 
History of Azerbaijan, 1995, Baku. 
Magomayev M., My Love–Melody, 1999, Moscow. 
 392 
Miralamov G., Way to Triumph, 2003, Baku (translated from the 
Azerbaijanian). 
Mirzoyeva S., Geidar Aliev: My Life Has Been Permeated with Art… 
2004, Baku. 
Molchanov N., General de Gaulle, 1973, Moscow. 
Muradverdiyev A., The Story of Envy, 2002, Baku. 
Primakov Ye., Years in Big-Time Politics, 1999, Moscow. 
Ryzhkov N., A Decade of Great Upheavals, 1996, Moscow. 
Samedzadeh E., Stages of the Great Road. Azerbaijan’s Economy in 
the Past Half a Century, Its Realities and Prospects, 2004, Baku. 
Salmanov F., Life as a Discovery, 2003, Moscow. 
Azerbaijan’s Chekists, 1981, Baku. 
 393
The authors express their sincere gratitude to all those who have 
contributed to the work on this book devoted to Geidar Aliev, primarily to: 
 
Aliev Ilkham Geidar ogly, President of the Azerbaijan Republic, 
Geidar Aliev’s son; 
Alieva Mekhriban Arif kyzy, wife of the President of the 
Azerbaijan Republic, President of the Geidar Aliev Fund, UNESCO 
goodwill envoy; 
Alieva Sevil Geidar kyzy, Geidar Aliev’s daughter; 
Aliev Agil Alirza ogly, a corresponding member of the National 
Academy of Sciences (NAS) of Azerbaijan, Geidar Aliev’s brother; 
Aliev Djalal Alirza ogly, academician of the NAS of Azerbaijan, 
Geidar Aliev’s brother; 
Alieva Rafiga Alirza kyzy and Alieva Shafiga Alirza kyzy, Geidar 
Aliev’s sisters; 
 
And also 
Abdullazadeh Fatima Gusein kyzy, head of the department of 
humanitarian policy of the Executive Staff of the President of the 
Azerbaijan Republic; 
Avdeyeva Svetlana Vladimirovna, a journalist; 
Azizov Fikret Nakhmed ogly, general department deputy head of 
the Executive Staff of the President of the Azerbaijan Republic; 
Aliev Natig Agami ogly, President of the Azerbaijanian State Oil 
Company; 
Aliev Alidjan Tarykulu ogly, director of Gyandjlik Publishers; 
Asadov Ali Gidayat ogly, assistant to the President of the Azerbaijan 
Republic; 
Akhundov Vagif Alibala ogly, Lieutenant General, chief of the 
Central Administration of the Special State Guard of the Azerbaijan 
Republic; 
Baibakov Nikolai Konstantinovich, Deputy Chairman of the USSR 
Council of Ministers, Chairman of the USSR State Planning Committee 
(1965-1985); 
Batalin Yuri Petrovich, President of the Russian Union of Oil and 
Gas Builders, Deputy Chairman of the USSR Council of Ministers 
(1985-1990); 
Biryukov Viktor Yefimovich, Deputy Chairman of the USSR State 
Planning Committee (1977-1990); 
Bobkov Filipp Denisovich, advisor of the board chairman of RIA 
Novosti, army general, First Deputy Chairman of the USSR KGB (1986-
1990); 
Gavrilov Alexander Timofeyevich, Cand. Sc. (Hist.), assistant to 
the First Deputy Chairman of the USSR Council of Ministers (1983-
1987); 
Gasanov Ali Akbar ogly, head of the staff of the Supreme Mejlis of 
the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic; 
 394 
Gasanly Djamil Poladkhan ogly, Dr. Sc. (Hist.), deputy to Milli 
Mejlis of Azerbaijan; 
Gusev Vladimir Kuzmich, First Deputy Chairman of the Economic 
Policy, Enterprise and Property Committee of the Federation Council of 
the Federal Assembly of the Russian Federation, Deputy Chairman of the 
USSR Council of Ministers (1986-1991); 
Guseinzadeh Lyatif Talyb ogly, Cand. Sc. (Hist.), Geidar Aliev’s 
teacher; 
Guseinov Rafael Djagilovich, Deputy Editor-in Chief of Trud 
newspaper; 
Dzasokhov Alexander Sergeyevich, President of the Republic of 
Northern Ossetia-Alania; 
Konarev Nikolai Semenovich, Director General of ZAO Intertrans, 
USSR Minister of Railways (1982-1989); 
Kuliyeva Irada Anver kyzy, Deputy Manager of Amrakh-Bank’s 
branch “Leader”; 
Likhanov Albert Anatolyevich, a writer, board chairman of the 
Russian Children’s Fund; 
Mamedov Chingiz Israfil ogly, Cand. Sc. (Chemistry); 
Mekhtiyev Ramiz Enver ogly, head of the Executive Staff of the 
President of the Azerbaijan Republic; 
Morozkov Vladimir Nikolayevich, acting Editor-in-Chief of 
Bakinsky rabochy newspaper; 
Musayev Dilman Musa ogly, a journalist; 
Mustafayev Vagif Bekhbud ogly, Deputy Minister of Culture of 
Azerbaijan, film director; 
Nazarbayev Nursultan Abishevich, President of Kazakhstan; 
Pastukhov Boris Nikolayevich, Senior Vice-President of the 
Chamber of Commerce and Industry of the Russian Federation, First 
Secretary of the CC YCL (1977-1982), Chairman of the USSR State 
Publishing Committee (1982-1986), Minister of the Russian Federation 
for CIS Affairs (1998-1999); 
Primakov Yevgeny Maximovich, academician, President of the 
Chamber of Commerce and Industry of the Russian Federation, Foreign 
Minister of the Russian Federation (1996-1998), Chairman of the 
Government of Russia (1998-1999); 
Rizayev Ramiz Gasan ogly, Ambassador of Azerbaijan to the 
Russian Federation; 
Ryzhkov Nikolai Nikolayevich, a member of the Federation Council 
of the Federal Assembly of the Russian Federation, President of the 
Russian Union of Commodity Producers, Chairman of the USSR Council 
of Ministers (1985-1990); 
Salmanov Farman Kurbanovich, corresponding member of the 
Russian Academy of Sciences; 
Talybov Vasif Yusif ogly, Chairman of the Supreme Mejlis of the 
Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic; 
Tomilina Natalya Georgiyevna, Director of the Russian State 
Archives of Recent History; 
Tretyakov Ivan Polikarpovich, a writer, Baku; 
 395
Ukhov Oleg Sergeyevich, assistant to the First Deputy Chairman of 
the USSR Council of Ministers (1983-1987); 
Shafranik Yuri Konstantinovich, President of the Union of Oil and 
Gas Industrialists, Minister of Fuel and Energetics of the Russian 
Federation (1993-1996). 
 
We acknowledge the contribution made by the staff members of: 
National Archives Administration of Azerbaijan, Akhundov National 
Library, G.A. Aliev’s Nakhichevan Museum, Russian State Archives of 
Recent History and Russian State Library. 
 
We express gratitude to all those who helped us in this work by their 
kind words and advice.  
 396 
 CONTENTS 
 
 
 
 
 
Foreword .................................................................................................  5 
Chapter 1. “I WAS BORN IN NAKHICHEVAN…” ..........................  11 
May 10, 1923, Nakhichevan................................................  11 
A Day in History .................................................................  12 
Parents’ House.....................................................................  14 
Chapter 2. HERE IS A FRONTLINE TOO..........................................  24  
June 22, 1941, Nakhichevan................................................  24 
Soviet Mission in South Azerbaijan ....................................  28 
It was Covered with Silence ................................................  37 
Chapter 3. GEIDAR AND ZARIFA.....................................................  41 
Chapter 4. “I CHOSE THIS PROFESSION IN MY YOUTH”............  53 
December 21, 1980, Baku ...................................................  53 
July 15, 1997, Baku .............................................................  57 
What Country We Live In ...................................................  67 
Chapter 5. AT THE HEAD OF THE REPUBLIC................................  78 
July 14, 1969, Baku .............................................................  78 
“Tell me, is he an honest man?” ..........................................  81 
Feeling of Fulfilled Duty .....................................................  87 
Let Justice Prevail................................................................  96 
December 2, 1982, Baku ...................................................  104 
Chapter 6. “THE WHOLE UNION NEEDS YOU, GEIDAR!”.........  111 
The Last Visit of the General Secretary.............................  111 
November 22, 1982, Moscow............................................  117 
The Sovmin–Workday Routine .........................................  123 
Someone Else’s Children...................................................  136 
BAM Remained in His Heart ............................................  143 
 397
Light of the Dead Star .......................................................  150 
April 22, 1985, Moscow ....................................................  154 
August 31, 1986, Novorossiysk.........................................  160 
He Could Appreciate Kindness..........................................  166 
What is Your Hobby? ........................................................  169 
In the Politburo of the CPSU Central Committee..............  174 
Chapter 7. “I AM NOT A STONE OR IRON, I AM A MAN”..........  191 
October 19, 1987, Moscow................................................  191 
Story of One Envy .............................................................  193 
Harsh Treatment ................................................................  197 
Karabakh ...........................................................................  198 
 June 28, 1988, Moscow ....................................................  201 
Baku Diary.........................................................................  203 
“I Spared No Effort to Be Received by Gorbachyov” .......  216 
January 21, 1990, Moscow ................................................  218 
Pravda Fires a Shot ...........................................................  221 
Moscow Blockade .............................................................  224 
Chapter 8. THE RIGHT TO BE WITH HIS PEOPLE .......................  228 
July 22, 1990, Nakhichevan...............................................  228 
Back to the Roots...............................................................  234 
July 19, 1991, Moscow......................................................  240 
The Putsch .........................................................................  244 
Nakhichevan in Siege ........................................................  248 
Chapter 9. NINETY-THREE..............................................................  252 
May-June 1993, Nakhichevan–Baku .................................  252 
Colonel Guseinov’s Tanks.................................................  253 
President Elchibei’s Flight.................................................  256 
Powers Handed Over to President Geidar Aliev................  258 
Azerbaijan Elects Geidar Aliev .........................................  272 
September 30, 1994, New York.........................................  274 
“I Rely on the People” .......................................................  275 
 398 
Chapter 10. AZERBAIJAN’S OIL IN WORLD POLITICS ..............  281 
If Oil Is a Queen… ............................................................  281 
April 21, 1971, Baku .........................................................  284 
September 20, 1994, Baku.................................................  285 
Bon Voyage, “Dede Gorgud”!...........................................  287 
About the Contract of the Century ....................................  294 
July 3, 1997, Moscow........................................................  297 
If There Is Will There Is a Way.........................................  298 
August 1, 1997, Washington .............................................  300 
Legends and True Stories of Three Seas............................  304 
Chapter 11. THE SUN RISING FROM THE SEASIDE....................  307 
July 14-15, 2001, Baku......................................................  307 
He Bequeathed Friendship with Russia to Azerbaijan.......  309 
September 21, 1999, Baku.................................................  312 
Thy Son Forever ................................................................  314 
January 9, 2001, Baku .......................................................  319 
“I Know Well All Streets in Baku” ...................................  323 
Chapter 12. ONE YEAR OF THE PRESIDENT................................  327 
Leafing Through the Calendar...........................................  327 
January 24, 2002, Moscow ................................................  328 
February 1, 2002, New York .............................................  331 
Novruz, the Spring Holiday...............................................  333 
March 3, 2002, Baku .........................................................  336 
Gyulnar, the Peace Envoy..................................................  339 
Lessons of History .............................................................  341 
June 25, 2002, Istanbul ......................................................  345 
July 9, 2002, St. Petersburg ...............................................  345 
General Akhundov’s Birthday ...........................................  352 
September 23, 2002, Moscow ...........................................  356 
A Girl With the Flag of the Republic ................................  359 
November 24, 2002, Baku .................................................  362 
 399
“All Azerbaijanian Children Have Got Together With US”365 
Chapter 13. IN THE EYES OF THE WORLD...................................  367 
Afterword ............................................................................................  375 
Basic Dates of Geidar Aliev’s Life and Activity.................................  387 
Literature .............................................................................................  391 
 
 
 400 
Andriyanov B., Miralamov G. 
Geidar Aliev. – M.: Molodaya Gvardiya, 2005. –396 [6] :  
(The Life of outstanding people: Ser. biogr; Issue 932).  
ISBN 5-235-02800-7 
 
 
Geidar Aliyevich Aliev was ranking the second person in the 
Government of Soviet Union and a member of Politburo of the CPSU Central 
Committee. Following his unjust resignation he managed to return to big 
politics and to rule a sovereign Azerbaijan. The writers Victor Andriyanov 
and Guseynbala Miralamov tell about life and activity and unwritten pages of 
his biography, titling an archive sources and memories of his relatives and 
close people, comrades’ in-arms, friends and political opponents of 
G.A.Aliev. 
Photos from the family archive of Geidar Aliev, the Nakhichevan 
museum of G.A.Aliev and the President G.A.Aliev’s own photographer – 
R.Bagirov, E.Grabilin, the archive of newspaper “Tribuna” and its authors 
have been used in this book. 
 
 
 
 
 
Victor Ivanovich Andriyanov, 
Guseynbala Fazil ogly Miralamov 
GEIDAR ALIEV 
 
Editor-in-chief  K.A.Yarmamedova 
Typographer editor R.A.Kerimov 
 
 
 
Typeset 28.10.2005. Print 18.11.2005. Format size 84x108/32 . Offset paper 
No 1. Offset print. Set “Times”. Conventional print list. 21,0+2,52 incl. 
Edition 2 000 copies. Order No 190 
“NURLAR” Publishing-Polygraphy Center.  
Address: 1122, Baku, Azerbaijan. 78, H.Zardabi Avenue 
Internet: http: //Nurprint.com.e-mail:office@nurprint.com  
Phone: (+99412) 4977021; 4971362 fax: (+99412) 4971295 
ISBN 9952-426-01-1   
