1
THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH 
AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
GORIS - 2010: 
SEASON OF THEATRE 
OF THE ABSURD 
Ramiz Mehdiyev
Academician
 National Academy of Sciences of Azerbaijan
TBILISI - 2010
2 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
3THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
ISBN: 978-9941-17-161-1
ISBN: 978-9941-17-162-8
Ramiz Mehdiyev | GORIS - 2010: SEASON OF THEATRE OF THE ABSURD
Tbilisi, 2010, 88+1p.sh. maps.
In his book, full member of the Azerbaijan National Academy of Science, 
outstanding philosopher and scientist, Ramiz Mehdiyev, uses scientifi c 
evidence to reveal the falsifi cation of history by Armenia’s leaders, who 
attempt to confuse the international public with new lies. He draws 
attention to the historical evidence that the Armenian state was established 
on territory which was formerly Azerbaijani land.
The academician replies in his book to the new ‘research’ of Armenian 
idealogues with fi rm scientifi c evidence, and proves the fultility and 
baselessness of those ‘ideas’ and that ‘research’.
The book, which includes both ancient and modern maps of Azerbaijan, 
is of interest to historians, politologists, specialists in international issues 
and to a wider readership.
Copyright © by Ramiz Mehdiyev
All rights reserved
Printed in Georgia
First Edition 
No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or 
by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying and 
recording, or by any information storage or retrieval system without the 
prior written permission of Universal Publishing House, or under terms 
agreed with the author. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside the 
scope of the above should be sent to the author. 
 
Publishing House “UNIVERSAL”
Tel: 22 36 09 8(99) 17 22 30
E-mail: universal@internet.ge
Address: 19 Chavchavadze ave. 0179 Tbilisi
4 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
Mehdiyev Ramiz Anvar oglu was born on 17 April 1938 
in the city of Baku.
1957 - He graduated from the Seamen’s School.
1963 -1966 - He was educated in the History Faculty of 
the Azerbaijan State University. In 1965, while still a 5th year 
student, he was offered a job with the Central Committee of 
the former Azerbaijan Lenin Communist Youth Association 
and went to work as an instructor in the Department of 
Students at Institutions of Higher Education (1965-1967). 
1967-1968 - He worked as Second Secretary for the Com-
mittee of the Nakhchivan Regional Komsomol. 
1968 - He was accepted on a postgraduate course in 
the Philosophy Faculty of the Mikhail Lomonosov Moscow 
State University. In May 1972 he became a Candidate of 
Philosophical Science, having defended his thesis at the 
Scientifi c Council of the same university. From 1972 to 1974 
he worked fi rst as a teacher and then as head teacher at the 
Azerbaijan State University. 
May 1974-1976 - He worked as a lecturer in the 
Department of Promotion and Agitation of the Central 
Committee of the former Azerbaijan Communist Party; from 
1976 to 1978 he was Deputy Director of the Department of 
Science and Education.
1978-1980 - He worked as First Secretary of the 26 Baku 
Commissar (now Sabail) Regional Party Committee of the 
former Azerbaijan Communist Party.
 June 1980 - He was Director of the Department of Science 
and Education of the Central Committee of the former 
Azerbaijan Communist Party; of the Department of Party 
Organizational Work from 1981-1983 and, from 1983-1988, 
he was Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist 
Party of Azerbaijan, managing ideological, educational, 
scientifi c, cultural issues and international relations. 
5THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
As a result of his stance on the issue of the Nagorno-
Karabakh confl ict at the plenum of the Central Committee of 
the Azerbaijan Communist Party on 31 May 1988, he was freed 
from his position at the insistence of Abdurahman Vezirov. 
June 1988 - He was detailed to be Head of Department 
of the Institute of Social-Political Research and Information 
of the Azerbaijan Academy of Sciences. He defended his 
doctoral dissertation in 1993 in order to attain a PhD in 
Philosophical Science. 
February 1994 - He was appointed Head of Department 
in the Executive Apparatus of the President of the Republic 
of Azerbaijan. 
From February 1995 - He has worked as Head of the 
Executive Apparatus of the President of the Republic of 
Azerbaijan  (the current Presidential Administration).
1980-1990 - He was a deputy in the Supreme Soviet of 
the Azerbaijan SSR and from 1995-2000 he was a deputy in 
the National Assembly of the Republic of Azerbaijan. 
He was twice awarded the “Red Labour Banner” and, in 
2008, he received the “Order of Liberty”. 
1999 - He was appointed Head of the Department of 
State Service and Staff Policy of the Academy of Public 
Administration under the President of the Republic of 
Azerbaijan. 
2007 - He was elected a full member of the Azerbaijan 
National Academy of Sciences. 
He is the author of numerous books and scientifi c articles 
on social-political problems, as well as on the progress of the 
modern Azerbaijani state and society. 
He is married. His wife is a professor and chair of 
computational mathematics department at Baku State 
University. He has a son, a daughter, and fi ve grandchildren.
6 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
7THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
On 16 October 2010, we witnessed another 
performance at the Armenian Theatre of the Absurd. 
This time it was staged not at a Yerevan theatre, but in 
the town of Goris, and the leading role was not played 
by a rank-and-fi le actor, but by Armenian President 
Serzh Sargsyan himself – yes, one 
of the organizers of the Khojali 
massacre of February 1992 and 
the ethnic cleansing carried 
out against the Azerbaijani 
population of Nagorno-Karabakh 
and surrounding areas. Clothing 
himself this time in the mantle 
of an academician, he decided 
to surprise the whole academic 
world from that theatre stage with 
“fresh” discoveries in the science 
of history. One of the “gems” 
in his address to journalists of 
the Armenian diaspora was the 
thought that a certain large group of “geneticists and 
linguists, which does not include a single Armenian, 
carried out a complex and lengthy study. According 
to the latest results, the Armenian language has a 
Serzh Sargsyan, whose 
legitimacy as president 
is questioned even by 
Armenian society, also let 
fl y with some impromptu 
statements from the stage 
of the Goris theatre; they 
refl ected the level of his 
own inner culture and 
education rather than the 
image of the political leader 
that Armenian society 
deserves.
GORIS - 2010: SEASON OF THEATRE OF THE ABSURD
8 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
history of at least 8,000 years. This means that we, 
as a nation, have existed for at least 8,000 years.” We 
have to confess that not since the time of Lysenkov’s 
repression of genetics, has world science been 
enriched by a discovery as sensational as the ability 
of genetics to ascertain the age of a language.
No matter how hard this scholar tried, he failed to 
inject gravity into this “new” production or conceal 
the crudity of the farce. However, working himself into 
a rage, Serzh Sargsyan, whose legitimacy as president 
is questioned even by Armenian society, also let fl y 
with some impromptu statements from the stage of 
the Goris theatre; they refl ected the level of his own 
inner culture and education rather than the image of 
the political leader that Armenian society deserves. 
The Armenian people, who have lived side by side 
with the Azerbaijanis for centuries and who are fated 
to be their neighbours in the future, certainly deserve 
a better leader - one who does not launch public 
attacks at the level of a provincial man-in-the-street 
to make a laughing stock, not only of himself, but 
also of the society he represents, to the misfortune of 
its respectable citizens.
Having invited diaspora journalists to Armenia, 
instead of taking the opportunity to call for impartial 
and unbiased coverage of regional developments, 
9THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
Serzh Sargsyan approached the meeting from his 
own narrow-minded viewpoint and gave those 
present a “presidential” homily: distort historical facts 
beyond recognition, rewrite history the way he did, 
ignore scientifi c sources and, instead, rely on the 
myths and fantasies he offered. In a healthy academic 
environment, a head of state does not usually interfere 
in the processes of scientifi c-research, but creates the 
conditions for scientists to study topical problems. 
This is normally followed by the publication and 
comprehensive discussion of the results obtained, 
based on a professional comprehensive, impartial 
and, more importantly, critical analysis of the whole 
complex of available sources, without emphasising 
one result and ignoring another. Armenia has leaders 
who seem to be unaware of the scientifi c approach 
and the culture of scientifi c work adopted by the rest of 
the world. Guests of the country, among whom there 
are probably some true professionals, are advised to 
employ completely different methods; methods that 
look ridiculous in a scientifi c environment and which 
are totally disgraceful coming from the lips of a head 
of state.
Sending a message to the external world rather 
than to the audience, the Armenian head of state told 
the meeting, without a hint of embarrassment, that the 
10 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
They achieved nothing but 
a meaningless war, thousands 
of destroyed lives, millions 
of refugees, devastation, 
large mine fi elds instead 
of farmland and military 
spending instead of social 
expenditure – they never 
managed, and will never 
manage, to incorporate 
Nagorno Karabakh into 
Armenia – 20 years ago, today 
or in 100 years.
11THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
results of the study were ready and that all scientifi c 
work should now be directed, not at searching for 
the truth (it has already been established!) but simply 
to confi rm the propaganda slogans which he and his 
team had prepared in advance, even though there 
are numerous facts and documents which contradict 
them. In a country in which the subjection of science 
to political goals (perhaps even myths) is the norm, 
statements by the head of state like the ones made 
recently in Goris, become possible.
Seventy years ago, similar “valuable” directives 
about the exceptional nature of the Aryan race were 
made by German scientists and leaders of the Third 
Reich. The outcome of all that talk about one nation 
being superior to another and some people being 
ancient and pure and others being alien and mixed, 
is well-known to everyone. It is to be regretted that 
the leaders of present-day Armenia, who are leading 
their people in the same catastrophic direction, have 
not learned a lesson from recent history.
The negotiating process towards a peaceful 
settlement of the Armenian-Azerbaijani Nagorno-
Karabakh confl ict is continuing and everyone is 
waiting patiently for the culprit in the confl ict – 
Armenia – to accept the updated Madrid principles, 
based on the provisions of the 1975 Helsinki Act. 
12 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
International organizations and the parliaments of 
leading countries are adopting resolutions one after 
the other. These resolutions confi rm Azerbaijan’s 
territorial integrity, Nagorno-Karabakh’s affi liation 
to Azerbaijan, the unacceptability of a spontaneous 
application of the principle of nations’ self-
determination, the need for an Armenian withdrawal 
from the occupied territories and for refugees to 
return to their homes. Meanwhile, Serzh Sargsyan, 
stubbornly failing to notice all these documents and 
ignoring the positions of the international community, 
advises his guests from the diaspora to channel 
their efforts into “the establishment, strengthening, 
development and international recognition of a 
second Armenian state – the Nagorno Karabakh 
Republic”. Instead of looking around, understanding 
his country’s international isolation and pulling out 
the misplaced nail, the President of Armenia urges 
journalists, on the contrary, to hammer the nail in 
to the very end, failing to understand that the pain 
of correcting the mistake will be worse in the future 
than now. The more Armenia drives itself into a dead 
end, the longer and more diffi cult the process to 
extract itself. The responsibility for this will rest with 
the leaders of the state.
What international recognition for the “second 
13THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
Armenian state” (and then the third, fourth etc.) 
are we talking about and what false hopes are the 
leaders of Armenia feeding to their compatriots, 
if the international community has clearly let it 
be known, via numerous resolutions, that this will 
never happen? What is the Armenian leadership 
hoping for? A miracle? Or, perhaps, unprecedented 
obstinacy, which they hope neither Azerbaijan nor 
the international community will endure. Isn’t it time 
to dispel this illusion?
If the adventurers of the 1980s who sent their 
unreasonable compatriots onto the streets and 
squares of Yerevan and Khankandi failed to realize that 
the “miatsum” utopia was doomed, isn’t it time now 
for the leaders of Armenia to understand this tragic 
mistake? Have the current leaders of the country, like 
rank-and-fi le Armenians, ever thought about what the 
South Caucasus region would be like today, had the 
false patriots of the Krunk and Karabakh committees 
of those years not plunged their own people into 
this meaningless adventure? There is no doubt that 
it was an exemplary region, with an economy closely 
integrated from the three countries in which one’s 
nationality did not matter, in which everyone had 
the chance to maintain their identity and in which 
peoples had the chance to develop their own culture. 
14 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
What did these adventurers achieve in the end? They 
achieved nothing but a meaningless war, thousands 
of destroyed lives, millions of refugees, devastation, 
large mine fi elds instead of farmland and military 
spending instead of social expenditure – they never 
managed, and will never manage, 
to incorporate Nagorno-Karabakh 
into Armenia – 20 years ago, today 
or in 100 years, either directly or via 
the notorious “independence”. Isn’t 
it time to fi nally understand this 
mistake and give journalists from the 
diaspora more reasonable advice?!
In his speech in Goris, Serzh 
Sargsyan expressed his indignation 
at the fact that Stepan Shaumyan 
is called a “bandit” in Azerbaijan. 
However, the communist regime, 
which favoured the Armenians and 
created a state for them, is a thing 
of the past. Today we are free to 
contemplate the events of our 
past. Archive materials help us to do this. No matter 
how hard President Serzh Sargsyan seeks refuge 
in quotations from ideological texts of the past, 
he cannot avoid facts. Stepan Shaumyan’s name is 
Armenia is totally 
isolated today, transport 
routes and pipelines 
bypass it, it has no access 
to the sea, most of its 
borderline is closed and 
the padlock will continue 
to hang on two of its 
four borders. What other 
country has 85 per cent 
of its borderline closed 
through its own fault? 
15THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
associated with one of the most tragic periods in the 
history of the Azerbaijani people in the 20th century. 
Acting under the banner of the Bolshevik regime, 
Shaumyan in fact embodied the programme of the 
Dashnaktsutyun party, whose strategic goal was to 
create an Armenian state on a considerable expanse 
of Azerbaijani and Turkish territory. It was possible to 
achieve this goal only by means of exterminating the 
Azerbaijani and Turkish population, and the Armenian 
leaders did not fail to use those means.
Shaumyan fi nally took the path of Armenian 
expansionism after the Bolshevik government of Russia 
announced its decree on 11 January 1918, supporting 
“the right of Russian-occupied Turkish Armenia to 
free self-determination as far as independence”. 
Shamyan’s affi liation to two parties explains how 
he used armed Dashnak detachments in March and 
April 1918 to organize the mass extermination of 
the Azerbaijani population. Shaumyan subsequently 
admitted: “We used the occasion… and launched an 
offensive along the entire front…, and we had armed 
forces – about 6,000 people. Dashnaktsutyun also 
had from 3,000 to 4,000 national forces that were at 
our disposal. The latter’s involvement partly gave the 
civil war the nature of an ethnic massacre, but there 
was no way to avoid this. We did this consciously. 
16 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
If they (i.e. Azerbaijani political forces) had gained 
the upper hand in Baku, the city would have been 
declared the capital of Azerbaijan.”1
As a result, in three days – from 30 March to 1 
April 1918 – the Bolshevik-Dashnak 
troops exterminated more than 
12,000 Azerbaijanis in Baku because 
of their ethnicity. After this, how 
can we not regard Shaumyan as the 
principal organizer of a massacre of 
Azerbaijanis?
At the Goris meeting, the 
journalists were urged to provide 
the world community with “true 
and impartial information about 
Artsakh”, “actively promote the truth” 
and “not to embellish the reality”. 
This was good advice, there is no 
doubt about that. However, every 
time a foreign channel or newspaper 
reports without embellishing the reality – Shusha and 
the seven districts surrounding Nagorno-Karabakh 
devastated and burnt out by Armenian marauders, 
cultural monuments destroyed and desecrated and 
1  Шаумян, Степан Г. Избранные произведения. Т.2. Москва: 
Политиздат, 1978, стр. 246.
Against the 
background of 
Azerbaijan’s growing 
international authority 
and economic and 
military power, Armenia 
is trying to hide behind 
a military block whose 
every member, apart 
from Armenia, is friendly 
to Azerbaijan and 
understands Armenia’s 
aggressive nature 
17THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
villages devastated, or video footage of atrocities 
committed by Serzh Sargsyan’s former colleagues in 
Khojali - Armenia and the diaspora immediately raise 
a fuss because this does not accord with the goals of 
the Armenian leadership and diaspora. By “reality”, 
they refer to only one side of the medal. In speaking 
about “the problems of Artsakh” and the “concerns 
of modern Artsakh people”, they refer only to ethnic 
Armenians, striking out almost one third of the 
region’s population from Nagorno-Karabakh. How 
awkward will they feel if a foreign journalist, listening 
to such advice, visits the temporary settlements of 
Nagorno-Karabakh Azerbaijanis in order to cover 
the concerns of modern “Artsakh” Azerbaijanis who 
expect to return to their homes? The leaders of 
Armenia have their own understanding of “objective 
reality” which, in almost Goebbels-like fashion, has 
no room for non-Armenians.
In Goris, Serzh Sargsyan accused Azerbaijan of 
spending oil dollars, as he put it, on “spreading lies, 
falsifi cations and black propaganda”, promising to 
contrast it with “our human potential worldwide”. 
Perhaps, by his “human potential worldwide”, a 
kind of “secret weapon” that he holds in reserve, he 
meant the large criminal group of Armenians recently 
exposed in the United States, who robbed the elderly 
18 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
and the poor and used the money stolen to bribe 
corrupt congressmen in the guise of donations to 
their election campaigns. Using the money stolen 
from rank-and-fi le taxpayers and members of the 
House of Representatives, the Armenians have spread 
sheer lies and black propaganda about Azerbaijan 
and regional developments all these years. It turns 
out that this entire criminal network is linked to top 
Armenian offi cials. The Armenian leaders need not 
worry about the fate of oil dollars – they are being 
spent on the construction of schools, hospitals, 
temporary settlements for the displaced persons 
ousted from their centuries-long homeland by those 
same fi eld commanders who built their political 
careers out of the war and are now handing out 
“valuable directives” to diaspora journalists.
One of the requests made to the journalists was 
to help Armenia’s ruling regime to consolidate in 
the diplomatic sphere the “victory” gained on the 
battlefi eld. All this time the Armenian leadership 
has failed to understand that having committed 
aggression against a neighbouring state, occupied its 
territory, carried out ethnic cleansing and barbarically 
devastated cities and villages, Armenia in fact lost 
rather than won! It has lost the peace, missing out 
on so many opportunities. In order to understand 
19THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
this, it is enough to compare today’s Azerbaijan with 
Armenia and estimate the margin that will continue 
to widen from year to year. In the diplomatic sphere, 
Armenia is moving inexorably towards total failure, 
which could be followed by failure of a different 
nature. Isn’t it time for the leaders of a country which 
is sliding into an abyss, to save face now and hurry to 
emerge from the situation with credit, avoiding the 
inevitable outcome before it is too late?
Armenia is totally isolated today, transport routes 
and pipelines bypass it, it has no access to the sea, 
most of its borderline is closed and the padlock will 
continue to hang on two of its four borders. What 
other country has 85 per cent of its borderline closed 
through its own fault? There is no other country in 
the world. The population of Armenia is steadily 
shrinking. According to the report on the development 
of human potential, published under the aegis of 
the UN Development Programme, from 23,000 to 
27,000 people leave Armenia every year.2 According 
to Armenian non-governmental organizations, 1.5 
million people have left the country since 1991. Two 
decades ago, the Republic of Armenia, Artsakh and 
2   “Миграция в Армении: минусов больше, чем плюсов.” Радио 
Организации Объединенных Наций. May 14, 2010. http://www.unmul-
timedia.org/radio/russian/detail/69756.html (accessed September 20, 
2010).
20 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
Javakhk were populated by 3.7 million Armenians. 
Today, only 2.2-2.3 million Armenians live in these 
territories, i.e. the population of Armenia has declined 
by almost 40 per cent. From a sense of hopelessness 
and in an attempt to emigrate as soon as possible, 
everyone without exception in the 
country plays the American Green 
Card lottery, even top offi cials and 
generals in the security forces. 
Information from the Gallup 
service indicates that Armenia has 
the highest proportion of people 
wishing to emigrate – 39 per cent3. 
It looks like the president, too, will 
run away soon. No longer do major 
enterprises belong to the country; 
they were sold to pay off the public 
debt. Armenia is not even able to 
independently protect its state 
border, which is one of the symbols 
of statehood, an element of national 
pride and prestige for any other 
country. It does not have enough troops to protect its 
3 “Армения: бедная родственница Закавказья или прекрасная 
незнакомка инвестору?” Биржевой Лидер. October 24, 2010. http://
profi -forex.org/news/entry1008057044.html (accessed September 30, 
2010).
The arguments of 
the Armenian side were, 
and remain, weak in 
both cases, because 
the historical argument 
is based on fi ction, 
fraud and unscientifi c 
conclusions, and the 
legal argument – on 
a free interpretation 
of the provisions of 
international law.
21THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
borders. Despite that, it wants to expand its borders 
at the expense of Azerbaijan. What for? To again 
ask foreign border guards to protect them? Having 
occupied foreign territory and failed to populate it, 
Armenia, with its challenging demographic situation, 
will soon lose its own population. It is 
not diffi cult to explain the ease with 
which Armenians are leaving their own 
country and moving abroad – they 
do not feel an affi liation to this land 
because they instinctively feel that 
they are incomers. That is why they are 
light on their feet. Furthermore, they 
understand full well that the Azerbaijani 
people are determined on the issue 
of liberating their land and as long as 
they have not restored their integrity, 
Armenia will have no calm future, with 
hostilities always on the agenda.
Against the background of 
Azerbaijan’s growing international 
authority and economic and military 
power, Armenia is trying to hide behind a military 
block whose every member, apart from Armenia, is 
friendly to Azerbaijan and understands Armenia’s 
aggressive nature. Information about Azerbaijan’s 
Azerbaijani historians 
have never claimed 
that the Caucasian 
Albanians were the fi rst 
to embrace Christianity. 
But Armenian historians 
have created, and 
persistently promote, the 
myth that Armenia was 
the fi rst country to adopt 
Christianity as a state 
religion in 301. 
22 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
possible purchase of two defence systems caused 
unprecedented panic in the Armenian leadership. 
And they call this “victory”? Winners do not behave 
like that and do not ask other countries to protect 
them against the loser!
Perhaps Serzh Sargsyan’s “victory” was the 
operation about which Armenia’s top circles, as 
they themselves admit, “prefer not to speak aloud”.4 
The same Sargsyan, who admitted in an interview 
with a British journalist several years ago that his 
associates had participated in the shooting of Khojali 
refugees and who now hypocritically complains 
about information “lies” and “falsifi cations”, ordered 
the establishment of a service a year ago to confront 
Azerbaijan’s growing efforts to inform the world 
community of the truth. The new entity soon yielded 
its fi rst result: a sacrilegious myth was created, denying 
Sargsyan’s confession about the extermination of 
Khojali residents by Armenian servicemen: “Before 
Khojali, Azerbaijanis thought that they could joke with 
us, they thought that Armenians were not capable 
of raising their hand at the civilian population. We 
managed to break that stereotype.”5 In Goris, the same 
Sargsyan told journalists that “you can’t go far with 
4 Waal, Thomas de. Black Garden: Armenia and Azerbaijan through 
peace and war. New York: NYU Press, 2003, p. 172.
5  Ibid - p. 172.
23THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
lies and falsifi cations”. This is the modern Armenian 
leadership’s understanding of the “truth”.
Serzh Sargsyan’s irresponsible statement that 
“Azerbaijan itself began the war and itself lost it” is 
striking in its cynicism. Azerbaijan, which has faced 
aggression from Armenia but has never made 
territorial claims on it (despite suffi cient historical 
grounds), now hears a sacrilegious statement from 
the lips of the leader of the aggressor state, the 
occupier state and the state that violates international 
conventions. You inevitably recall Goebbels’ remark: 
“If you tell a lie big enough, people will come to 
believe it.” You also remember the Polish “attacks” on 
Germany and the Kuwaiti attacks on Iraq. Azerbaijan 
has never had any intention of seizing one fi fth of 
Armenian territory in order to expel the Armenians 
and create a puppet regime there. It would be better 
if the author of such hypocrisy considered another 
question: if the consequences of defeat, as he claims, 
are never pleasant, why then have the Armenians been 
weeping for many decades about the consequences 
of the Armenian revolt against the Ottoman Empire 
during World War I? They themselves betrayed their 
state, stabbed it in the back, defected to the enemy, 
began to exterminate the Muslim population in 
the east of the country, and they themselves bear 
24 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
the responsibility for the consequences! As if the 
consequences of such actions could be pleasant. 
What “genocide” are the Armenians talking about? 
That word did not even exist at the time! And they 
want to be its “fi rst victims” of the 20th century, as if 
they themselves had not massacred the whole Muslim 
population and there had not been the massacre of 
Herero and Hottentot peoples in Namibia in 1904-07.
Gone are the days when you could grab someone’s 
land and declare it to be yours just because you had 
seized it. The world is no longer what it was centuries 
ago. Therefore, to justify their territorial claims on 
neighbours, the expansionist heads of Armenia 
decided fi rst to turn to the historical argument: “These 
lands were once ours, we are the indigenous people, 
you are incomers and, therefore, we are entitled to it.” 
To this end, they invented a falsifi ed version of history 
which has nothing to do with fact. When they came 
to realize that in today’s world, territorial disputes are 
dealt with according to international law, not within 
the framework of narrow medieval thinking or in 
historical dimensions, Armenia decided to adapt the 
international legal principle of nations’ right to self-
determination to its territorial claims. The arguments 
of the Armenian side were, and remain, weak in both 
cases, because the historical argument is based on 
25THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
fi ction, fraud and unscientifi c conclusions, and the 
legal argument – on a free interpretation of the 
provisions of international law, which is unacceptable 
and counterproductive. Therefore, the Armenian 
claims are not supported internationally.
In the historical argument, Armenia could be 
called the undisputed world champion in falsifi cation. 
It has no equal in the world. In an effort to make their 
history more ancient and to “link” their people in 
every way to their neighbours’ territories, Armenian 
authors, sometimes without even knowing it, draw 
almost anecdotal conclusions, which are immediately 
seized upon by political leaders and without a hint 
of embarrassment, proclaimed from high rostrums 
as “axioms” universally accepted  by science. 
For example, Serzh Sargsyan, with undisguised 
arrogance, allowed himself to groundlessly accuse 
Azerbaijanis of claiming to be the fi rst in the world to 
adopt Christianity. Azerbaijani historians have never 
claimed that the Caucasian Albanians were the fi rst 
to embrace Christianity. But Armenian historians have 
created, and persistently promote, the myth that 
Armenia was the fi rst country to adopt Christianity 
as a state religion in 301, although science has long 
known that at the end of the 2nd century, i.e. more 
than a century before the Armenians, Christianity 
26 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
became the offi cial religion of the Aramaic kingdom 
of Edessa (Osroene). In 165, King Abgar Bar Manu 
(Abgar V or Manu VIII) of Edessa converted to 
Christianity6; he was persuaded by a missionary from 
Palestine, St. Thaddaeus (Adday), while his successor 
on the royal throne, Abgar VIII, made Christianity the 
state religion of Osroene7 (some sources write that 
this was done by Abgar IX8 who laid the foundations 
of Christian poetry). In 1905, the German historian 
and theologian Adolph von Harnack wrote: “... there is 
no doubt that even before 190, Christianity was  being 
actively spread throughout Edessa and its outlying 
areas, and (soon after 201 or even earlier) the royal 
court also accepted the Church (i.e. Christianity).”9 
Irfan Shahid wrote of Abgar VIII as the fi rst ruler of a 
Middle Eastern state to adopt Christianity.10
It is curious that Armenia’s adoption of the 
Christian religion in 301 is challenged by Armenian 
historians themselves. Sirarpi Ter-Nersesyan writes: 
6  Cheetham, Samuel. A History of the Christian Church during the First 
Six Centuries. New York: Macmillan and Co., 1905, p. 58.
7  Lockyer, Herbert. All the Postles of the Bible. Grand Rapids: Zonder-
van, 1988, p. 260.
8  Adshead, Samuel Adrian Miles. China in World History. London: Mac-
millan, 2000, p. 27.
9  Harnack, Adolph von. The Expansion of Christianity in the First Three 
Centuries. London: Williams & Norgate, 1905, p. 293.
10  Shahid, Irfan. Rome and the Arabs: A Prolegomenon to the Study of 
Byzantium and the Arabs. Washington D.C.: Dumbarton Oaks, 1984, p. 96.
27THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
“The year 301 is traditionally regarded as the date of 
this event but, judging by recent studies, this did not 
happen before 314.”11
How did the Armenians become the “fi rst” 
Christian nation in the world in the light of these facts? 
Interestingly, the Armenians, whose fabrications deny 
historical facts, try to play down the signifi cance of 
the fact that Edessa was fi rst to convert to Christianity, 
resorting to outright distortions: some Yerevan 
“historians” claim that the adoption of Christianity 
as the state religion by Osroene “does not count”, 
as it were, because at that time, it was allegedly not 
independent and did not have statehood yet (or any 
longer). In support of this speculation, they publish a 
map in which Osroene is shown as part of Armenia. 
However, they hold back the fact that Osroene had 
been conquered by Tigran the Great long before and 
for a short time but, at the time it adopted Christianity, 
it had been independent for many years. Apart 
from these distortions, these “historians” are trying 
to belittle in every way the importance of the fact 
that Osroene was the fi rst to convert to Christianity, 
because it was linked to an apocryphal legend of 
correspondence between Abgar V (Manu VIII) and 
11  Тер-Нерсесян, Сирарпи. Армения: Быт, религия, культура. 
Москва: Центрполиграф, 2008, стр. 84.
28 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
Jesus Christ. Whoever the king of Edessa “wrote” 
to and whatever the real reasons for his personal 
adoption of Christianity, the fact remains - no matter 
how hard the false propaganda of the neighbouring 
country tries today, Christianity became the offi cial 
religion of Osroene more than a century before the 
Armenians adopted it.
Serzh Sargsyan also pompously quoted the 
Greek geographer Strabo, who allegedly pointed to 
Armenian autochthony in the South Caucasus. In fact, 
Strabo described these areas as territories conquered 
by Armenian kings from other nations and peoples. 
Even in those days, Strabo noted the Armenians’ 
inclination to seize the lands of others and recorded 
in his book: “Armenia, which was formerly a small 
country, was enlarged by Artaxias and Zariadris, who 
had been generals of Antiochus the Great and, at last, 
after his overthrow, when they became kings, (the 
former of Sophene, Acisene, and Odomantis, and some 
other places, the latter of the country around Artaxata) 
they simultaneously aggrandized themselves by taking 
away portions of the territory of surrounding nations: 
from the Medes they took  Caspiana, Phaunitis and 
Basoropeda; from the Iberians, the country at the foot 
of the Paryadres, the Chorzene and Gogarene, which is 
on the other side of the Cyrus; from the Chalybes and 
29THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
the Mosynceci, Carenitis and Xerxene, which border 
upon Lesser Armenia, or are even parts of it; from 
the Cataones, Acilisene and the country around the 
Anti-Taurus; from the Syrians, Taronitis.”12 Moreover, 
Strabo emphasized that in the conquered lands, the 
Armenians tried to assimilate the conquered peoples: 
“Hence they all speak the same language.”13
The Armenian president’s team interprets the 
words of Strabo rather amusingly. According to their 
logic, if Armenian kings conquered the territories of 
other nations, the Armenians immediately became 
“autochthons” in those lands.
It should be noted that, as an independent state, 
Armenia survived for a relatively short period. History 
tells us that having existed as an independent state 
for slightly more than two decades in the early years 
AD, Armenia lost its independence and became a 
Roman-Parthian possession because, after the year 
63, according to a treaty between Rome and Parthia, 
Armenia’s double dependence was established.14 For 
all the following centuries until 1918, it was either 
a vassal or totally dependent on other powers - 
the Persian, Roman, Ottoman and Russian empires. 
12  Strabo. Geographica, XI, XIV, 5. 
13  Ibid.
14  Меликишвили, Георгий А. К истории древней Грузии. Тбилиси: 
АН Груз. ССР, 1959, стр. 344.
30 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
Within the short period of the independence of 
the Armenian kingdom, its rulers made numerous 
attempts at territorial expansion. There is no scientifi c 
evidence of the spread of Armenian control to the 
territory of modern Azerbaijan, except in the time of 
King Tigran the Great. Only during the reign of Tigran 
did Armenia reach its peak and temporarily conquer 
lands to the north of the River Araz. 
Strabo, who was born in the years 
when Armenian King Tigran the 
Great was still alive, can be regarded 
as a contemporary of those events. 
Therefore, it is not surprising that in 
his book “Geographica”, he recorded 
that Orchistene was (probably at the 
time) a region of Armenia. As we 
know, history has never been static 
– possessions have expanded and 
contracted, states have appeared 
and disappeared and borders 
have changed. One should not 
forget that the Armenian kingdom, 
which expanded under Tigran, was home to many 
peoples, not just Armenians. But the important point 
is a different one - nowhere does Strabo say that 
Orchistene, which could easily change hands, was 
In the process, the 
toponym Artsakh 
became «Armenian», 
and an «Armenian 
settlement called 
Vararakn» was made 
up. Not a single 
source mentions any 
«Vararakn».  
31THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
Christian churches and 
temples, built by Albanian 
princes and part of the 
history of Caucasian Albania, 
are becoming “Armenian”. 
Armenian scholars carry out 
so-called “restoration” work 
on these monuments in order 
to Armenianize them. 
32 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
populated by Armenians. Strabo does not say a single 
word about the ethnic composition of Artsakh and, 
especially, whether its population was autochthonous 
or migrant! But there are myriad other sources and 
accounts by other writers, which specifi cally mention 
the Albanian population of Artsakh. In the same, 11th, 
section of the book, Strabo says that the River Cyrus 
(Kura) fl owed through (!) Albania15
Another absurd thesis that characterizes the 
intellectual level of its authors is the assertion that 
Azerbaijan and Azerbaijanis as a nation emerged less 
than a century ago, and everything that was in the 
territory before the early 20th century had nothing 
to do with them. The authors of such delusional 
statements have hardly considered the basic question: 
how does directive-bureaucratic ethnogenesis relate 
to normal human biology? If a nation can be created 
by the simple pen stroke of a party leader who decides 
in his offi ce to change the name of a centuries-old 
people, does it mean that the fi rst representatives 
of the “newly created” people had neither fathers 
nor grandfathers nor great-grandparents, and were 
cloned in a test tube? The older generation, born in 
the 1930s, still lives in Azerbaijan today, and many 
members of this generation still have parents who 
15  Strabo. Geographica, XI, XIV, 2.
33THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
were born before the decision was made to rename 
the Azerbaijani Turks Azerbaijanis. According to the 
logic of the Armenian “intellectuals”, it appears that 
these two generations belong to different ethnicities, 
as the seniors, you know, are not young enough to 
be considered Azerbaijanis, while their children born 
in the 1930s are not old enough 
to deserve a spiritual, cultural or 
historical connection with the 
millennial legacy of their “biological” 
ancestors. It turns out that when a 
people is given a new name, the 
centuries-old history of one people 
stops and becomes “ownerless” and 
the history of another people begins, 
and further, there is no more a link 
not only between the “neighbouring” 
generations of parents and children, 
but also between nations, which are 
now “different”.
Perhaps nowhere but Armenia 
could the leaders of a state publicly make such 
absurd statements. What would these “scientists” say 
if, for example, a policy decision had been taken in 
the 1960-1970’s to rename the Armenians “Araratis” 
after a valley or even “Sevanis” after the new name for 
At the very beginning 
of the confl ict in 
1988, Armenian 
historian Ronald Suny 
of the University of 
Michigan, USA, noted 
the existence of a 
state of Caucasian 
Albanians on the 
territory of today’s 
Karabakh in the 
Middle Ages.
34 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
Lake Goycha? Would the era of a new nation begin 
in such a case? Would they lose the right to reside 
in their own republic in that case, and would they be 
subject to immediate deportation for the reason that 
you cannot fi nd mention of the “Ararat” or “Sevan” 
nation in medieval manuscripts, which write about 
some obscure Armenians who ceased to exist when 
the party issued its resolution?
Meanwhile, medieval Arab authors often called 
the territory of Caucasian Albania “Azerbaijan” or 
“Upper Azerbaijan”. Al-Kufi , writing of the presence of 
the ruler of Azerbaijan in Shaki, wrote that the Caliph 
ordered Al-Jarrah “to stay in Azerbaijan”, “he reached 
al-Bab (Derbent) in the region of Azerbaijan”, “he 
travelled to Azerbaijan and settled down in Baylakan...” 
and “he went to Azerbaijan and stopped in Barda”.16
In 1864, the British consul in Tabriz, Keith Abbott, 
wrote in a memorandum to the Royal Geographical 
Society: “The country, known to Persians as Azerbaijan, 
is divided between them [Persia] and Russia. The latter 
owns 5/8 [of Azerbaijan] whose territory is 80,000 
square miles, or is roughly equal to the territory of 
Great Britain; thus 50,000 square miles belong to Russia 
and 30,000 square miles to Persia. The Russian part [of 
16  Велиханова, Наиля М. «Изменение исторической географии 
Азербайджана в результате арабского завоевания.» In Историческая 
география Азербайджана, 53, 58. Баку: Элм, 1987.
35THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
Azerbaijan] borders on the Caucasus Mountains in the 
north and north-east, stretching to the vicinity of Baku 
on the Caspian Sea. In the west, it includes the provinces 
of Imereti, Mingrelia, Guria and Akhyska, which now 
belong to Russia; in the east, there is the Caspian Sea, 
and in the south, the border is marked by the River 
Arass (Araks) ... through the Mugan steppe to the Talysh 
district and by a small river called Astura (Astara), 
which fl ows through this region into the Caspian 
Sea. This region includes the following territories: 
Georgia or Gurjustan which consists of Kakheti, Kartli, 
Someheti and Qazakh; the Mohammedan regions 
of Erivan, Nakhichevan, Karabakh, Ganja, Shirvan, 
Shaki, Shamakhi, Azerbaijan, Quba, Salyan and part of 
Talysh.”17 As is evident from the account of the British 
diplomat, whom it is diffi cult to accuse of lying and 
serving “Azerbaijani propaganda”, by the 1860s, the 
population of Iravan, Nakhichevan and Karabakh, even 
after the Armenians were resettled here, continued 
to be predominantly Mohammedan (i.e., Turkic, if 
Sargsyan will - Azerbaijani), and these regions were 
considered part of Azerbaijan.
Alas, such is the intellectual level of today’s leaders 
of Armenia, who seek to impress visitors from the 
17  Abbott, Keith E. “Extracts from a Memorandum on the Country of 
Azerbaijan.” Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society of London, Vol. 
8, No. 6, 1863-1864: pp. 275-279.
36 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
diaspora with the rhetorical question – “how could a 
settlement have an Azerbaijani name 200-300 years 
ago? They could have said Turkish or Persian!” It turns 
out that it could! Both 300 years ago and a thousand 
years ago! Counting on the ignorance of his audience 
and without realizing it himself, Serzh Sargsyan did not 
explain that from a linguistic point 
of view, “Azerbaijani” and “Turkic” 
are the same thing, especially when 
it comes to the South Caucasus 
region. If it is diffi cult to understand, 
let him ponder in exactly the same 
way what relationship Hays have to 
Armenian place names.
After all, according to the rule 
applied in linguistics, in a hundred 
random features the Hay language 
is divided into 11 groups and 44 
dialects.18 Linguists believe that the 
existence in this nation of so many 
branches of the language and dialects is reason to 
believe that the Hay language was not the language 
of one people. This is also supported by skulls found 
in ancient tombs in Armenia. The skulls differ sharply 
18    Джаукян, Геворк Б. Общее и армянское языкознание. Ереван: АН 
Арм. ССР, 1978.
Prior to the 
Armenian-Azerbaijani 
Nagorno Karabakh 
confl ict, Armenian 
historians did not 
really challenge the 
fact that Artsakh was 
part of Caucasian 
Albania and was 
populated by 
Albanians.
37THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
from those of contemporary Armenians.19 The 
division of Armenians into 16 anthropological types 
causes confusion among researchers. One nation 
cannot have so many anthropological differences. It 
turns out that we can safely challenge the relationship 
between Hays and Armenians. Thinking about this, the 
Armenian president’s team will, perhaps, understand 
how a settlement could have an Azerbaijani name 
200-300 years ago.
It would not harm them to think about something 
else. Anthropologically, Armenians are almost the only 
people that do not fi t into the anthropological type 
characteristic of the peoples of the South Caucasus. 
On the basis of anthropological research, we can argue 
that the population of the western part of historical 
Azerbaijan was in all periods (from the Neolithic to 
the present) similar to the rest of the population of 
Azerbaijan. The oldest anthropological discoveries 
concerning Armenians and found on the territory of 
modern Armenia belong only to the 17th century and 
are confi rmed only by fi nds in the Kenaker necropolis. 
In a number of features (shape of the cranium, facial 
skeleton structure etc.) they are fundamentally 
different from previous paleoanthropological series 
19    Яков Я. Рогинский, Григорий М. Левин. Антропология, 2 изд. 
Москва: Высшая школа, 1963.
38 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
and represent a new ethnic component.
The fact that the Armenians were not aborigines 
in the area of Nagorno-Karabakh is also proved by an 
analysis of dental systems.20
In the process, the toponym Artsakh became 
“Armenian”, and an “Armenian settlement called 
Vararakn” was made up. Not a single source mentions 
any “Vararakn”. Of course, they did not have enough 
time to concoct it in the Armenian laboratories of 
historical falsifi cation and attach it to the site where 
Khankandi, which was founded by Karabakh khans, 
stands. This “Vararakn” is a useless invention of 
Armenian propaganda, just like “ancient Armenian” 
Berdzor, Karvachar, Kashatagh and many other 
fi ctitious names. Take, for example, the so-called 
“Tigranakert”, a name which they arbitrarily decided 
to give, without strong scientifi c evidence, to the area 
around the base of a structure discovered during 
illegal excavations in the occupied Agdam District of 
Azerbaijan. Why “Tigranakert” rather than a different 
name, and why in this place, and not in another? Is 
it only because the Armenians have set their eyes 
on this land and routinely concocted false evidence 
and records which they now artfully quote in order 
to assist the annexationist plans of the laboratory of 
20  Этническая одонтология СССР. Москва: Наука, 1979, стр.135.
39THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
historical falsifi cation?
Hundreds of place names in the former Azerbaijani 
(precisely Azerbaijani!) Iravan Khanate were bestowed 
during the Soviet era; Armenian names in order to 
destroy traces of the Azerbaijani Turks who lived in 
these lands - place names which have a meaning 
in our language and mean nothing in Armenian. 
Where are those place names? There is no doubt that 
when searching for an answer to this question, the 
same Armenian laboratory of historical falsifi cation 
will invent hundreds of new “Vararakns” for former 
Azerbaijani toponyms such as Basarkechar (Vardenis) 
Qaranliq (Martuni) Hamamli (Spitak), Jalaloglu 
(Stepanavan), Qarakilsa (Sisian), Qarakilsa (Vanadzor), 
Keshishkand (Yeghegnadzor), Ulukhanli or Zangibasar 
(Masis), or Istibulaq or Karvansaray (Ijevan), Davali 
(village of Ararat), Gozlu Kamarli (Metsamor), Uch-
Muazzin (Echmiadzin), Alagoz (Aragats), Goycha 
(Sevan), Arpachay (Akhuryan) and hundreds of others. 
All these Azerbaijani toponyms will be “seething with 
sources” for 8,000 years. False “records” will appear, 
supposedly containing information about new 
“ancient Armenian” names from Noah’s time. These 
same laboratories have already come up with new 
names for the occupied towns and villages and, after 
a while, Armenia’s leaders will inform the world of 
40 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
new “Vararakns” from the high rostrum! They already 
want to rename the Ukrainian city of Lviv Aryuts!
As far as the so-called “Armenian” toponym Artsakh 
is concerned, it has nothing to do with the Armenian 
language or the early history of Armenia. The thesis, 
voiced by the President of Armenia in Goris, is amazing 
in its level of ignorance: “The Armenian name of this 
area - Artsakh – was mentioned in the 8th century BC, 
and it was mentioned by the son of the founder of 
Yerevan, Argishti I - Sarduri II.” Firstly, Argishti I and 
Sarduri II were Urartu kings, not Hay. Urartu and Hays 
were different nations and spoke in languages that 
belong to different language families. Obviously, 
Armenia decided to grab not only Albanian cultural 
and historical heritage, but also Urartian. Secondly, 
why did this name suddenly become Armenian? The 
Urartian king mentioned the name of Artsakh, but did 
not refer to it as an “Armenian” toponym! He only noted 
that there was such a region, and that’s it. It would 
seem that if the existence of a region called Artsakh 
in the Caucasus had been mentioned by Egyptian 
pharaohs or Chinese emperors, this toponym would 
immediately have become Egyptian or Chinese. The 
name Artsakh did not become ancient just because 
it was mentioned by Byzantine sources! Armenian 
pseudo-scientists and politicians surprise us with their 
41THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
fraudulent methods: fi rst, they turn Hurrite-speaking 
Urartians into Indo-European Hays and arrogate their 
heritage to themselves and then they make Artsakh an 
“Armenian” name, solely on the basis of the fact that 
it was allegedly mentioned by the newly-made “Hay” 
Sarduri II. Meanwhile, the consensus established in 
international historiography is that today’s Armenians 
(Hays) have nothing to do with the place name 
Artsakh, the Urartian civilization or the city founded 
by Argishti I! The sources of Artsakh Khachen, along 
with Syunik, Utik and Paytakaran, mention a historical 
region called Caucasian Albania, which could have 
fallen under the political infl uence of the territorially 
enlarged Armenian kingdom for some short period 
of historical development. But many other empires, 
caliphates and kingdoms also expanded, contracted 
and experienced rises and falls. This did not make 
the whole population in areas under their control, 
say, Latin, Greek, Arabic, Persian, Mongol, Ottoman, 
English, French etc. Indigenous peoples continued to 
live in the conquered lands. The Albanian population 
of the right bank of the Kura and, in particular, Artsakh, 
Paytakaran, Utik and Syunik, was mentioned even by 
Armenian historians such as Raffi , B. Ishkhanyan, I. 
Orbeli and R. Suny, not to mention dozens of other 
respected historians worldwide.
42 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
For example, at the very beginning of the confl ict 
in 1988, Armenian historian Ronald Suny of the 
University of Michigan, USA, noted the existence of a 
state of Caucasian Albanians on the territory of today’s 
Karabakh in the Middle Ages: “Back in the Middle 
Ages, before the Turkish people migrated here from 
Central Asia, eastern Transcaucasia 
was known as Caucasian Albania. 
No relation to the Balkan Albanians, 
these were a Christianized people 
quite close to the Armenians. Once 
the Seljuk Turks began arriving in 
the 11th century, the Albanians in the 
mountainous part - Karabakh up to 
historical Armenia - remained largely 
Christian and eventually merged 
with the Armenians. The Albanians 
in the eastern plain leading down 
to the Caspian Sea mixed with the 
Turkish population and eventually 
became Muslims.”21
Later, in the midst of hostilities, he wrote in his book 
“Looking towards Ararat”: “Karabakh had been in ancient 
and medieval times part of the kingdom of Caucasian 
21  Suni, Ronald G. “What Happened in Soviet Armenia?” Middle East 
Report, No. 153, Islam and the State, July - August, 1988: p. 37.
Cultural 
terrorism is under 
way in today’s 
Armenian-occupied 
lands. Separatists 
have destroyed 
a historical and 
architectural reserve 
– the medieval 
Azerbaijani town of 
Shusha. 
43THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
Albanians. This distinct ethno-religious group, now long 
extinct, had converted to Christianity in the 4th century
and drew close to the Armenian Church. Over time, its 
upper classes were effectively Armenianized. When the 
Seljuks invaded Transcaucasia in the 11th century, a process 
of Islamization began that resulted in the conversion 
of the peoples of the plain to the east of Karabakh to 
Islam. These people, the direct ancestors of present-day 
Azerbaijanis, spoke a Turkic language and adopted the 
Shiite brand of Islam dominant in neighbouring Iran. 
The mountains remained largely Christian and, in time, 
the Karabakh Albanians merged with the Armenians. 
The central seat of the Albanian Church at Gandzasar 
became a bishopric of the Armenian Church, and the 
memory of the once-independent national religion was 
preserved in the stature of the local primate, who was 
called Catholicos.”22
Another Armenian author B. Ishkhanyan wrote that 
“the Armenians living in Nagorno Karabakh are partly 
aborigines - descendants of the ancient Albanians, 
and partly refugees from Turkey and Iran, for whom 
Azerbaijani soil became a refuge from persecution and 
oppression.”23
22  Suny, Ronald G. Looking Toward Ararat: Armenia in Modern History. 
Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, 1993, p. 193.
23  Алиев, Играр. Нагорный Карабах: История. Факты. События. 
Баку: Элм, 1989, сс. 73-74.
44 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
Armenian scholars wrote of Caucasian Albania as “a 
signifi cant country, along with Armenia and Georgia, in 
the Caucasian cultural world” and about Albanian art 
and architecture as a separate subject in the cultural 
history of the Caucasus. According to the Armenian 
historian Iosif Orbeli, the rise and blossoming of the 
Khachen principality, which formed part of Albania, 
occurred in the 12th-13th centuries.24 The same Orbeli 
wrote about the capture and colonization of regions 
of modern Nagorno-Karabakh by Armenian feudal 
lords.25
The Armenian academician, S.T. Yeremyan, wrote: 
«A huge number of Christian monuments, many 
of which relate to the pre-Arabic period, survived 
in the Armenianized part of ancient Albania, in 
the ancient Albanian regions of Artsakh and Utik 
which are currently predominantly Armenian-
populated.»26
Why did these Armenian authors write honestly 
about Artsakh as a province of Albania, if this 
fact is a lie, invention and product of “Azerbaijani 
propaganda”, as claimed by Armenian leaders 
today? If Artsakh had nothing to do with Albania, 
24  Орбели, Иосиф. «Гасан-Джалал – князь Хаченский.» In Избран-
ные труды, by Иосиф Орбели, стр. 146. Ереван: АН Арм.ССР, 1993.
25  —. Избранные труды. Ереван: АН Арм.ССР, 1963, сс. 296, 297, 317, 
347.296, 297, 317, 347. 
26  Очерки истории СССР (III-IХ вв.). Москва: АН СССР, 1958, стр. 326.
45THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
Armenians (Hays) hardly lived 
in the South Caucasus until the 
middle of the 15th century. In 
1441, Jahanshah, the ruler of 
the Turkic-Azerbaijani state 
of Qaraqoyunlu, relocated 
the centre of the Armenian 
Catholicosate from the Cilician 
city of Sis to the Uch-Kilsa (or 
Uch-Muazzin) monastery which 
was situated near the totally 
Turkic-populated Iravan and 
was an Albanian monastery in 
antiquity. 
46 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
and the Ganjasar monastery was founded as purely 
“Armenian”, why did Prince Hasan Jalal, who built this 
temple, leave an inscription in which it was called the 
“main cathedral of Albania” built for “my Albanian 
people”? Did anyone force them to do it, or perhaps 
they were recruited by “Azerbaijani intelligence”? 
Armenian historians have themselves recognized the 
Albanian nature of Artsakh!
It is notable that, prior to the Armenian-Azerbaijani 
Nagorno-Karabakh confl ict, Armenian historians did 
not really challenge the fact that Artsakh was part of 
Caucasian Albania and was populated by Albanians. 
At the very beginning of the confl ict, the woeful 
Yerevan historians fi rst tried to deny the existence 
of the state of Caucasian Albania and Albanians in 
the ancient and early medieval periods. Some even 
compared it with the mythical Atlantis. When these 
“historians” realized that they had put themselves in 
an unenviable position in the academic environment 
and become an object of ridicule by scientists, they 
decided to extricate themselves from this situation in 
a rather original way: recognizing the undeniable fact 
of the existence of Caucasian Albania, they “tweaked” 
its borders slightly, placing them on the Kura River, 
that is, right up to the line to which their territorial 
ambitions extended. Most likely, if Armenian claims 
47THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
extended to the Absheron peninsula (and the most 
imbecilic ones are still talking about “Armenian 
Bakurakert”), then Albania would have to “move” 
beyond the Caspian Sea. In this case, Yerevan 
“historians” would have to come up urgently with 
an explanation as to why Albania was “erroneously” 
called Caucasian, not Central Asian. In an attempt to 
subordinate science to myth and put it at the service 
of foreign policy objectives, Armenian historical 
science sometimes approaches the absurd.
Unlike Hays, the Albanians were autochthons in 
Artsakh and other provinces of Caucasian Albania. 
History fi nds Albanian tribes on both banks of the 
River Kura. A.Y. Krymskiy very accurately remarked: 
“Strabo knew about the common origin of ‘part’ of the 
population on the right bank and on the left bank.”27 
The fact that the Kura fl owed through Albania, as 
noted above, is proved by Strabo’s direct note (XI, I, 5; 
XI, III, 2; XI, IV, 2; XI, VIII, 3).28
The Albanian state emerged in the 4th-3rd centuries 
BC, and the Albanian population was fi rst mentioned 
27 Крымский, Агафангел Е. «Страницы из истории Северного или 
Кавказского Азербайджана (Классической Албании).» In Памяти 
академика Н.Я.Марра (1864-1934). Москва, 1938.
28  Крымский, Агафангел Е. «Страницы из истории Северного или 
Кавказского Азербайджана (Кавказская Албания).» In Сборник ста-
тей в честь Е.Ф.Ольденбурга. К 50-летию научно-общественной 
деятельности., стр. 289–290. Москва, 1934.
48 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
in connection with events of that time.29 From the 1st 
century BC, Albania was ruled by the Parthian Arshakid 
dynasty. Reporting this period, both Armenian and 
Albanian sources indicate that the southern border 
of Albania was the Araz River30, i.e. the whole area 
between the Kura and Araz rivers was part of the 
Albanian state. It was here that the historical lands 
of Karabakh - Orchistene (Artsakh), Tsavdeya, Otena 
and part of Araxene – were situated.
The Armenian author Movses Khorenatsi, whose 
information is confi rmed by the Albanian historian 
Movses Kaghankatvatsi, reported the establishment 
by the Parthian King Valarshak (probably Vologez 
I (51/52-79/80 BC), son of Vonon II) of a province 
“in the great, glorious and populous north-eastern 
area, along a great river called the Kur, which cuts 
through the vast plain, (appointing) Arana31, the 
husband of the eminent one, the fi rst in all matters of 
wisdom and reason.” Then it turns out that this great 
and glorious area was Albania: “Know, however, the 
people of Sisak – for it is a great and eminent tribe 
we forgot to mention in the fi rst book – who inherited 
29  Флавий, Арриан. Поход Александра. Москва: АМН СССР, 1962.
30 Хоренаци, Мовсес. История Армении. Москва, 1858; 
Каланкатуйский, Моисей. История агван. Санкт-Петербург: СПб., 
1861.
31  One of the cases when Movses Khorenatsi personifi ed a place name. 
Aran was a region in the eastern part of the territory between the Araz and 
Kura. It was also called Alvank, Alvania or Albania.
49THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
the Alvan plain, including its side that fronts onto the 
mountains from the Yeraskh32 river to a fortress called 
Hnarakert33. The country is called Alvania because 
of its gentle disposition, since it was called ‘Alu’34. 
And here, one of his descendants, mentioned as an 
eminent and gallant Draya, was appointed governor 
by Valarshak of Parthia. It is said that the Uti tribe and 
the principalities of Gardmans, Tsavdeys and Gargars35 
hail from his offspring.”36
It is important to stress that this recognition comes 
from the Albanophone Movses Khorenatsi, who spoke 
about the inhabitants of Aran (between the Araz and 
Kura) as “Alvan men mired in constant mendacity”.37 
Of these Albanian tribes, the Utis, Tsavdeys, certainly, 
and Gargars, almost certainly, lived in the Karabakh 
zone. Consequently, the whole right bank of the Kura 
and the meanders of the Araz River up to Agstafa 
were occupied by Albanian tribes. Sources defi nitely 
32  Araz. 
33  Agstafa.
34  «Alu» – pleasant, tasteful.
35  They are all Albanian tribes that had nothing to do with the Arme-
nians. 
36  Xоренаци, Mовсес. “История Армении, книга 2, глава 8 
(Назначение второго (лица) в государстве из потомков Аждахака, 
царя маров), Ереван: Айастан, 1990.” Библиотека «Вехи». http://
www.vehi.net/istoriya/armenia/khorenaci/02.html (accessed October 30, 
2010).
37  —. “История Армении, книга 3, глава 3 (Кончина святого Григориса 
от рук варваров). Ереван: Айастан, 1990.” Библиотека «Вехи». http://
www.vehi.net/istoriya/armenia/khorenaci/03.html (accessed October 30, 
2010).
50 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
indicate that the tribes in the Karabakh region were 
of Albanian origin and that the region belonged to 
the Albanian state.
Movses Khorenatsi also mentions the Albanian 
population of the province of Paytakaran, where King 
Trdat, accompanied by a certain 
Sanatruk, sent a young missionary 
named Grigoris, the eldest son 
of Vrtanes, obviously to convert 
local residents (Khorenatsi called 
them “barbarians”) to Christianity. 
“But when news came of the death 
of Trdat, the barbarians, by the 
machinations of Sanatruk and some 
other Alvan men mired in constant 
mendacity, killed the blissful one, 
trampling upon him with hooves 
of their horses on the Vatnean fi eld 
near a sea called Caspian... Sanatruk, 
taking the crown, captured the city 
of Paytakaran and conspired to seize power over the 
whole of Armenia with the help of other peoples.” By 
“other peoples” who helped Sanatruk to capture 
Paytakaran, Movses Khorenatsi undoubtedly means 
the recalcitrant local population – “Alvan men”.38
38  Ibid.
Speaking in Goris 
about the Turkic-Muslim 
“nomad” population 
which barely exceeded 
fi ve per cent and the 
“homogenous” and 
“indigenous” Armenian 
population of Karabakh, 
Serzh Sargsyan switched 
the Armenians and the 
Turks and used the word 
“nomad” incorrectly. 
51THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
One of the most authoritative Western experts 
on Caucasian Albania, Oxford University professor 
Charles Dowsett, wrote: “Catholicos John and Tovma 
Arkruni mention three Albanian princes among the 
captives taken by Boga Al-Kabir in 854: Prince of 
Khachen Atrnersekh, Prince of Shaki Sahl, son of Smbat, 
and Esay Abu Musa, the prince of Ktish in Artsakh.”39 A 
year later, the scientist wrote: “In the Albanian part 
of the ancient region of Artsakh, Khachen retained its 
independence. It is known that Mkhitar compiled a set 
of laws, partly at the request of the governor - Prince 
Vakhtang.”40 Caucasus expert V.F. Minorskiy wrote 
that the territory of the then Azerbaijan SSR roughly 
coincided with that of ancient Caucasian Albania.41
After the fall of the independent Albanian state, 
Karabakh, a part of the geographical and political 
concept of Azerbaijan, was part of the Azerbaijani 
Sajid state; part of the Salari state in the 10th century, 
part of the Shaddadi state in the 11th-12th centuries; 
and in the 12th-13th centuries, Karabakh was part of 
the Azerbaijani Atabay-Ildenizid state of. Later, it was 
part of the Qaraqoyunlu and Agqoyunlu states and, 
39  Dowsett, Charles. J. F. “The Albanian Chronicle of Mxit’ar Gos.” Bulle-
tin of the School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London, Vol. 
21, No. 1/3, 1958: 463.
40  Ibid., p. 475.
41  Minorsky, Vladimir. “Caucasica IV .” Bulletin of the School of Oriental 
and African Studies, University of London, Vol. 15, No. 3., 1953: p. 504.
52 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
in the 16th-17th centuries, Karabakh, as part of the 
Karabakh principality, was part of the Turkic Safavid 
state. In the second half of the 18th century, Karabakh 
was in the Karabakh Khanate, as part of which it was 
incorporated into Russia in the early 19th century.
The Christian monuments of Azerbaijan have 
always been subject to fraud by the Armenian clergy 
and the science they use. The Armenian Church, 
which had been struggling with the Albanian Church 
for centuries, planned to subject it and then eliminate 
it. Part of this policy was the destruction of Albanian 
manuscripts and epigraphy. The Christian architectural 
monuments of Azerbaijan do not contain Armenian 
epigraphy until the 11th century (unless modern stone 
dressers have had a chance to carve new “ancient” 
Armenian inscriptions on monuments in the occupied 
territories). Earlier Albanian inscriptions were erased 
after the Albanian Church was placed under the 
jurisdiction of the Armenian Church by the Russian 
Synod in 1836. The existence of Armenian-language 
epigraphy and historical sources written after the 11th 
century testifi es only to the religious affi liation of the 
writers, not their ethnicity.
From 1975-76, during the construction of the 
Amassia-Qazanchi road, the offi cial Armenian 
authorities fl attened an ancient cemetery, which 
53THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
the Azerbaijani population of the village of Gollu 
(Lakeside) in Amassia district considered to be 
Christian, because of the crosses and inscriptions 
carved on tombstones, which were not like Armenian 
crosses or letters of the Armenian alphabet. Specialists 
and Armais Harutyunyan, head of the Propaganda 
Department of the Amassia District Committee of 
the Communist Party, removed the human remains 
from the graves and studied their anthropological 
characteristics. After a while, the tombstones were 
completely destroyed and razed to the ground. Asked 
by local residents why they were destroying the 
graves of their ancestors, Harutyunyan answered that 
they were believed not to be Armenian graves. That 
is how they obliterated traces of the non-Armenian 
Christian population of Albania.
The Christian architectural monuments of 
Azerbaijan, including Karabakh, speak for themselves, 
and their ethnic and cultural provenance is proved 
by works of the Albanian historians Movses 
Kaghankatvatsi and Kirakos Gandzak. They are 
monuments built by Albanian kings and princes. 
Among them are the ruins of early Christian churches 
erected by King of Albania Vachagan the Pious, who, 
according to Movses Kaghankatvatsi, built as many 
churches as “days in the year”. Many monuments 
54 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
Didn’t the Armenians 
themselves (e.g. A.M. 
Nazaretyan) vote at the plenary 
session of the Caucasian 
Bureau in July 1921 for keeping 
Karabakh part of Azerbaijan? 
Didn’t the leaders of the 
Karabakh Armenians (e.g. 
Sero Manutsyan) welcome 
this decision, noting: “The 
act of self-government within 
Azerbaijan was met with 
complete unanimity by the 
Armenian peasants.” 
55THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
were built by Prince Javanshir. These were built in 
the 12th-13th centuries, the heyday of the Albanian 
principalities, among which Khachen was prominent. 
A representative of this branch, Hasan Jalal, was 
able to unite Albanian principalities within a short 
period and achieved the title of King of Albania. The 
Ganjasar temple he built became the centre of the 
Albanian Catholicosate. The Khudavank monastic 
complex was built by the Albanian Khachen prince 
Hasan the Great, his son Vakhtang and his wife Arzu 
Khatun – the daughter of “the Grand Prince of Princes 
of the Kurds”.
Saint Elisha’s Monastery bore the name of the 
enlightener of Albania. It has existed since the reign 
of Albanian King Vachagan the Pious, and one of 
the chapels holds his grave. The Khatiravank funeral 
monastery was built as the tomb of another Albanian 
royal family. The history of these and other monasteries 
and churches of Karabakh is closely linked to the 
history of Caucasian Albania, from ancient times to 
1836 when the Ganjasar Catholicosate was abolished. 
Their founders were Albanian rulers and princes. 
Their names speak eloquently of their ethnicity. The 
Armenian researcher S. Lisitsyan was forced to admit 
that “judging by the names of the modern monasteries 
of Nagorno Karabakh, the activity of purely Armenian 
56 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
saints was feeble here”. Even in the 20th century, after 
the Armenianization of the Christian population of 
Karabakh, purely Armenian saints were not revered 
here. Naturally, in earlier centuries, monasteries and 
churches dedicated to Armenian saints did not exist 
in Karabakh. Albanian monasteries and churches were 
dedicated to other Christian or local Albanian saints, 
which distinguishes them from the Armenian ones.
Cultural terrorism is under way in today’s 
Armenian-occupied lands. Separatists have destroyed 
a historical and architectural reserve – the medieval 
Azerbaijani town of Shusha. Mosques, 18th-19th 
century homes and monuments of civil and defence 
architecture have been destroyed there. Outstanding 
monuments of civil architecture – the 11 and 15-span 
Khudafarin bridges crossing the River Araz - remain 
in the occupied zone. Numerous mosques have been 
destroyed, including those built by the outstanding 
Azerbaijani architect Karbalayi Safi  Khan Qarabagi, 
bridges, baths, memorial buildings, the mausoleums 
built by Malik Ajdar in the 12th-13th centuries, Mir Ali in 
the 14th century, Khachin Dorbatli in the 14th century, 
Sheikh Babain in the 13th century, Panah Khan in the 
17th century and others. Azerbaijani cemeteries are 
also subject to destruction. All this is the result of 
cultural terrorism and the systematic destruction of 
57THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
Azerbaijani traces in the occupied territories.
If Islamic monuments are subjected to a policy of 
terrorism, the other part of Azerbaijani cultural heritage 
– the Christian architectural inheritance of Caucasian 
Albania - is being destroyed or Armenianized. 
Christian churches and temples, built by Albanian 
princes and part of the history of Caucasian Albania, 
are becoming “Armenian”. Armenian scholars carry out 
so-called “restoration” work on these monuments in 
order to Armenianize them. This work is illegal as it is 
being carried out on foreign monuments in occupied 
territories and without the participation of scientists 
from Azerbaijan. The traces of their connection to 
Albanian culture are being erased. Under the guise of 
“restoration” work, they are falsifying and destroying 
the characteristic features of Albanian Karabakh 
architecture. Unfortunately, they sometimes involve 
foreign experts in this work, and their participation, 
the occupiers believe, gives “scientifi c validity” to 
their fabrications.
Armenians (Hays) hardly lived in the South 
Caucasus until the middle of the 15th century. In 
1441, Jahanshah, the ruler of the Turkic-Azerbaijani 
state of Qaraqoyunlu, relocated the centre of the 
Armenian Catholicosate from the Cilician city of Sis 
to the Uch-Kilsa (or Uch-Muazzin) monastery which 
58 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
was situated near the totally Turkic-populated Iravan 
and was an Albanian monastery in antiquity. Later, 
the Armenians distorted the name of Uch-Muazzin 
and began calling it “Echmiadzin”. In Armenian, this 
word has no meaning (unless, of course, they adjust 
some Armenian word to it), while in the Azerbaijani 
Turkic language, it means “three muezzins” (muazzin 
“reader of the azan” in Arabic). Medieval documents 
held at Matenadaran refer to a temple known as 
“Uch-Kilsa”42. After the Armenian Catholicosate 
was relocated to Uch-Kilsa, Armenian missionaries 
rushed there, taking the opportunity to spread their 
infl uence in the South Caucasus. The monastery soon 
became the religious centre for Armenians. Until the 
incorporation of these lands into Russia in the fi rst half 
of the 19th century, the number of Armenians outside 
Uch-Kilsa in western Transcaucasia was negligible.
Prior to their migration to the South Caucasus, 
where the local Turkic population dominated, the 
Hays lived around Lake Van, to which they had 
previously migrated from the Balkans. The ancient 
Greek historian, Herodotus, wrote that the ancestors 
of the Armenians had come from the Phrygian land43. 
42  Персидские документы Матенадарана (указы, сост. А.Д.Папазян). 
Вып. I (XV–XVII вв.). Ереван, 1956; Персидские документы Матенадарана 
(указы, сост. А.Д.Папазян). Вып.II (1601–1650 гг.) Ереван, 1959.
43   Геродот. История в девяти книгах. Ленинград: Наука, 1972, стр. 
334.
59THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
This fact is also recognized by Armenian scientists. In 
particular, M.G. Nersisyan, who edited “The History of 
the Armenian People”, states the following: “During 
the period of known migrations by peoples of the sea 
(13th-12th centuries BC), Armens penetrated into Asia 
Minor, together with kindred Thracian-Phrygian tribes 
from the Balkans.”44 A. Pastermadjian agrees with this, 
and he believes that the migration of Armenians, as 
one of the Phrygian tribes of Indo-European origin 
from the Balkans, to Asia Minor is a fact generally 
accepted in the scientifi c world45. However, he 
believes that this migration happened six centuries 
later - in the 7th-6th centuries BC, which is recognized 
by most researchers. A prominent Russian orientalist, 
I.M. Dyakonov, wrote that “the original bearers of 
the ancestor of the Armenian language came to the 
Armenian Highlands as roaming cattle-breeders who 
lived on subsistence farming and did not know of a class 
society, and they learnt the nature of the Highlands 
and the social conditions of early class society from 
the autochthonous people who had not yet adopted 
the Armenian language“.46 The absurd statement 
44  История армянского народа с древнейших времен до наших 
дней. П/р проф. М.Нерсисяна. Ереван: АН Арм.ССР, 1980, стр. 27.
45  Pastermadjian, Herand. Histoire de l’Armenie. Paris (1st edn, 1949, 
2nd edn, 1964), 1949, p. 23.
46 Дьяконов, Игорь М. «К преистории армянского языка (о фактах, 
свидетельствах и логике).» Историко-филологический журнал Но.4, 
1983: стр. 166.
60 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
by the Armenian president that the population of 
Karabakh was allegedly “homogeneously Armenian” 
for millennia and that “Turkic-Muslim nomadic tribes 
began to settle here only in the second half of 18th 
century, and their number at the beginning of the last 
century was barely 5 per cent of the total population” 
has absolutely nothing to do with science or historical 
fact. To be more convincing, Sargsyan referred to 
mysterious “Turkish offi cial sources 
of the 18th century”. Of course, 
there was no further clarifi cation 
as to what sources the author of 
this unscientifi c nonsense had in 
mind, as there are no such sources 
behind the walls of the Armenian 
laboratories of historical falsifi cation. 
The Turkish archives, in fact, suggest 
the opposite. In November 2009, 
the Central Department of the State 
Archives under the Turkish Cabinet 
of Ministers issued a 660-page book 
called “Karabakh in Ottoman Documents” based on 
archive materials. The book consists of two parts - 
“Political, Military and Diplomatic Relations” and 
“Resettlement”, which, based on archive documents, 
cite evidence of the resettlement of Armenians to 
Armenia hopes that 
it will be able to annex 
Nagorno Karabakh 
by ineptly forging 
history and “proving” 
to the international 
organizations that it 
is supposedly ancient 
Armenian land. 
61THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
Karabakh. Ottoman archives have no mention of 
Armenians in Karabakh, and all documents indicate 
that Armenians settled in Karabakh from the 17th-19th 
centuries and changed the ethnic composition of the 
population.
Sargsyan’s “discovery”, to put it mildly, does not 
really match what Armenian historians themselves 
write. For example, George 
Bournoutian notes: “A number of 
Armenian historians, referring to 
statistics since the 1830s, incorrectly 
assess the number of Armenians in 
Eastern Armenia under Persian rule, 
giving a fi gure of 30 to 50 per cent of 
the total population {Serzh Sargsyan 
put the number of Armenians at 95 per 
cent of the total population!} In fact, 
according to offi cial statistics, after 
the Russian conquest, the Armenians 
hardly comprised 20 per cent of the 
total population of Eastern Armenia, 
while Muslims made up more than 80 per cent. In any 
case, before the Russian conquest, the Armenians here 
had never been in the majority. Despite the fact that 
the Offi ce Description indicates an Armenian majority 
in several mahals of Eastern Armenia, this change 
Nations’ right to self-
determination, which 
Azerbaijan supports, 
does not imply 
permissiveness and the 
right to change borders 
as you wish. The manner 
in which Armenia 
interprets this law is 
unacceptable. 
62 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
took place after the emigration of more than 35,000 
Muslims from the region. Thus, there is no evidence 
of an Armenian majority in any district during the 
Persian administration. Perhaps the only place where 
the Armenians constituted a majority at a local level 
was Karbibasar mahal, in which the Armenian spiritual 
centre Uch-Kilsa (Echmiadzin) was situated. With the 
departure of thousands of Muslims and the arrival 
here of 57,000 Armenian immigrants from Persia and 
the Ottoman Empire, the Christian population had 
grown signifi cantly by 1832 and equalled that of the 
Muslims. Yet only after the Russian-Turkish wars of 
1855-56 and 1877-78, which resulted in even more 
Armenians coming to the region from the Ottoman 
Empire, and even more Muslims leaving the area, did 
the Armenians fi nally achieve a majority here. And 
even after that, until the beginning of the 20th century 
the city of Iravan remained predominantly Muslim.”47
Citing statistical evidence according to which the 
number of Muslims in the Iravan and Nakhichevan 
khanates dropped by almost a third between 1826 
and 1832 while the number of Armenians increased 
by 3.5 times due to immigration, Bournoutian notes 
47  Bournoutian, George A. “The Ethnic Composition and the Socio-Eco-
nomic Condition of Eastern Armenia in the First Half of the Nineteenth 
Century.” In Transcaucasia, Nationalism and Social Change: Essays in the 
History of Armenia, Azerbaijan, and Georgia, by Ronald Grigor Suny, pp. 
77-80. Ann Harbor : University of Michigan Press, 1996.
63THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
further: “As is evident from the statistics, prior to the 
Russian conquest, the Armenians constituted about 20 
per cent of the total population of Eastern Armenia and 
Muslims - 80 per cent. After the Russian annexation, 
57,000 Armenian immigrants arrived here from Persia 
and the Ottoman Empire, while 35,000 Muslims fl ed 
Eastern Armenia. By 1832, the Armenians made up 
half of the total population.”48 
Prior to the conclusion of the Turkmanchay Treaty, 
there were even fewer Armenians in the Karabakh 
khanate, according to Russian statistics. “According 
to a Russian census, in 1823 Armenians comprised 
9 per cent of the total population of Karabakh (the 
remaining 91 per cent were registered as Muslims), 
in 1832 - 35 per cent, and in 1880 they had already 
achieved a majority - 53 per cent,” says the Swedish 
author Svante Cornell.49
After the conclusion of the Turkmanchay Treaty 
in 1828, Armenians began migrating en masse 
from Persia and the eastern regions of the Ottoman 
Empire to Iravan, Nakhichevan and Karabakh. The 
operation was headed by the Russian diplomat and 
poet, Aleksandr Griboyedov, who wrote in his “Notes 
on the Resettlement of Armenians from Persia to 
48  Ibid., p.79.
49  Cornell, Svante. Small Nations and Great Powers: A study of Ethnopo-
litical Confl ict in the Caucasus. Surrey: Curzon Press, 2001, p. 68.
64 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
Our Regions”: “Armenians are mostly settled on the 
lands of Muslim landlords. In summer, it was still 
acceptable. Most of the Muslims landowners were 
away and had little opportunity to communicate 
with the heterodox incomers.” Griboyedov also 
warned about possible future confl icts between the 
Armenian incomers and local Muslims (as seen from 
the Offi ce Description statistics, Muslims were mostly 
Turks, i.e. Azerbaijanis): “He (Prince Argutinsky) and I 
also talked a lot about the need to persuade Muslims 
to reconcile with their present burden, which will not 
be long, and eradicate their fears that the Armenians 
will take over forever the lands where they were 
allowed for the fi rst time!”50 
The resettlement of Armenians to Karabakh, 
Iravan and Nakhichevan was described in detail 
by the Russian writer and historian, S.N. Glinka, in 
“The Description of the Resettlement of Azerbaijani 
Armenians to Russian Territory with a Brief Preliminary 
Statement of Historical Times of Armenia”, published 
in Moscow in 1831. From 26 February to 11 June 
1828, i.e. within three and a half months, 8,249 
Armenian families, or at least 40,000 Armenians, were 
50  Александр, Грибоедов С. «Записка о переселении армян из Пер-
сии в наши области.» Фундаментальная электронная библиотека 
«Русская литература и фольклор». http://feb-web.ru/feb/griboed/
texts/piks3/3_4_v3.htm (accessed October 30, 2010).
65THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
resettled here from Persia.51 In the next few years, 
another 90,000 Armenians were resettled to these 
three former khanates of the Ottoman Empire.52
In 1911, another Russian writer, N. Shavrov, 
wrote: “Of the 1.3 million Armenians currently 
living in the South Caucasus, more than one million 
are not indigenous, and were resettled by us.” “The 
Armenians were settled mainly in the fertile lands of 
Yelizavetpol and Erivan provinces where their number 
was negligible. The mountainous part of Yelizavetpol 
Province (Nagorno-Karabakh) and the shores of Lake 
Goycha were populated by these Armenians.”53 
The historical fact of the resettlement of Armenians 
to Karabakh, Iravan and Nakhichevan is refl ected even 
in the works of artists, in particular, in a picture which 
was drawn by the famous Russian artist Vladimir 
Mashkov in 1828 and clearly refl ects the theme of 
the mass migration of Armenians from Persia to the 
northern bank of the Araz River.
Thus, speaking in Goris about the Turkic-Muslim 
51  Глинка, Сергей Н. Описание переселения армян аддербиджанских 
в пределы России, с кратким предварительным изложением 
исторических времен Армении. Москва, 1831, стр. 131.
52  Акты Кавказской Археографической Комиссии (АКАК), т. VII, док. 
829. Тифлис, 1878, стр. 845.
53  Шавров, Николай И. Новая угроза русскому делу в Закавказье: 
предстоящая распродажа Мугани инородцам. Санкт-Петербург: СПб, 
1911, сс. 59-61.
66 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
“nomad” population which barely exceeded fi ve 
per cent and the “homogenous” and “indigenous” 
Armenian population of Karabakh, Serzh Sargsyan 
switched the Armenians and the Turks and used 
the word “nomad” incorrectly. Statistical data and 
descriptions by contemporaries of those events, 
writers who can hardly be suspected of working for 
“Azerbaijani propaganda”, show the overwhelming 
numerical superiority of the Turkic population over 
the Armenians before the Turkmanchay Treaty and 
a sharp rise in the Armenian population as a result 
of their resettlement to Karabakh and present-day 
Armenia (Iravan khanate) after the incorporation of 
these lands into Russia. This is confi rmed by Armenian 
historians themselves. None of them wrote about 
the resettlement of “Turkic nomads” to “ancient 
Armenian” land or the “homogeneous Armenian” 
population of these areas. They record the opposite 
in detailed and accurate accounts.
The current leaders of Armenia are unlikely to fi nd 
in Karabakh a monument erected on the anniversary 
of the arrival of “Turkic-Muslim nomads” there. But 
in 1978, in the village of Margushevan in Agdara 
District, a monument was unveiled to mark the 
150th anniversary of the resettlement of completely 
different incomers to Karabakh. As for what became 
67THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
of this monument after the confl ict began and why 
Sargsyan’s compatriots hastily destroyed it, the 
Armenian president will tell his reporters from the 
diaspora about this next time. He will also explain 
why the 1805 treaty on the incorporation of Karabakh 
into Russia (Kurakchay Treaty)54 was not signed by 
some Armenian prince, but was concluded between 
the Turkic (Azerbaijani) Ibrahim Khalil Khan and 
a representative of the Russian Emperor, General 
Tsitsianov. This was probably because Ibrahim Khalil 
Khan was representing “the fi ve-per-cent nomadic 
population” which had “recently appeared there”.
According to Russian statistics, about this time 
(1810) the population of Karabakh comprised 
9,500 Turkic and 2,500 Armenian families.55 It is not 
surprising that the text of the treaty does not, and 
could not, contain the word “Armenia” or “Armenians”. 
Nevertheless, many years later Armenia would create 
a myth about “the Armenians of Karabakh voluntarily 
joining Russia”.
Academician T. P. Aghayan, in his work dedicated 
to the Azerbaijani educator Bakikhanov, published 
54  «Трактат между Карабахским ханом и Российской Империей о 
переходе ханства под власть России от 14 мая 1805 года.» azeri.ru. 
http://azeri.ru/az/karabakh/412/ (accessed August 16, 2010).
55  Акты Кавказской Археографической Комиссии, т. IV. Изданъ под 
редакциею председателя комиссии дсс. А.Д.Берже, док. 37. Тифлис: 
Типография главного управления наместника Кавказского, 1870, сс. 
38-39.
68 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
a map of the northern Azerbaijani khanates of the 
18th century.56 However, the Armenian academician 
did not include the territory of one of the Azerbaijani 
khanates, namely the Iravan Khanate. In a note on the 
map, Aghayan said that he had taken this map from 
P. Kovalevskiy’s book “The Russian Conquest of the 
Caucasus”57 as it was. Aghayan lied, because the map 
published in Kovalevskiy’s book showed the territory 
of all the khanates, including the Iravan Khanate. 
That is a good example of sophisticated Armenian 
falsifi cation!
As Azerbaijani Turks celebrated the Novruz festival 
on 21 March 1828, Emperor Nicholas I issued a decree 
abolishing the Iravan and Nakhichevan khanates, 
which had existed for centuries, and formed in these 
areas a so-called “Armenian province” for Armenians 
resettled from Iran and Turkey.58 Thus, the fi rst step 
was taken towards the creation of a new homeland 
for Armenian immigrants in the Azerbaijani lands of 
the Iravan and Nakhichevan khanates.
It would be good to remind Mr Serzh Sargsyan 
56 Агаян, Цатур П. А.Бакиханов. Баку: АН Азерб. ССР, 1948, стр. 9.
57 Ковалевский, Павел И. Завоевание Кавказа Россией (Исторический 
очерк), (без выходных данных). Санкт-Петербург: СПб., 1911, сс. 65, 
113.
58  Полное собрание законов Российской империи (ПСЗРИ). Собрание 
второе, т. III, 1828. Санкт-Петербург: СПб, 1830; Акты Кавказской 
Археографической Комиссии, т. VII, док. 437, Тифлис, 1878, стр. 487.
69THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
and his ideological and political associates that on 28 
May 1918, the Armenians declared the establishment 
of an independent state without a political centre. 
On 29 May 1918, the newly proclaimed Azerbaijan 
Democratic Republic, under pressure from the 
great powers, was forced to give the Armenians 
the ancient Azerbaijani city of Iravan with adjacent 
territory of approximately 9,500 sq. km. By the way, 
the current territory of Armenia is more than 29,000 
sq. km. The question is at whose expense? So, the 
modern Armenian state was created on this territory 
of Northern Azerbaijan which was handed over to the 
Armenians and which had previously belonged to the 
Iravan Khanate.
The chairman of the ADR Cabinet of Ministers, 
Fatali Khan Khoyski, assumed that this would end 
the territorial claims of the Armenians. But he was 
profoundly mistaken. After the fall of the ADR, he 
was not fated to see how the expansionist policies of 
Armenia developed further, for on 19 June 1920, he was 
killed in Tbilisi by Armenian Dashnaktsakan terrorists 
Aram Yerkanyan and Misako Kirakosyan as part of 
Operation Nemesis, carried out by Dashnaktsutyun 
to eliminate the leaders of the Ottoman Empire and 
the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic.
All these are historical facts based on sound 
70 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
archive materials and accounts by contemporaries 
and historians - both neutral and Armenian. How can 
anyone ignore or, even worse, reject them, calling 
them “Azerbaijani fraud”? Maybe it was “Azerbaijanis”, 
not A. Mikoyan, who wrote to Lenin in 1919: “The 
Dashnaks, agents of the Armenian government, are 
seeking Karabakh’s incorporation into Armenia. But 
for the population of Karabakh, that would mean loss 
of livelihood in Baku and attachment to Erivan, with 
which they have never been connected in anything. 
The Armenian peasants decided to join Azerbaijan at 
the fi fth congress.”59 Didn’t the Armenians themselves 
(e.g. A.M. Nazaretyan) vote at the plenary session 
of the Caucasian Bureau in July 1921 for keeping 
Karabakh part of Azerbaijan? Didn’t the leaders of the 
Karabakh Armenians (e.g. Sero Manutsyan) welcome 
this decision, noting: “The act of self-government 
within Azerbaijan was met with complete unanimity 
by the Armenian peasants.” Despite the publication of 
archive documents, which say that Karabakh remained 
within Azerbaijan in 1921, Armenia’s current leaders 
continue to promote around the whole world their 
myth that Stalin “separated” Karabakh from Armenia 
and “transferred” it to Azerbaijan, in the hope that 
59  Центральный партийный архив Института марксизма-
ленинизма (ЦПА ИМЛ), ф. 461, оп. 1, ед.хр.4525, л. 1. 
71THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
they can mislead the international community and 
appeal for sympathy. Meanwhile, Stalin and Chicherin 
were in favour of handing over Karabakh to Armenia.
The autonomous region in Nagorno-Karabakh 
was an artifi cial entity whose borders had been drawn 
arbitrarily by merging locally situated Azerbaijani 
villages with the already prevailing Armenian 
population. And matters came to the point of absurdity 
here. According to the 16 September 1923 decree 
of the Presidium of the CC ACP (b), Karabakh was 
visited by a commission which included I. Dovlatov, 
M. Bagirov and E. Khanbudagov to investigate the 
situation in the region. Later, recording the results 
of the investigation, M.D. Bagirov wrote to the CC 
ACP (b) in a memorandum dated 8 October 1923: “In 
the area of Khankandi, Shusha and Abdalar there are 
several Muslim villages: Halfali, Zarisli, Musulmanlar 
and others, with a population of up to 8,000. It is much 
easier to govern them from Abdalar rather than from 
Khankandi. Just because among these Muslim villages 
is the village of Qaladarasi with a population of 
about 1,150 Armenians, the entire area was attached 
to Khankandi for some reason, plus Shusha with a 
population of about 10,000 Muslims. In the Javanshir 
county, among three dozen Muslim villages there is 
one Armenian village which, for some reason, was 
72 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
attached to Khankandi, bypassing Muslim villages.”60 
As seen from the commission’s report, the Armenians, 
who constantly complained about a “lack of land”, 
were even given the territory of Muslim cemeteries.
At the time of its formation, the Autonomous 
Region of Nagorno-Karabakh had an area of 4,160.5 
sq. km.61 In just over two years (1923-1925), 16,000 
dessiatinas of land from the Land Fund of the 
Azerbaijan SSR were handed over to the ARNK.62 The 
territory of the ARNK expanded continuously and, as 
of 1 January 1933, it covered 4,431.7 sq. km.63
Under the Soviets, Armenia was given large tracts 
of land from the Azerbaijan SSR. Soon after the 
establishment of Soviet rule in Armenia in December 
1920, it was given Zangezur. Then, two years later, 
“Armenian” Zangezur was given additional land. A 
note dated 22 October 1922, prepared by the People’s 
Commissariat of Agriculture of the Azerbaijan SSR, 
stated: “The whole territory of the Azerbaijan SSR 
60  Архив политических документов при Управлении делами 
Президента Азербайджанской Республики (АПДУДПАР), ф.1, оп.74, 
д.136, сс. 4-8.
61  Азербайджанская сельскохозяйственная перепись 1921 г. 
Итоги по сельским обществам во вновь образованных уездах 
АССР, Нагорного Карабаха и по тем (основным) уездам, в которых 
произошли изменения границ. Т. III. Вып. XVII. Баку: АзЦСУ, 1924, стр. 9.
62  К истории образования Нагорно-Карабахской Автономной 
Области Азербайджанской ССР 1918–1925. Документы и материалы. 
Баку: Азернешр, 1989, стр. 295.
63  Социалистическое строительство АССР. Статистический 
сборник. Баку: Союзоргучет, 1935, стр. 9.
73THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
comprised 7,989,105 dessiatinas. Of this total area: 
a) 379,984 dessiatinas were handed over to Armenia 
from the Qazakh county, and b) 405,000 dessiatinas of 
land from the former Zangezur county were handed 
over to Armenia.”64
A report by the land department of the People’s 
Commissariat of Agriculture for 1920-1923 says: 
“Part of the summer pastures, with an area of 
150,000 dessiatinas, which was previously within 
the boundaries of Zangezur, Javanshir and Qazakh 
counties and belonged to Azerbaijan, entered into a 
zone disputed between the two republics following its 
handover to Armenia, which is why indigenous users of 
these pastures - Azerbaijani cattle-breeders experience 
major inconveniences as they move.”65
On 18 February 1929, Armenia was given the 
last piece of historically Azerbaijani Zangezur - its 
southern tip, overlooking the border with Iran. 
According to the 18 February 1929 resolution of 
the Transcaucasian CEC, it was given the territory of 
lowland Karabakh - the villages of Nuvadi, Eynadzor 
and Tugut in Jabrayil County of the Azerbaijan SSR66, 
64  Государственный Архив Азербайджанской Республики (ГААР), 
(State Archive of the Republic of Azerbaijan), ф.28, оп.1, д.155, сс. 19-20.
65  Государственный Архив Азербайджанской Республики (ГААР), 
ф.2502, оп.1, д.20, лл. 56–57.
66  Государственный Архив Азербайджанской Республики (ГААР), 
ф.2502, оп.1, д.26, л. 98 об.
74 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
the village of Karkivan in Ordubad County and part 
of the lands of the village of Kilid67, after which the 
Meghri county of the Armenian SSR, which did 
not exist before, was artifi cially created in the new 
“Armenian” lands with an Azerbaijani population. 
Thus, the separation of Nakhichevan from the 
rest of Azerbaijan was completed and an artifi cial 
geographical wedge created within the Turkic world. 
According to the same resolution, Armenia was 
given other villages in Nakhichevan: Qurdqulaq, 
Qoradiz, Khachik Agbin, Aghach, Almali, Dagalmali, 
Itqiran and Sultanbay. Thus, by 1933 the territory 
of the Nakhichevan autonomy had shrunk from the 
original 5,988 sq. km68, defi ned by the Treaty of Kars, 
to 5,329.6 sq. km.69
Armenia is not even ashamed of denying facts from 
its most recent history, as witnessed by generations 
living today, to distort history and to switch cause 
and effect. For example, Armenians talk everywhere 
about pogroms in Sumqayit, Kirovabad and Baku, 
but prefer to keep quiet that they were behind the 
pogroms and massacres in Gafan, Meghri Asgaran 
67  Государственный Архив Азербайджанской Республики (ГААР), 
ф.2502, оп.2, д.26, л. 99.
68  Аzərbaycan Xalq Cümhuriyyəti Ensiklopediyası. II cild. Bakı: Lider, 
2005, s. 250.
69  Социалистическое строительство АССР. Статистический 
сборник. Баку: Союзоргучет, 1935, стр. 9.
75THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
and Gukark, during which far more Armenian citizens 
of Azerbaijani nationality suffered than Armenians in 
Azerbaijani cities. Despite overwhelming evidence 
and testimony by witnesses and victims refl ected 
in the materials of the Soviet Prosecutor’s Offi ce, 
Armenia prefers not to mention (and sometimes 
even completely denies it and calls it a “fi ction”) the 
participation of Armenians themselves in the killings 
of their compatriots in Sumqayit and other cities. 
Did even one Azerbaijani take part in the pogroms 
against his compatriots in Gukark and other regions 
of Armenia like the Sumqayit murderer E. Grigoryan? 
Was there even one resident of Armenia who spirited 
an Azerbaijani away and saved his neighbour’s 
life? Erecting an obelisk in memory of six Yugoslav 
rescuers killed in a plane crash, Armenia did not even 
express (at least for the sake of common decency) 
verbal condolences to the families of 79 Azerbaijani 
rescuers who rushed to the earthquake disaster zone 
in 1988 and were killed due to unclear and confl icting 
commands by Armenian air traffi c controllers, whose 
actions were not investigated.
Attempts to separate the former Nagorno-
Karabakh Autonomous Region from Azerbaijan in the 
fi nal years of the USSR were one-sided, contrary to 
several articles of the Constitution of the USSR and 
76 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
in violation of several provisions of the 3 April 1990 
Soviet law “On the procedure for resolving issues 
related to the secession of a republic from the USSR”. 
Therefore, all these efforts by the separatists had no 
legal force from the moment they were made. With 
the demise of the Soviet Union, 15 independent 
states formed in its place; they were recognized by 
the international community and admitted to the UN 
within their previous borders. A member of the UN 
Sub-Commission on Human Rights A. Eide said, “... 
Even in these complicated cases, there has been a broad 
consensus within the United Nations that the borders 
of the union Republics, such as in the former USSR and 
in former Yugoslavia, should be drawn not on the basis 
of ethnic habitats but should follow the principle of uti 
possidetis juris, which has been interpreted to mean 
that the new borders should be those which previously 
existed as the borders of the union Republics of the 
federation.70 PACE rapporteur D. Atkinson clearly 
stated in his report of 29 November 2004 that “a 
substantial part of the territory of Azerbaijan is still 
occupied by Armenian forces”. He stressed that “the 
borders of Azerbaijan, whose territory included the 
70  Eide, Asbjørn. «Territorial integrity of States, minority protection and 
guarantees for autonomy arrangements: approaches and roles of the Un-
tied Nations.» Local self-government, territorial integrity and protection of 
minorities. Lausanne: Council of Europe Publishing, 1996, p. 282.
77THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
Nagorno Karabakh region, were recognized by the 
international community at the time when the country 
was recognized as an independent state in 1991.”71
The political history of the Armenians provides 
suffi cient grounds to say that the national 
consciousness of the Armenians, by the efforts of 
their politicians and ideologists, is permeated with 
Turkophobia and hatred of everything Azerbaijani 
and Turkic. They do not even hide the fact that the 
starting point of this fl awed Armenian ideology, 
which supports the existence of the Armenian state, 
includes such ideological and political directives as 
“the 1915 genocide” and “the annexation of Karabakh 
and Javakhk” and other territories. In order to realize 
these absurd ideas, their world outlook justifi es the 
most sophisticated crimes of Armenian terrorists and 
separatists.
Armenia hopes that it will be able to annex 
Nagorno Karabakh by ineptly forging history and 
“proving” to the international organizations that it is 
supposedly ancient Armenian land. Serzh Sargsyan 
and Armenian “intellectuals” from the laboratories 
of historical falsifi cation should have recognised 
71  Atkinson, David. “The confl ict over the Nagorno-Karabakh region 
dealt with by the OSCE Minsk Conference.” Council of Europe. November 
29, 2004. http://assembly.coe.int/Main.asp?link=/Documents/Working-
Docs/Doc04/EDOC10364.htm (accessed October 20, 2010).
78 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
long ago that the historical process is moving in a 
progressive direction, not backwards, while the fact 
that Nagorno-Karabakh, or Artsakh under its ancient 
name, is an ancient Albanian land has been proved 
by Armenian historians themselves. For example, 
S.T. Yeremyan wrote: “A huge number of Christian 
monuments, many of which belong to the pre-Arabic 
period, have survived in the Armenianized part of 
ancient Albania, in the ancient Albanian regions of 
Artsakh and Utik, where a predominantly Armenian 
population currently lives.”72 But what surprises us 
is the audacity of falsifi ers and politicians of the 
same ilk who lie in cavalier fashion and try to win 
over some parts of the world community. By virtue 
of his position, Serzh Sargsyan should not play with 
the fate of the Armenian people. After all, no-one 
else has ever managed to escape the wrath of their 
compatriots for their crimes. Isn’t it time to recognise 
that in the present world, borders are not established 
on the basis of myths and ancient chronicles and do 
not change because of the presence of monasteries 
in some area or a national minority’s residence there? 
Otherwise, the political map of the world would look 
different today (e.g., Armenia would have to lose its 
independence again and return to the revived Roman 
72  Очерки истории СССР (III-IХ вв.). Москва: АН СССР, 1958, стр. 326.
79THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
Empire, while the Armenians themselves would have 
to return to Phrygia), the UN would be engaged in 
collecting and studying archaeological data and 
manuscripts rather than drawing up its Charter, while 
the Security Council would become a place for debate 
between historians. Armenia’s leaders should realize 
that in today’s world, territorial issues are resolved on 
the basis of international law rather than in a historical 
context based on the principle of “who originally 
lived where and who migrated where”, and quickly 
extricate themselves and their society from such 
provincial thinking. Distorting history and destroying 
monuments, even if done successfully, will not help 
them to justify the seizure of territory from other 
states. Forcible changing of borders always leads to 
war. A political leader must protect his people from 
war, not push his people into war.
Nations’ right to self-determination, which 
Azerbaijan supports, does not imply permissiveness 
and the right to change borders as you wish. 
The manner in which Armenia interprets this law 
is unacceptable. Otherwise, there would be no 
national minorities in the world today, because all 
of them, even the smallest, would use the right to 
self-determination, declare themselves independent 
members of the world community and ask for 
80 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
international recognition. Obviously, fears based on 
such a primitive interpretation of this principle forced 
the Armenian authorities to implement a planned 
expulsion of Azerbaijanis from their ancestral lands in 
the former Iravan Khanate, turn Armenia into a mono-
ethnic state and then conduct ethnic cleansing in the 
occupied part of Azerbaijani territory. Armenia will 
have to accept the fact that the self-determination 
of national minorities, which is the status of the 
Armenian population of Nagorno-Karabakh, is only 
possible under international law, whose principles are 
enshrined in numerous conventions and documents, 
with which Armenia is undoubtedly familiar. The legal 
basis for the settlement of the Armenian-Azerbaijani 
Nagorno-Karabakh confl ict is the Helsinki Final Act 
of 1975, in which the right to self-determination is 
outlined within the territorial integrity of states.
Nagorno-Karabakh has been, and will remain, 
part of Azerbaijan. As such, it is recognized by a 
number of authoritative international organizations, 
including the UN, OSCE, Council of Europe, European 
Parliament, OIC, NATO, GUAM and the parliaments 
and heads of many states. As part of Azerbaijan, it 
is recognized by the co-chairs of the OSCE Minsk 
Group who use the historical name of Khankandi, 
along with the Armenian name, in their statements, 
81THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
who conduct meetings not only with the de facto 
leaders of the Armenian community, but also with the 
leaders of the Azerbaijani community of Nagorno-
Karabakh and who describe their visits to the region 
from Azerbaijani territory not as “crossing the border, 
but as crossing the contact line between troops”. In 
UN Security Council resolutions, Nagorno-Karabakh 
appears as “the Nagorno-Karabakh region of 
Azerbaijan”. Similar formulations can also be found in 
the documents of other international organizations. 
If Armenia has not learned to read between the lines 
and notice these details, they should at least address 
documents where it is stated openly and without 
subtle hints, in order to understand that the world 
community does not support them.
Only in speeches by Armenian leaders, can one 
hear the name “Nagorno Karabakh Republic”. Despite 
the isolation, they continue to feed themselves 
and their citizens with the illusion that the world 
community supports their “aspirations”. Nobody has 
recognized the puppet pseudo-republic created on 
the occupied territory. Recognition by Armenia, as 
the leaders of this country sometimes threaten, will 
not add legitimacy to this illegal entity and will further 
exacerbate the position of Armenia itself. Instead of 
understanding the reality, Serzh Sargsyan has placed 
82 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
himself in an unenviable position with his speech 
in Goris and given his visitors the wrong advice. It 
is not diffi cult to understand that the severity of the 
consequences of these mistakes will be felt by future 
generations in Armenia.
83THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Abbott, Keith E. «Extracts from a Memorandum on the 
Country of Azerbaijan.» Proceedings of the Royal Geographical 
Society of London, Vol. 8, No. 6, 1863-1864: p. 275-279.
2. Adshead, Samuel Adrian Miles. China in World History. 
London: Macmillan, 2000.
3. Atkinson, David. «The confl ict over the Nagorno-Karabakh 
region dealt with by the OSCE Minsk Conference.» Council 
of Europe. November 29, 2004. http://assembly.coe.int/Main.
asp?link=/Documents/WorkingDocs/Doc04/EDOC10364.htm 
(accessed October 20, 2010).
4. Bournoutian, George A. «The Ethnic Composition and the 
Socio-Economic Condition of Eastern Armenia in the First Half 
of the Nineteenth Century.» In Transcaucasia, Nationalism and 
Social Change: Essays in the History of Armenia, Azerbaijan, and 
Georgia, создатель Ronald Grigor Suny, 77-80. Ann Harbor : 
University of Michigan Press, 1996.
5. Cheetham, Samuel. A History of the Christian Church during 
the First Six Centuries. New York: Macmillan and Co., 1905.
6. Cornell, Svante. Small Nations and Great Powers: A study of 
Ethnopolitical Confl ict in the Caucasus. Surrey: Curzon Press, 2001.
7. Dowsett, Charles. J. F. «The Albanian Chronicle of Mxit'ar Gos.» 
Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies, University of 
London, Vol. 21, No. 1/3, 1958: 475.
8. Eide, Asbjørn. «Territorial integrity of States, minority protection 
and guarantees for autonomy arrangements: approaches and 
roles of the Untied Nations.» Local self-government, territorial 
integrity and protection of minorities. Lausanne: Council of Europe 
Publishing, 1996. 282.
9. Harnack, Adolph von. The Expansion of Christianity in the First 
Three Centuries. London: Williams & Norgate, 1905.
84 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
10. Lockyer, Herbert. All the Postles of the Bible. Grand Rapids: 
Zondervan, 1988.
11. Minorsky, Vladimir. «Caucasica IV .» Bulletin of the School of 
Oriental and African Studies, University of London, Vol. 15, No. 3., 
1953: p. 504.
12. Pastermadjian, Herand. Histoire de l'Armenie . Paris (1st edn, 
1949, 2nd edn, 1964), 1949.
13. Shahid, Irfan. Rome and the Arabs: A Prolegomenon to the 
Study of Byzantium and the Arabs. Washington D.C.: Dumbarton 
Oaks, 1984.
14. Strabo. Geographica, XI, XIV. 
15. Suni, Ronald G. «What Happened in Soviet Armenia?» Middle 
East Report, No. 153, Islam and the State, July - August, 1988: 37.
16. Suny, Ronald G. Looking Toward Ararat: Armenia in Modern 
History. Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, 1993.
17. Waal, Thomas de. Black Garden: Armenia and Azerbaijan 
through peace and war. New York: NYU Press, 2003.
18. Аzərbaycan Xalq Cümhuriyyəti Ensiklopediyası. II cild. Bakı: 
Lider, 2005.
19. Агаян, Цатур П. А.Бакиханов. Баку: АН Азерб. ССР, 1948.
20. Азербайджанская сельскохозяйственная перепись 1921 г. 
Итоги по сельским обществам во вновь образованных уездах 
АССР, Нагорного Карабаха и по тем (основным) уездам, в 
которых произошли изменения границ. Т. III. Вып. XVII. Баку: 
АзЦСУ, 1924.
21. Акты Кавказской Археографической Комиссии, т. IV. 
Изданъ под редакциею председателя комиссии дсс. А.Д.Берже, 
док. 37. Тифлис: Типография главного управления наместника 
Кавказского, 1870.
85THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
22. Акты Кавказской Археографической Комиссии, т. VII, док. 
437, с. 487. Тифлис, 1878.
23. Акты Кавказской Археографической Комиссии, т. VII, док. 
829. Тифлис, 1878.
24. Алиев, Играр. Нагорный Карабах: История. Факты. 
События. Баку: Элм, 1989.
25. “Армения: бедная родственница Закавказья или 
прекрасная незнакомка инвестору?” Биржевой Лидер. October 
24, 2010. http://profi -forex.org/news/entry1008057044.html 
(accessed September 30, 2010).
26. Архив политических документов при Управлении делами 
Президента Азербайджанской Республики (АПДУДПАР), ф.1, 
оп.74, д.136. 
27. Велиханова, Наиля М. «Изменение исторической 
географии Азербайджана в результате арабского завоевания.» 
In Историческая география Азербайджана, 53, 58. Баку: Элм, 
1987.
28. Геродот. История в девяти книгах. Ленинград: Наука, 
1972.
29. Глинка, Сергей Н. Описание переселения армян 
аддербиджанских в пределы России, с кратким 
предварительным изложением исторических времен 
Армении. Москва, 1831.
30. Государственный Aрхив Азербайджанской Республики 
(ГААР) (State Archive of the Republic of Azerbaijan), ф.2502, оп.1, 
д.20, лл. 56–57. 
31. Государственный Архив Азербайджанской Республики 
(ГААР), ф.2502, оп.1, д.26, л. 98 об. 
32. Государственный Архив Азербайджанской Республики 
(ГААР), ф.2502, оп.2, д.26, л. 99. 
86 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
33. Государственный Архив Азербайджанской Республики 
(ГААР), ф.28, оп.1, д.155. 
34. Александр, Грибоедов С. «Записка о переселении армян 
из Персии в наши области.» Фундаментальная электронная 
библиотека «Русская литература и фольклор». http://feb-
web.ru/feb/griboed/texts/piks3/3_4_v3.htm (accessed October 
30, 2010).
35. Джаукян, Геворк Б. Общее и армянское языкознание. 
Ереван: АН Арм. ССР, 1978.
36. Дьяконов, Игорь М. «К преистории армянского языка (о 
фактах, свидетельствах и логике).» Историко-филологический 
журнал Но.4, 1983: 166.
37. История армянского народа с древнейших времен до 
наших дней. П/р проф. М.Нерсисяна. Ереван: АН Арм.ССР, 
1980.
38. К истории образования Нагорно-Карабахской 
Автономной Области Азербайджанской ССР 1918–1925. 
Документы и материалы. Баку: Азернешр, 1989.
39. Каланкатуйский, Моисей. История агван. Санкт-
Петербург: СПб., 1861.
40. Ковалевский, Павел И. Завоевание Кавказа Россией 
(Исторический очерк), (без выходных данных). Санкт-
Петербург: СПб., 1911.
41. Крымский, Агафангел Е. «Страницы из истории Северного 
или Кавказского Азербайджана (Кавказская Албания).» In 
Сборник статей в честь Е.Ф.Ольденбурга. К 50-летию 
научно-общественной деятельности., стр. 289–290. Москва, 
1934.
42. Крымский, Агафангел Е. “Страницы из истории Северного 
или Кавказского Азербайджана (Классической Албании).” In 
Памяти академика Н.Я.Марра (1864-1934). Москва, 1938.
43. Меликишвили, Георгий А. К истории древней Грузии. 
Тбилиси: АН Груз. ССР, 1959.
87THE HISTORY OF OCCUPIED NAGORNO-KARABAKH AND THE BATTLE FOR JUSTICE
44. “Миграция в Армении: минусов больше, чем плюсов.” 
Радио Организации Объединенных Наций. May 14, 2010. 
http://www.unmultimedia.org/radio/russian/detail/69756.html 
(accessed September 20, 2010).
45. Орбели, Иосиф. «Гасан-Джалал – князь Хаченский.» In 
Избранные труды, by Иосиф Орбели, стр. 146. Ереван: АН 
Арм.ССР, 1993.
46. —. Избранные труды. Ереван: АН Арм.ССР, 1963.
47. Очерки истории СССР (III-IХ вв.). Москва: АН СССР, 1958.
48. Персидские документы Матенадарана (указы, сост. 
А.Д.Папазян). Вып. I (XV–XVII вв.). Ереван, 1956.
49. Персидские документы Матенадарана (указы, сост. 
А.Д.Папазян). Вып.II (1601–1650 гг.). Ереван, 1959.
50. Полное собрание законов Российской империи (ПСЗРИ). 
Собрание второе, т. III, 1828. Санкт-Петербург: СПб, 1830.
51. Социалистическое строительство АССР. 
Статистический сборник. Баку: Союзоргучет, 1935.
52. Тер-Нерсесян, Сирарпи. Армения: Быт, религия, культура. 
Москва: Центрполиграф, 2008.
53. «Трактат между Карабахским ханом и Российской 
Империей о переходе ханства под власть России от 14 мая 
1805 года.» azeri.ru. http://azeri.ru/az/karabakh/412/ (accessed 
August 16, 2010).
54. Флавий, Арриан. Поход Александра. Москва: АМН СССР, 
1962.
55. Хоренаци, Мовсес. История Армении. Москва, 1858.
56. —. “История Армении, книга 2, глава 8 (Назначение 
второго (лица) в государстве из потомков Аждахака, царя 
маров), Ереван: Айастан, 1990.” Библиотека «Вехи». http://
www.vehi.net/istoriya/armenia/khorenaci/02.html (accessed 
October 30, 2010).
88 Ramiz Mehdiyev |
57. —. «История Армении, книга 3, глава 3 (Кончина 
святого Григориса от рук варваров). Ереван: Айастан, 1990.» 
Библиотека «Вехи». http://www.vehi.net/istoriya/armenia/
khorenaci/03.html (accessed October 30, 2010).
58. Центральный партийный архив Института марксизма-
ленинизма (ЦПА ИМЛ), ф. 461, оп. 1, ед.хр.4525, л. 1. 
59. Шавров, Николай И. Новая угроза русскому делу в 
Закавказье: предстоящая распродажа Мугани инородцам. 
Санкт-Петербург: СПб, 1911.
60. Шаумян, Степан Г. Избранные произведения. Т.2. Москва: 
Политиздат, 1978.
61. Этническая одонтология СССР. Москва: Наука, 1979.
62. Яков Я. Рогинский, Григорий М. Левин. Антропология, 2 
изд. Москва: Высшая школа, 1963.
OLD AND MODERN MAPS OF 
AZERBAIJAN















89
ГОРИС – 2010:  
СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА 
АБСУРДА
Рамиз Мехтиев
Действительный член
 Национальной Академии Наук Азербайджана 
ТБИЛИСИ - 2010
90 Рамиз Мехтиев |
91
ISBN: 978-9941-17-161-1
ISBN: 978-9941-17-162-8
Мехтиев Р.A. Горис – 2010:  сезон театра абсурда
Тбилиси - 2010, 104 стр.
В этой книге действительный член Национальной Академии 
Наук Азербайджана, выдающийся ученый-философ Рамиз Мехтиев 
на основе научных аргументов разоблачает попытки армянских 
лидеров сфальсифицировать историю, ввести международную 
общественность в заблуждение новой ложью и измышлениями, на 
исторических фактах доводит до внимания, что армянское государство 
создано на исконных азербайджанских землях. 
В книге академик на основе научных аргументов дает весомый 
ответ новым «исследованиям» армянских идеологов, доказывает 
необоснованность этих «идей» и «исследований». 
Книга, в которой также опубликованы древние и современные 
карты Азербайджана, представляет интерес для историков, 
политологов, специалистов по международным вопросам и широкой 
массы читателей. 
©Рамиз Мехтиев, 2010
Дом печати «UNIVERSAL» 
Тел: 22 36 09 8(99) 17 22 30 
E-mail: universal@internet.ge 
Адрес: 19 ул. Чавчавадзе 0179, 
Тбилиси-2010
92 Рамиз Мехтиев |
Мехтиев Рамиз Энвер оглу родился 17 апреля 1938 
года в городе Баку. 
В 1957 году окончил Бакинскую мореходную школу. 
В 1961-1966 годах учился на историческом факультете 
Азербайджанского государственного университета. В 
1965 году, будучи студентом 5-го курса, был приглашен 
на работу в Центральный комитет Ленинского 
Коммунистического Союза Молодежи Азербайджана, где 
работал в должности инструктора отдела студентов 
высших учебных заведений (1965 -1967). 
В 1967-1968 годах работал вторым секретарем 
Нахчыванского областного комитета комсомола. 
В 1968 году поступил в аспирантуру факультета 
философии Московского государственного университета 
имени М.В.Ломоносова. Защитив в мае 1972 года 
диссертацию получил ученую степень кандидата 
философских наук. С 1972 года по 1974 год работал 
в Азербайджанском государственном университете, 
сначала преподавателем, а затем старшим 
преподавателем. 
С мая 1974 года по 1976 год работал в должности 
лектора Отдела пропаганды и агитации Центрального 
комитета Коммунистической партии Азербайджана, 
а с 1976 года по 1978 год – заместителя заведующего 
Отделом науки и образования. 
В 1978 – 1980-х годах работал в должности первого 
секретаря районного комитета Коммунистической 
партии Азербайджана района имени 26 бакинских 
комиссаров (ныне Сабаильский район). 
С июня 1980 года был заведующим Отделом науки и 
образования Центрального комитета Коммунистической 
партии Азербайджана, в 1981-1983 годах – Отделом 
организационно-партийной работы, в 1983-1988 годах 
являлся секретарем ЦК КП Азербайджана, курировал 
вопросы идеологии, образования, науки, культуры и 
международных связей. 
93ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
За позицию, занятую в вопросе нагорно-карабахского 
конфликта, на пленуме Центрального Комитета 
Коммунистической партии Азербайджана от 31 мая 1988 
года был освобожден от этой должности по настоянию 
Абдурахмана Везирова. 
В июне 1988 года был назначен заведующим отделом 
Института общественно-политических исследований и 
информации Академии Наук Азербайджана. В 1993 году 
защитил докторскую диссертацию на соискание ученой 
степени доктора философских наук. 
В феврале 1994 года был назначен заведующим 
отделом Исполнительного аппарата Президента 
Азербайджанской Республики. 
С февраля 1995 года работает в должности 
руководителя Исполнительного аппарата (в настоящее 
время - Администрации) Президента Азербайджанской 
Республики. 
В 1980-1990 годах был депутатом Верховного Совета 
Азербайджанской ССР, а в 1995-2000 годах – депутатом 
Милли Меджлиса Азербайджанской Республики. 
Награжден двумя орденами «Трудового Красного 
Знамени», а в 2008 году – орденом «Истиглал». 
С 1999 года является заведующим кафедрой 
государственной службы и кадровой политики 
Академии государственного управления при Президенте 
Азербайджанской Республики. 
В 2007 году был избран действительным членом 
Национальной Академии Наук Азербайджана. 
Является автором многочисленных книг и научных 
статей в области социально-политических проблем, 
а также связанных с развитием современного 
Азербайджанского государства и общества. 
Женат. Супруга - доктор наук, профессор, заведующая 
кафедрой вычислительной математики Бакинского 
Государственного Университета. Имеет сына, дочь и 
пять внуков.
94 Рамиз Мехтиев |
95ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
16 октября 2010 года мы стали свидетелями 
очередного спектакля на сцене армянского театра 
абсурда. На этот раз он был поставлен не на сцене 
театра в Ереване, а в городе Горис, в котором 
главным действующим 
лицом был не какой-нибудь 
заурядный артист,  а сам 
президент Армении Серж 
Саргсян – да, тот самый, один 
из главных организаторов 
Ходжалинского геноцида в 
феврале 1992 года и этнических 
чисток, осуществленных 
против азербайджанского 
населения Нагорного Карабаха 
и прилегающих к нему земель. 
Надев на этот раз тогу академика, 
он решил с театральной 
сцены удивить весь ученый 
мир «новыми» открытиями в 
исторической науке. Одним из 
«шедевров» его выступления перед журналистами 
армянской диаспоры была мысль о том, что некая 
большая научная группа «генетиков и лингвистов, 
Серж Саргсян, 
легитимность 
президентства которого 
ставится под сомнение 
даже самим армянским 
обществом, с подмостков 
горисского театра 
позволил себе и ряд 
резких заявлений, 
которые, скорее, отражают 
уровень его личной 
внутренней культуры и 
образованности, нежели 
образ политического 
лидера, которого 
заслуживает армянское 
общество.
ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
96 Рамиз Мехтиев |
в которой нет ни одного армянина, осуществила 
сложное и длительное исследование. По 
последним результатам, армянский язык имеет 
историю, по меньшей мере, восемь тысяч лет. Это 
означает, мы как нация существуем, как минимум, 
восемь тысяч лет». Надо признать, что со времен 
лысенковских гонений на генетику мировая наука 
не обогащалась таким сенсационным открытием, 
как способность генетики установить возраст того 
или иного языка. 
Как ни старался сей ученый муж, ему не удалось 
придать серьезности этой «новой» пьесе и скрыть 
грубость фарса. Однако, войдя в раж, Серж Саргсян, 
легитимность президентства которого ставится 
под сомнение даже самим армянским обществом, 
с подмостков горисского театра позволил себе и 
ряд резких заявлений, которые, скорее, отражают 
уровень его личной внутренней культуры и 
образованности, нежели образ политического 
лидера, которого заслуживает армянское 
общество. Армянский народ, который жил бок о 
бок с азербайджанским на протяжении веков и 
которому суждено и дальше с ним соседствовать, 
несомненно, достоин лучшего руководителя, 
который не стал бы допускать публичных 
выпадов на уровне провинциального обывателя 
97ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
и выставлять на посмещище не только самого 
себя, но и общество, которое он, к несчастью для 
порядочных граждан, представляет.
Пригласив в Армению журналистов из 
числа диаспоры, Серж Саргсян, вместо того, 
чтобы воспользоваться шансом и призвать их к 
объективному и беспристрастному освещению 
происходящих в регионе процессов, подошел к 
встрече сообразно узости своего мышления и 
дал собравшимся свой «президентский» наказ: 
извратить до неузнаваемости исторические 
факты, переписать на озвученный им лад 
историю, игнорировать научные источники, 
а вместо них опираться на предложенные им 
мифы и домыслы. В здоровой академической 
среде руководитель государства, обычно, не 
вмешивается в научно-исследовательский 
процесс, а создает ученым условия для изучения 
актуальных проблем с последующей публикацией 
и широким обсуждением результатов, полученных 
на основе профессионального, всестороннего, 
беспристрастного и, что немаловажно, 
критического анализа всего комплекса имеющейся 
в наличии базы источников без выделения из 
общей массы одних и игнорирования других.  В 
Армении же, руководителям которой, похоже, 
98 Рамиз Мехтиев |
Кроме бессмысленной 
войны, тысяч погубленных 
жизней, миллионов 
беженцев, разрухи, 
обширных минных полей 
вместо обрабатываемых, 
военных расходов 
вместо социальных они 
не добились ничего – 
Нагорный Карабах так и 
не удалось присоединить 
к Армении и никогда не 
удастся. Ни 20 лет назад, ни 
сегодня, ни через 100 лет. 
99ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
не знаком принятый во всем мире научный 
подход и культура исследовательской работы, 
советуют съехавшимся в страну гостям, среди 
которых, возможно, присутствовали и истинные 
профессионалы своего дела, применить 
совершенно иные методы, которые в научной 
среде звучат смешно, а из уст главы государства – 
и вовсе позорно.
Посылая месседж, скорее, внешнему миру, 
нежели собравшейся аудитории, глава армянского 
государства без тени смущения сообщил 
присутствующим, что итоги исследования 
вообще-то уже готовы,  и вся работа ученых теперь 
должна быть направлена не на поиск истины 
(она уже найдена!), а лишь на подтверждение 
заранее заготовленных им и его командой 
пропагандистских лозунгов, даже если против 
них и свидетельствуют многочисленные факты 
и документы. В стране, где нормой считается 
подчинение науки политическим целям (а то и 
вовсе мифам), становятся возможными заявления 
из уст главы государства, наподобие тех, которые 
прозвучали на днях в Горисе. 
Семьдесят лет назад похожие «ценные» 
директивы об исключительности арийской расы 
давались немецким ученым и лидерами третьего 
100 Рамиз Мехтиев |
рейха. К чему привели разговоры о превосходстве 
одной нации над другими, древности и 
чистокровности одних и пришлости и смешанности 
других, всем хорошо известно. Вызывает 
сожаление, что руководители сегодняшней 
Армении, ведущие свой народ примерно в том 
же катастрофическом направлении, не извлекли 
уроков из недавней истории.
В то время, когда продолжается переговорный 
процесс по мирному урегулированию армяно-
азербайджанского, нагорно-карабахского 
конфликта и все терпеливо ждут от виновницы 
конфликта - Армении принятия основанных 
на положениях Хельсинкского Акта 1975 года 
обновленных Mадридских принципов, в то 
время, когда международные организации 
и парламенты ведущих стран одна за другой 
принимают резолюции, подтверждающие 
территориальную целостность Азербайджана, 
принадлежность Нагорного Карабаха 
Азербайджану, недопустимость самовольной 
интерпретации принципа самоопределения 
наций, необходимость освобождения Арменией 
оккупированных территорий и возвращения 
вынужденных переселенцев в свои дома, Серж 
101ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
Саргсян, в упор не замечая все эти документы и 
игнорируя позицию международного сообщества, 
советует своим гостям из диаспоры направить 
усилия на «становление, укрепление, развитие 
и международное признание второго армянского 
государства, Нагорно-Карабахской Республики». 
Вместо того, чтобы оглянуться вокруг, осознать 
свое международное одиночество и начать 
вытаскивать гвоздь из неправильной доски, 
президент Армении призывает журналистов, 
напротив,  вбить этот гвоздь до конца, не понимая, 
что боль от исправления ошибки будет в будущем 
сильнее, чем сейчас. Чем дальше вгоняет Армения 
саму себя в тупик, тем дольше и труднее будет ей 
из него выбраться. И ответственность за это будут 
нести руководители государства. 
О каком международном признании «второго 
армянского государства» (а затем и третьего, 
четвертого…) может идти речь и какими ложными 
надеждами кормят своих соотечественников 
руководители Армении, если международное 
сообщество посредством многочисленных 
резолюций уже однозначно дало понять, что этого 
никогда не произойдет! На что надеется армянское 
руководство? На чудо? Или, может, на рекордное 
102 Рамиз Мехтиев |
упрямство, перед которым, как они надеются, не 
устоят ни Азербайджан, ни мировое сообщество? 
Не пора ли избавиться от этой иллюзии?
Если авантюристы 1980-х гг., выводившие своих 
несмышленных соотечественников на улицы и 
площади Еревана и Ханкенди, не 
могли тогда осознать обреченность 
и бесперспективность утопии 
«миацума», то не пора ли 
руководителям Армении осознать 
эту трагическую ошибку сегодня? 
Задумывались ли нынешние 
лидеры страны, равно как и 
простые армяне, каким был бы 
сегодня регион Южного Кавказа, 
если бы в те годы лжепатриоты из 
комитетов «Крунк» и «Карабах» 
не ввергли свой народ в эту 
бессмысленную авантюру? 
Нет сомнений, что это был бы 
образцовый регион с тесно 
интегрированной экономикой 
трех стран, в котором национальность человека 
не имела бы большого значения, и при этом 
каждый имел бы возможность сохранять свою 
идентичность, а народы – развивать свою культуру. 
Армения 
сегодня полностью 
изолирована, 
транспортные пути и 
трубопроводы обходят 
ее стороной, у нее 
нет выхода к морю, 
большая часть ее 
границы закрыта, и 
замок будет продолжать 
и дальше висеть на двух 
из четырех ее границ. В 
какой еще другой стране 
85% границы закрыты 
по ее собственной же 
вине?
103ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
А чего, в итоге, добились эти авантюристы? Кроме 
бессмысленной войны, тысяч погубленных жизней, 
миллионов беженцев, разрухи, обширных минных 
полей вместо обрабатываемых, военных расходов 
вместо социальных они не добились ничего – 
Нагорный Карабах так и не удалось присоединить 
к Армении и никогда не удастся. Ни 20 лет назад, ни 
сегодня, ни через 100 лет. Ни напрямую, ни через 
пресловутую «независимость». Так не пора ли, 
наконец, понять эту ошибку и дать журналистам 
из диаспоры более разумные советы?!
Во время выступления в Горисе Серж 
Саргсян возмущался тем, что Степана Шаумяна 
в Азербайджане называют «бандитом». 
Однако, коммунистический режим, который 
благодетельствовал армянам и создал им 
государство, канул в историю. Сегодня мы свободны 
в осмыслении событий нашего прошлого. В этом 
нам помогают архивные материалы. Как бы ни 
старался Президент Серж Саргсян прикрываться 
цитатой из идеологических текстов прошлого, 
фактов не избежать. С именем Степана Шаумяна 
связана одна из самых трагических страниц истории 
азербайджанского народа XX века. Выступая 
под знаменем  большевистского движения, С. 
Шаумян фактически олицетворял программу 
104 Рамиз Мехтиев |
партии «Дашнакцутюн», стратегической 
целью которой было создание армянского 
государства на значительной части территории 
Азербайджана и Турции. Решение этой задачи 
было возможно только за счет 
истребления азербайджанского 
и турецкого населения. И этим 
вожди армянства не  преминули 
воспользоваться.
С. Шаумян окончательно 
встал на путь армянского 
экспансионизма после того, как 11 
января 1918 года был обнародован 
декрет большевистского 
правительства России, в котором 
поддерживалось «право армян 
оккупированной Россией 
Турецкой Армении на свободное 
самоопределение вплоть 
до полной независимости». 
Факт двойной партийной 
принадлежности С. Шаумяна объясняет то, 
что при организации массового истребления 
азербайджанского населения в марте-апреле 
1918 года он использовал вооруженные отряды 
дашнаков. Впоследствии С. Шаумян признавал: 
На фоне роста 
международного 
авторитета, 
экономической и военной 
мощи Азербайджана 
Армения пытается 
спрятаться за спиной 
у военного блока, все 
члены которого, кроме 
Армении, являются 
дружественными 
Азербайджану странами и 
понимают захватническую 
сущность Армении. 
105ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
«Мы воспользовались поводом… и открыли 
наступление по всему фронту, … у нас были уже 
вооруженные силы – около 6 тысяч человек. 
У «Дашнакцутюн» имелось также около 3-4 
тысяч национальных частей, которые были 
в нашем распоряжении. Участие последних 
придало отчасти гражданской войне характер 
национальной резни, но избежать этого не было 
возможности. Мы шли сознательно на это. Если 
бы они (т.е. азербайджанские политические 
силы) взяли верх в Баку, город был бы объявлен 
столицей Азербайджана»1.
В результате за три дня -  с 30 марта по 1 
апреля 1918 года – в Баку из-за национальной 
принадлежности большевистско-дашнакские 
войска уничтожили более 12 тысяч 
азербайджанцев. После всего этого как же не 
считать С. Шаумяна главным организатором 
геноцида азербайджанцев.   
На встрече в Горисе журналистов призвали 
доводить до мирового сообщества «правдивую и 
объективную информацию об Арцахе», «активно 
представлять истину», «не приукрашивая 
действительности». Хороший совет, не 
1  Шаумян, Степан Г. Избранные произведения. Т.2. Москва: 
Политиздат, 1978, стр. 246.
106 Рамиз Мехтиев |
поспоришь. Однако каждый раз, когда какой-
нибудь зарубежный телеканал или печатное 
издание освещает без приукрашиваний 
действительность – разрушенную и сожженную 
армянскими мародерами Шушу, прилегающие к 
Нагорному Карабаху 7 районов, уничтоженные и 
оскверненные памятники культуры, опустошенные 
селения, видеокадры о зверствах, совершенныx 
бывшими коллегами Сержа Саргсяна  в 
Ходжалы – в Армении и диаспоре немедленно 
поднимается шумиха, так как это не отвечает 
целям руководства Армении и диаспоры. У них 
под «действительностью» понимают только одну 
сторону медали. Говоря о «проблемах Арцаха» и 
«заботах сегодняшнего арцахца», под таковыми 
они видят только этнических армян, вычеркнув 
почти треть населения края из числа жителей 
Нагорного Карабаха. Какова же будет степень 
неловкости ситуации, если зарубежный журналист, 
вняв подобным советам, посетит временные 
поселки, в которых проживают азербайджанцы 
Нагорного Карабаха, чтобы без приукрашиваний 
осветить заботы сегодняшнего «арцахца»-
азербайджанца, ожидающего возвращения в 
родной край. У лидеров Армении имеется свое 
понимание «объективной действительности», 
в которой, почти по-геббельсовски, нет места 
неармянам.
107ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
В Горисе Серж Саргсян обвинил Азербайджан в 
расходовании нефтедолларов на, как он выразился, 
«распространение лжи, фальсификаций и черной 
пропаганды», пообещав противопоставить этому 
«наш человеческий потенциал во всем мире». 
Возможно, под своим «человеческим материалом 
во всем мире», припасенном у него в запасе в 
качестве некоего «секретного оружия», он имел 
в виду разоблаченную недавно в США большую 
преступную группу выходцев из Армении, 
которые обкрадывали престарелых и неимущих, 
а наворованные деньги направляли на подкуп 
коррумпированных конгрессменов под видом 
взносов в их избирательную кампанию. На 
украденные деньги рядовых налогоплательщиков 
и устами подкупленных сенаторов и членов палаты 
представителей армяне как раз и распространяли 
все эти годы несусветную ложь и черную 
пропаганду об Азербайджане и происходящих 
в регионе процессах. Как выясняется, нити этой 
криминальной сети ведут к высшим чинам 
Армении. А о судьбе нефтедолларов руководителям 
Армении беспокоиться не стоит – они расходуются 
на строительство школ, больниц, временных 
поселков для вынужденных переселенцев, 
изгнанных из многовековых насиженных мест 
108 Рамиз Мехтиев |
как раз теми бывшими полевыми командирами, 
которые на этой войне сделали себе политическую 
карьеру, a сегодня уже дают «ценные директивы» 
журналистам из диаспоры.
Одной из таких просьб к журналистам 
было помочь правящему 
режиму Армении закрепить в 
дипломатической сфере «победу», 
одержанную на поле боя. За все эти 
годы в руководстве Армении так и 
не поняли, что совершив против 
соседнего государства агрессию, 
оккупировав его территорию, 
проведя этнические чистки, 
варварски демонтировав города и 
села, Армения в действительности 
не победила, а проиграла! Она 
проиграла мир, упустив столько 
возможностей. Чтобы понять это, 
достаточно сравнить сегодняшний 
Азербайджан с Арменией, оценив 
отрыв, который с годами будет 
еще больше. В дипломатической сфере Армения 
твердо движется в сторону полного поражения, 
за которым может последовать поражение и 
иного характера. Так не пора ли руководителям 
Аргументная база 
армянской стороны 
и в том, и в другом 
случае была и 
остается слабой, так 
как в исторической 
части она основана 
на вымыслах, 
фальсификациях 
и ненаучных 
заключениях, а в 
правовой – на вольной 
интерпретации 
положений 
международного 
права.
109ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
этой скатывающейся в пропасть страны сохранить 
лицо сейчас и поспешить, пока не поздно, с 
достоинством выйти из положения, избежав 
неминуемого исхода?
Армения сегодня полностью изолирована, 
транспортные пути и трубопроводы 
обходят ее стороной, у нее нет выхода 
к морю, большая часть ее границы 
закрыта, и замок будет продолжать и 
дальше висеть на двух из четырех ее 
границ. В какой еще другой стране 85% 
границы закрыты по ее собственной 
же вине? Второй такой страны 
в мире нет. Население Армении 
неуклонно сокращается. По данным 
доклада о развитии человеческого 
потенциала, который выпускается 
под эгидой Программы развития 
ООН Армению ежегодно покидает от 
23 до 27 тысяч человек2. По данным 
же армянских неправительственных 
организаций начиная с 1991 года 
страну покинули 1,5 млн. человек. Два десятилетия 
2  «Миграция в Армении: минусов больше, чем плюсов.» Радио 
Организации Объединенных Наций. 14 Мая 2010 г. http://www.un-
multimedia.org/radio/russian/detail/69756.html (дата обращения: 20 
Сентября 2010 г.).
В азербайджанской 
историографии никогда 
не утверждалось, что 
кавказские албанцы 
первыми приняли 
христианство. Зато 
армянские историки 
создали и упорно 
пропагандируют миф 
об Армении как о 
первой в мире  стране, 
принявшей в 301 году 
христианство в качестве  
государственной 
религии. 
110 Рамиз Мехтиев |
назад в Республике Армения, Арцахе и Джавахке 
проживали около 3,7 млн. армян. Сегодня на этой 
же территории проживают 2,2 – 2,3 млн. армян, т.е. 
число армян сократилось на 40%. От безысходности 
и в стремлении поскорее эмигрировать в стране 
все повально играют в американскую лоторею 
Green Card, даже высшие государственные 
чиновники, генералы органов безопасности. 
Данные службы Гэллапа свидетельствуют, что 
наибольшее число желающих эмигрировать из 
постсоветских республик находится в Армении - 
39%3. Глядишь, скоро и сам президент сбежит. Все 
крупные предприятия перестали принадлежать 
стране и были распроданы в счет погашения 
государственного долга. Армения неспособна даже 
самостоятельно охранять свои государственные 
границы, являющиеся в любой другой стране 
одним из символов государственности, элементом 
национальной гордости и престижа. Для охраны 
границ у нее нет достаточного количества 
военнослужащих. При этом она еще хочет 
расширить свои границы за счет Азербайджана. 
Для чего? Чтобы опять просить пограничников 
3  «Армения: бедная родственница Закавказья или прекрасная 
незнакомка инвестору?» Биржевой Лидер. 24 Октября 2010 г. http://
profi -forex.org/news/entry1008057044.html (дата обращения: 30 
Октября 2010 г.).
111ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
другой страны охранять их? Оккупировав чужую 
территорию и не сумев ее заселить, Армения с ее 
тяжелым демографическим положением скоро 
сама останется без населения. Объяснить ту 
легкость, с которой армяне покидают свою страну 
и перебираются в другие страны, несложно – они 
не ощущают связи с этой землей, привязанности 
к ней, так как на инстиктивном уровне чувствуют 
свою пришлость. Поэтому и легки на подъем. 
Кроме того, они хорошо понимают, что 
азербайджанский народ настроен решительно в 
вопросе освобождения своих земель, и пока он 
не восстановит свою целостность, у Армении не 
будет спокойного будущего, и военные действия 
всегда будут на повестке дня.
На фоне роста международного авторитета, 
экономической и военной мощи Азербайджана 
Армения пытается спрятаться за спиной у военного 
блока, все члены которого, кроме Армении, 
являются дружественными Азербайджану 
странами и понимают захватническую 
сущность Армении. Информация о возможном 
приобретении Азербайджаном каких-то двух 
комплексов оборонительного характера вызвала 
в армянском руководстве невиданную панику. И 
это они называют «победой»? Победители себя 
112 Рамиз Мехтиев |
так не ведут и не просят другие страны защитить 
их от проигравшего! 
Возможно, «победой» для Сержа Саргсяна 
считалась операция, о которой в армянских верхах, 
по его собственному признанию, «предпочитают 
вслух не говорить»4. Тот же Саргсян, признавшийся 
несколько лет назад британскому журналисту 
в участии своих сослуживцев в расстреле 
ходжалинских беженцев, a сегодня – лицемерно 
негодующий об информационной «лжи» и 
«фальсификациях», поручил около года назад 
сформировать службу по противостоянию 
растущим усилиям Азербайджана в доведении 
истины до мировой общественности. В короткий 
срок новая структура выдала первый результат: 
был создан кощунственный миф, отрицающий 
признание самого Саргсяна об истреблении 
армянскими военнослужащими ходжалинцев: 
«До Ходжалы азербайджанцы думали, что с нами 
можно шутки шутить, они думали, что армяне не 
способны поднять руку на гражданское население. 
Мы сумели сломать этот стереотип».5 A в 
Горисе тот же Саргсян поведал журналистам, что 
«на лжи и фальши далеко уйти невозможно». 
4 Waal, Thomas de. Black Garden: Armenia and Azerbaijan through 
peace and war. New York: NYU Press, 2003, p. 172.
5  Ibid – p. 172
113ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
Таково понимание «истины» сегодняшними 
руководителями Армении.
Поражает своим цинизмом безответственное 
заявление Сержа Саргсяна «Азербайджан сам 
начал войну, сам же проиграл». Азербайджан, 
испытавший на себе агрессию со стороны 
Армении и никогда не предъявлявший к ней 
территориальных претензий (несмотря на 
предостаточные исторические основания), слышит 
сегодня из уст главы государства-агрессора, 
государства-оккупанта и государства-нарушителя 
международных конвенций кощунственное 
обвинение. Невольно вспоминается изречение 
Геббельса: «Чем наглее ложь, тем быстрее 
она распространяется». Вспоминаются также 
«нападения» Польши на Германию, а Кувейта 
– на Ирак. У Азербайджана никогда не было 
намерений оккупировать пятую часть территории 
Армении, чтобы изгнать оттуда армян и создать 
там марионеточный режим. Не мешало бы автору 
подобного лицемерия задуматься над другим 
вопросом: если последствия поражения, как 
он утверждает, никогда не бывают приятными, 
то почему армянство на протяжении многих 
десятилетий рыдает о последствиях армянского 
мятежа в Османской Империи в годы Первой 
114 Рамиз Мехтиев |
мировой войны? Сами же предали свое 
государство, сами нанесли ему удар в спину, сами 
перешли на сторону противника, сами первыми 
начали истреблять мусульманское население на 
востоке страны, и сами же несут ответственность 
за последствия! Как будто последствия таких 
действий бывают приятными. О каком «геноциде» 
могут говорить армяне, если в то время даже не 
было этого слова? И при этом хотят еще быть 
«первыми жервами» его в XX веке, как будто 
не сами до этого вырезали все мусульманское 
население и не было истребления народов 
герреро и готтентотов в Намибии в 1904–07 гг.
Прошли те времена, когда можно было 
захватывать чужую землю и объявлять ее своей 
по факту захвата. Mир уже не тот, что был 
много веков назад. Поэтому, чтобы обосновать 
свои территориальные претензии к соседям, 
экспансионистские головы Армении решили 
сперва обратиться к историческому аргументу: 
«Эти земли когда-то были наши, мы коренной 
народ, вы – пришлый, а значит, право имеем». 
Для этого была выдумана фальсифицированная 
версия истории, не имеющая ничего общего 
с фактами. Когда пришло осознание того, что 
в современном мире территориальные споры 
115ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
решаются не в рамках узкого средневекового 
мышления и не в исторической плоскости, а 
международно-правовой, в Армении решили 
подвести под свои территориальные претензии 
существующий в международном праве принцип 
самоопределения наций. Аргументная база 
армянской стороны и в том, и в другом случае была 
и остается слабой, так как в исторической части 
она основана на вымыслах, фальсификациях и 
ненаучных заключениях, а в правовой – на вольной 
интерпретации положений международного 
права, что недопустимо и непродуктивно. Поэтому 
армянские претензии не находят поддержки в 
мире.
По части истории Армению можно   смело назвать 
бессменным чемпионом мира по фальсификациям. 
В мире равных ей нет. В стремлении удревнить 
свою историю и всячески «привязать» свой народ 
к облюбованным территориям соседей, армянские 
авторы, порой сами того не ведая, делают почти 
анекдотичные выводы, которые немедленно 
подхватываются политическими лидерами и без 
тени смущения произносятся с высоких трибун 
в качестве общепризнанных в науке «аксиом». 
К примеру, Серж Саргсян с нескрываемым 
высокомерием позволил себе безосновательно 
116 Рамиз Мехтиев |
обвинить азербайджанцев в претензиях на 
мировое первенство в принятии христианства. 
В азербайджанской историографии никогда не 
утверждалось, что кавказские албанцы первыми 
приняли христианство. Зато армянские историки 
создали и упорно пропагандируют миф об 
Армении как о первой в мире  стране, принявшей в 
301 году христианство в качестве  государственной 
религии, хотя науке давно известно, что еще в 
конце II столетия, т.е. более чем за век до армян, 
христианство стало официальной религией в 
арамееязычном Эдесском царстве (Осроенe). В 
165 году царь Эдессы Абгар бар Ману (Абгар V или 
Ману VIII) принял христианство6, в чем его убедил 
миссионер из Палестины Св.Фадей (Аддай), a его 
преемник на царском престоле Абгар VIII превратил 
христианство в государственную религию Осроены7 
(некоторые источники пишут, что это сделал Абгар 
IX8, который заложил основы христианской поэзии). 
В 1905 году немецкий историк и теолог Адольф фон 
Харнак писал: «…не вызывает сомнений, что еще 
до 190 г. христианство активно распространялось 
6  Cheetham, Samuel. A History of the Christian Church during the First 
Six Centuries. New York: Macmillan and Co., 1905, p. 58.
7  Lockyer, Herbert. All the Postles of the Bible. Grand Rapids: Zonder-
van, 1988, p. 260.
8 Adshead, Samuel Adrian Miles. China in World History. London: Mac-
millan, 2000, p. 27.
117ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
по всей Эдессе и ее прилегающим областям, и 
(вскоре после 201 г. или даже раньше) царский 
двор также принял церковь (т.е. христианство)»9. 
Ирфан Шахид пишет об Абгаре VIII как о первом 
правителе передневосточного государства, 
принявшего христианство.10 
Любопытно, что факт принятия Арменией 
христианской религии в 301 году оспаривается 
и самими армянскими историками. Сирарпи 
Тер-Нерсесян пишет: «Датой этого события 
традиционно считался 301 год, однако, судя по 
последним исследованиям, это произошло не 
раньше 314 года»11.
Как же после всех этих фактов армяне стали 
«первой» христианской нацией в мире? Интересно, 
что армяне, чьи измышления опровергают 
исторические факты, пытаются принизить 
значение первопринятия Эдессой христианства, 
прибегая к откровенным искажениям: некоторые 
ереванские «историки» утверждают, что 
принятие Осроеной христианства в качестве 
госу-дарственной религии, как бы сказать, «не 
9  Harnack, Adolph von. The Expansion of Christianity in the First Three 
Centuries. London: Williams & Norgate, 1905, p. 293.
10  Shahid, Irfan. Rome and the Arabs: A Prolegomenon to the Study of 
Byzantium and the Arabs. Washington D.C.: Dumbarton Oaks, 1984, p. 96.
11 Тер-Нерсесян, Сирарпи. Армения: Быт, религия, культура. 
Москва: Центрполиграф, 2008, стр. 84.
118 Рамиз Мехтиев |
счи-тается», так как в это время она якобы 
не была независимой и еще (или уже) не 
имела государственности. В подтверждение 
этим домыслам они издают карту, в которой 
Осроена указана в составе Армении. Однако они 
умалчивают, что Осроена была завоевана Тиграном 
Великим задолго до этого и на короткое время, а 
к моменту принятия христианства 
она уже давно была независимой. 
Помимо этих искажений, эти 
«историки» пытаются всячески 
умалить значение первопринятия 
Осроеной христианства 
тем, что оно было связано с 
апокрифической легендой о 
переписке Абгара V (Ману VIII) 
с Иисусом Христом. С кем бы ни 
«переписывался» эдесский царь 
и каковы бы ни были подлинные 
причины принятия лично им 
христианства, факт остается 
фактом – сколько бы ни пыжилась 
сегодня лживая пропаганда соседней страны, 
более чем за век до армян христианство стало 
официальной религией именно в Осроене.
Серж Саргсян высокопарно привел ссылку 
По ходу дела 
«армянским» стал 
топоним Арцах, и 
было выдумано 
«армянское поселение 
Вараракн». Ни в 
одном источнике 
нет упоминания ни о 
каком «вараракне». 
119ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
Сотни топонимов на 
территории бывшего 
азербайджанского (именно 
азербайджанского!) 
Ирeванского ханства 
были переименованы 
в советское время в 
армянские названия с 
целью уничтожения следов 
проживавших на этих 
землях азербайджанских 
тюрoк. 
120 Рамиз Мехтиев |
также на древнегреческого географа Страбона, 
который якобы отмечал автохтонность армян на 
Южном Кавказе. В действительности же у Страбона 
эти территории фигурируют как завоеванные 
армянскими царями у других государств и народов. 
Страбон еще в те времена заметил склонность 
армян к захвату чужих земель и в своей книге писал: 
«Армению, в прежние времена бывшую маленькой 
страной, увеличили войны Артаксия и Зариадрия. 
Они были первоначально полководцами Антиоха 
Великого, а впоследствии, после его поражения, 
стали царями (первый – царем Софены, Акисены, 
Одомантиды и некоторых других областей, а 
последний – царем страны вокруг Артаксаты); 
они расширили совместно свои владения, отрезав 
часть областей окружающих народностей, а 
именно: у мидян они отняли Каспиану, Фавнитиду 
и Басоропеду; у иберов – предгорье Париадра, 
Хорзену и Гогарену, которая находится на другой 
стороне реки Кира; у халибов и мосинеков – 
Каренитиду и Ксерксену, которая граничит с Малой 
Арменией или является ее частью; у катаонов – 
Акилисену и область вокруг Антитавра; наконец, 
у сирийцев – Таронитиду»12. Более того, Страбон 
особо отмечал, что на завоеванных землях 
12  Strabo. Geographica, XI, XIV, 5 
121ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
армяне старались ассимилировать покоренные 
народности: «Поэтому все эти народности 
теперь говорят на одном языке»13. 
В команде президента Армении довольно 
забавно трактуют слова Страбона. По их логике, 
если армянские цари завоевывали территории 
других народов, то армяне на 
этих землях сразу становились 
«автохтонами». 
Следует отметить, что как 
независимое государство Армения 
просуществовала сравнительно 
короткое время. Истории  известно, 
что просуществовав в начале 
н.э. чуть более двух десятилетий 
как независимое государство, 
Армения, потеряв независимость, 
превратилась в римско-
парфянское владение, ибо после 
63 года по договору между Римом 
и Парфией установилась двойная 
зависимость  Армении14. Все последующие 
века вплоть до 1918 года она находилась либо 
13  Ibid.
14  Меликишвили, Георгий А. К истории древней Грузии. Тбилиси: 
АН Груз. ССР, 1959, стр. 344.
В самом начале 
конфликта, в 1988 
году армянский 
историк Рональд Суни 
из Мичиганского 
университета 
США отмечал о 
существовании 
в средние века 
на территории 
сегодняшнего 
Карабаха государства 
кавказских албанцев. 
122 Рамиз Мехтиев |
в вассальной, либо в абсолютной зависимости 
от других держав – Персидской, Римской, 
Османской, Российской империй. За короткий 
период независимого Армянского Царства его 
правителями предпринимались неоднократные 
попытки территориального расширения. Научных 
доказательств распространения контроля Армении 
на территорию современного Азербайджана, 
кроме периода царя Тиграна Великого, нет. Только 
в годы правления Тиграна Армения достигла 
своего апогея и действительно временно покорила 
земли к северу от р. Араз. Страбона, родившегося 
в годы, когда еще был жив армянский царь Тигран 
Великий, можно назвать современником тех 
событий. Поэтому неудивительно, что в своей 
книге «География» он действительно отмечает, 
что Орхистена была (возможно, на тот момент) 
областью Армении. Как известно, история никогда 
не была статичной – владения расширялись и 
сокращались, появлялись и исчезали государства, 
менялись границы. При этом не следует забывать, 
что на территории разросшегося при Тигране 
Армянского Царства проживало много народов, а 
не только армяне. Важно другое – нигде у Страбона 
не говорится, что в Орхистенe, которая вполне 
123ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
могла переходить из рук в руки, жили армяне. 
Об этническом составе Арцаха и, тем более, об 
автохтонности или пришлости его населения, у 
Страбона нет ни слова! Зато имеeтся множество 
других источников и свидетельств других авторов, 
в которых говорится именно об албанском 
населении Арцаха. В том же 11-м разделе книги 
Страбон отмечает, что река Кир (Кура) протекала 
через (!) Албанию15.
Еще одним абсурдным тезисом, 
характеризующим интеллектуальный уровень 
его авторов, является утверждение о том, что, 
дескать, Азербайджан и азербайджанцы как нация 
появились меньше века назад, и все, что было на 
этой территории до начала ХХ века, к ним отношения 
не имеет. Авторы подобных бредовых заявлений 
вряд ли задумались над элементарным вопросом: 
как директивно-чиновничий бюрократический 
этногенез соотносится с обычной человеческой 
биологией? Если нация может создаваться 
простым росчерком пера партийного вождя, 
решившего у себя в кабинете переименовать 
название многовекового народа, то означает ли, 
что у первых представителей «свежесозданного» 
15  Strabo. Geographica, XI, XIV, 2.
124 Рамиз Мехтиев |
народа не было ни отцов, ни дедов, ни прадедов, 
и все они были клонированы в пробирке? Сегодня 
в Азербайджане живет старшее поколение, 
родившееся в 30-годы, у многих представителей 
которого еще живы родители, появившиеся на свет 
до решения о переименовании азербайджанских 
тюрок в азербайджанцев. По ло-
гике армянских «интеллектуалов» 
выходит, что эти два поколения 
этнически относятся к разным 
нациям, так как старшие, видите 
ли, недостаточно молоды, чтобы 
считаться азербайджанцами, 
а их дети, родившиеся в 30-е 
гг., – недостаточно стары, 
чтобы заслужить духовную и 
культурно-историческую связь с 
тысячелетним наследием своих 
«биологических» предков? 
Получается, в день придания 
народу нового названия останавливается и 
становится «бесхозной» многовековая история 
одного народа и начинается история другого, да к 
тому же обрывается не только связь между двумя 
«приграничными» поколениями отцов и детей, но 
До начала армяно-
азербайджанского, 
нагорно-карабахского 
конфликта армянские 
историки не особо 
оспаривали вхождение 
Арцаха в состав 
Кавказской Албании 
и факт албанского 
населения этой 
области.
125ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
и связь между теперь уже «разными» нациями? 
Пожалуй, нигде, кроме Армении, невозможно 
публичное озвучивание руководителями 
государства подобных абсурдных заявлений. Как 
бы «запели» эти «ученые», если, допустим, в 60–
70-е годы было принято директивное решение 
о переименовании армян в «араратцев» по 
названию долины или же хотя бы в «севанцев» 
по новому названию озера Гейча? Начался бы в 
таком случае отсчет новой нации? Лишились бы 
они тогда права проживать в своей республике 
и заслуживали бы немедленной депортации по 
той причине, что в средневековых манускриптах 
невозможно найти упоминания об «араратском» 
или «севанском» народе, a речь в них идет о 
каких-то непонятных армянах, прекративших 
существование в день выхода в свет партийного 
постановления? 
Между тем, еще средневековые арабские 
авторы нередко называли территорию 
Кавказской Албании «Азербайджаном», «Верхним 
Азербайджаном». Аль-Куфи, говоря о пребывании 
правителя Азербайджана в Шеки, пишет, что 
халиф приказал аль-Джарраху «остановиться в 
Азербайджане», «достиг аль-Баба (Дербента) в 
126 Рамиз Мехтиев |
области Азербайджана», «отправился в страну 
Азербайджан и расположился в Байлакане...», 
«отправился в страну Азербайджан и остановился 
в Барде»16.
В 1864 году английский консул в Тебризе 
Кейт Аббот в меморандуме для Королевского 
географического общества писал: «Страна, 
известная персам как Азербайджан, разделена 
между ними [Персией] и Россией. Последняя 
владеет 5/8 [Азербайджана], территория 
которого составляет примерно 80.000 кв.миль 
или равна площади Великобритании; таким 
образом, 50.000 кв.миль принадлежит России 
и 30.000 кв.миль – Персии.  Российская часть 
[Азербайджана] граничит с севера и северо-
востока с горами Кавказа, простирающимися 
до окрестностей Баку на Каспии. На западе в 
него входят провинции Имеретия, Мингрелия, 
Гурия и Ахыска, принадлежащие теперь 
России; на востоке – Каспийское море, а на юге 
граница обозначена рекой Арасс (Аракс)... через 
Муганскую степь к округу Талыш и маленькой 
рекой Астура (Астара), которая течет через 
этот край в Каспийское море. В данную область 
16  Велиханова, Наиля М. «Изменение исторической географии 
Азербайджана в результате арабского завоевания.» В Историческая 
география Азербайджана, 53, 58. Баку: Элм, 1987, сс. 53, 58.
127ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
входят следующие территории: Грузия или 
Гюрджюстан, состоящая из Кахетии, Картли, 
Сомехети, Казахa; магометанские области 
Эривань, Нахчыван, Карабах, Гянджа, Ширван, 
Шеки, Шамахы, Баку, Куба, Сальян и часть 
Талыша»17. Как видно из свидетельства английского 
дипломата, которого трудно обвинить во лжи и 
службе «азербайджанской пропаганде», к 60-м 
годам XIX вeкa население Иревана, Нахчывана и 
Карабаха даже после переселения сюда армян 
по-прежнему оставалось преимущественно 
магометанским (т.е. тюркским, если угодно 
Саргсяну – азербайджанским), и эти области 
считались относящимися к  Азербайджану.
Увы, таков интеллектуальный уровень 
сегодняшних руководителей Армении, 
стремящихся произвести впечатление на гостей 
из диаспоры риторическим вопросом «как мог 
населенный пункт 200–300 лет назад иметь 
азербайджанское название? Хоть бы сказали 
турецкие или персидские!» Oказывается, мог! И 
300 лет назад, и тысячу! Рассчитывая на невежество 
своей аудитории и сам того не понимая, Серж 
Саргсян не пояснил, что в языковом смысле 
17 Abbott, Keith E. “Extracts from a Memorandum on the Country of 
Azerbaijan.” Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society of London, Vol. 
8, No. 6, 1863-1864: pp. 275-279.
128 Рамиз Мехтиев |
«азербайджанский» и «тюркский» – это одно и то 
же, особенно когда речь идет о регионе Южного 
Кавказа. Если это сложно понять, то пусть точно 
так же задумается, какое отношение хаи имеют к 
армянским топонимам. 
Ведь в соответствии принятому в лингвистике 
правилу, по ста выборочным признакам хайский 
язык делится на 11 групп и 44 диалекта.18 
Специалисты-языковеды считают, что наличие 
у этого народа такого большого количества 
языковой ветви и диалекта дает основание 
утверждать, что хайский язык не является 
языком одного народа. Это подтверждается и 
найденными на территории Армении в древних 
могильниках черепами. По своим головным 
показателям они резко отличаются от головных 
показателей современных армян.19 Деление 
армян на 16 антропологических типов вызывает у 
исследователей недоумение. У одного народа не 
может быть столько антропологических различий. 
Выходит, можно смело ставить под сомнение связь 
между хаями и армянами? Задумавшись над этим, 
в команде армянского президента, возможно, и 
18     Джаукян, Геворк Б. Общее и армянское языкознание. Ереван: АН 
Арм. ССР, 1978.
19   Яков Я. Рогинский, Григорий М. Левин. Антропология, 2 изд. 
Москва: Высшая школа, 1963.
129ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
поймут, как мог населенный пункт 200–300 лет 
назад иметь именно азербайджанское название.
Не мешало бы им задуматься и о другом. 
Антропологически армяне практически 
единственный народ, не вписывающийся 
в антропологический тип, характерный 
для народов Южного Кавказа. На основе 
проведенных антропологических исследований 
можно утверждать, что население западной 
части исторического Азербайджана во все 
периоды (с эниолита и до современности) было 
сходным с населением остального Азербайджана. 
Самые древние антропологические находки, 
касающиеся армян, обнаруженные на территории 
современной Армении, относятся лишь к 
XVII в. и подтверждаются только находками в 
Кенакерском некрополе. Они по ряду признаков 
(форма черепной коробки, строение лицевого 
скелета и т.д.) в корне отличаются от предыдущих 
палеоантропологических серий и являют собой 
новый этнический компонент. 
То, что армяне не аборигены в зоне Нагорного 
Карабаха свидетельствует и анализ зубочелюстной 
системы20.
По ходу дела «армянским» стал топоним 
20  Этническая одонтология СССР. Москва: Наука, 1979, стр.135.
130 Рамиз Мехтиев |
Арцах, и было выдумано «армянское поселение 
Вараракн». Ни в одном источнике нет упоминания 
ни о каком «вараракне». Разумеется, если его еще 
не успели состряпать в армянских лабораториях 
исторической фальсификации и привязать к месту, 
где располагается основанный карабахскими 
ханами Ханкенди. Этот «вараракн» 
– бесполезное изобретение 
армянской пропаганды, равно как 
и «древнеармянские» бердзор, 
карвачар, кашатаг и множество 
других вымышленных названий. 
Взять, к примеру, так называемый 
«Тигранакерт», которым решили 
самовольно, не опираясь на 
серьезные научные факты, 
назвать место вокруг фундамента 
строения, обнаруженного в ходе 
незаконных археологических 
раскопок в оккупированном 
Агдамском районе Азербайджана. Почему именно 
«Тигранакерт»,  а  не другое название, и почему 
именно в этом месте, а не в другом? Только ли 
потому, что эта земля пригляделась армянам, и в 
помощь аннексионистским планам лаборатории 
исторической фальсификации привычно 
Сегодня на 
оккупированных 
армянами землях 
осуществляется 
культурный террор. 
Сепаратистами 
разрушен историко-
архитектурный 
заповедник – 
средневековый 
азербайджанский 
город Шуша. 
131ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
состряпали фальшивые свидетельства и летописи, 
на которые они теперь сами же с умным видом 
ссылаются?
Сотни топонимов на территории бывшего 
азербайджанского (именно азербайджанского!) 
Ирeванского ханства были переименованы в 
советское время в армянские названия с целью 
уничтожения следов проживавших на этих 
землях азербайджанских тюрoк. Топонимы, 
которые в нашем языке имеют значение, а на 
армянском ничего не означают. Куда исчезли эти 
топонимы? Не приходится сомневаться, что при 
поиске ответа на этот вопрос те же армянские 
лаборатории исторической фальсификации 
изобретут сотни новых «вараракнов» для 
бывших азербайджанских топонимов Басаркечар 
(Варденис), Гаранлыг (Мартуни), Хамамлы 
(Спитак), Джалалоглу (Степанаван), Гаракился 
(Сисиан), Гаракился (Ванадзор), Кешишкенд 
(Ехегнадзор), Улуханлы или Зангибасар (Масис), 
Истибулаг или Карвансарай (Иджеван), Дэвэли 
(поселок Арарат), Гезлю Кямярли (Мецамор), 
Уч-Муадзин (Эчмиадзин), Алагез (Арагац), Гейча 
(Севан), Арпачай (Ахурян) и сотен других. Во всех 
этих азербайджанских топонимах будут 8000 
лет «бурлить источники». Появятся фальшивые 
132 Рамиз Мехтиев |
«летописи», якобы содержащие сведения о новых 
«древнеармянских» названиях аж со времен Ноя. 
Эти же лаборатории уже успели придумать новые 
названия для оккупированных городов и сел, и 
через некоторое время руководители Армении 
с высоких трибун поведают миру о новых 
«вараракнax»! Уже и украинский город Львов 
хотят переименовать в Арьюц!
Что же касается так называемого «армянского» 
топонима Арцах, то к армянскому языку и ранней 
истории Армении он не имеет никакого отношения. 
Тезис, озвученный президентом Армении в 
Горисе, поражает степенью своей безграмотности: 
«армянское название этой местности – Арцах – 
засвидетельствовано в VIII веке до Рождества 
Христова, и засвидетельствовал его сын 
основателя Еревана Аргишти I – Сардури II». Во-
первых, Аргишти I и Сардури II были урартскими 
царями, а не хайскими. Урарты и хаи были разными 
народами и говорили на языках, относившиxся 
к разным языковым семьям. Очевидно, Саргсян 
решил между делом замахнуться не только на 
албанское культурно-историческое наследие, 
но и заодно на урартское. Во-вторых, с чего это 
вдруг упомянутое название стало армянским? 
Урартский царь засвидетельствовал лишь 
133ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
Армяне (хаи) до середины 
XV века на Южном Кавказе 
почти не жили. В 1441 
году правитель тюркско-
азербайджанского государства 
Гарагоюнлу Джаханшах 
перенес центр армянского 
католикосата из киликийского 
города Сис в располагавшийся 
недалеко от полностью 
тюрконаселенного Иревана 
монастырь Уч-Кился (или 
Уч-Муадзин), который в 
древности был албанским 
монастырем.
134 Рамиз Мехтиев |
название Арцах, но не засвидетельствовал его 
как «армянский» топоним! Он лишь отметил, что 
есть такая область, не более того. Выходит, если 
бы о существовании на Кавказе области под 
названием Арцах сообщили египетские фараоны 
или китайские императоры, то данный топоним 
немедленно стал бы египетским или китайским? 
Не стало же название Арцах античным только 
потому, что о нем упоминали византийские 
источники! Армянские псевдоученые и политики 
поражают методами фальсификации: сначала 
они превращают хурритоязычных урартов в 
индоевропейских хаев и присваивают себе их 
наследие, а затем делают Арцах «армянским» 
названием на том лишь основании, что о нем, 
видите ли, упоминал новоиспеченный «хай» 
Сардури II. Между тем, консенсус, установленный 
в мировой историографии, заключается в 
том, что никакого отношения сегодняшние 
армяне (хаи) не имеют ни к топониму Арцах, 
ни к урартской цивилизации, ни к городу, 
основанному Аргишти I! В источниках Арцах-
Хачен, наряду с Сюником, Утиком, Пайтакараном, 
фигурирует как историческая область Кавказской 
Албании, на которую в какой-то короткий период 
исторического развития могло распространиться 
135ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
политическое влияние территориально 
расширившегося Армянского царства. Но ведь 
расширялись и сокращались, переживали расцвет 
и упадок много других империй, халифатов, царств. 
От этого все население контролируемых ими 
территорий не становилось, допустим, латинским, 
греческим, арабским, персидским, монгольским, 
османским, английским, французским и т.д. На 
завоеванных землях продолжали жить коренные 
народы. Об албанском населении правобережной 
Куры и, в частности, Арцаха, Пайтакарана, 
Утика, Сюника свидетельствовали даже сами 
армянские историки, такие как Раффи, Б.Ишханян, 
И.Орбели, Р.Суни, не говоря уже о десятках других 
авторитетных историков в мире. 
Так, в самом начале конфликта, в 1988 году 
армянский историк Рональд Суни из Мичиганского 
университета США отмечал о существовании 
в средние века на территории сегодняшнего 
Карабаха государства кавказских албанцев: «В 
средние века до переселения сюда из Средней Азии 
тюркских народов Закавказье было известно как 
Кавказская Албания. Кавказские албанцы не имели 
никакого отношения к балканским албанцам, это 
был христианский народ, близкий к армянам. 
После прихода в XI веке сельджуков албанцы в 
136 Рамиз Мехтиев |
нагорной части – то есть от Карабаха вплоть 
до границы с исторической Арменией, остались 
христианами и в итоге слились с армянами. 
Албанцы же в восточной части – от низменности 
вплоть до Каспия – смешались с тюркским 
населением и стали мусульманами»21. 
Чуть позже, в самый разгар военных 
действий, в своей книге «Взглядом в сторону 
Арарата» он писал: «С древнейших времен и в 
средние века Карабах был частью княжества 
кавказских албанцев. Эта самостоятельная 
этнорелигиозная группа, уже не существующая в 
наши дни, была обращена в христианство в IV веке 
и сблизилась с Армянской церковью. Со временем 
высший слой албанской элиты арменизировался. 
Когда в ХI веке сельджуки вторглись в Закавказье, 
начался процесс исламизации, результатом 
которого было обращение в мусульманскую веру 
населения низменной части Карабаха. Этот 
народ, являющийся прямым предком сегодняшних 
азербайджанцев, говорил на тюркском 
языке и принял ислам шиитского толка, 
распространенный в соседнем Иране. Нагорная же 
21  Suni, Ronald G. “What Happened in Soviet Armenia?” Middle East 
Report, No. 153, Islam and the State, July - August, 1988: p. 37.
137ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
часть осталась преимущественно христианской, 
и со временем карабахские албанцы слились с 
армянами. Центр албанской церкви Ганзасар 
стал одним из епископств Армянской церкви. 
Отголоски же некогда независимой национальной 
церкви сохранились лишь в статусе местного 
архиепископа, именуемого Католикосом»22.
Другой армянский автор Б.Ишханян писал, что 
«армяне, проживающие в Нагорном Карабахе, 
частью являются аборигенами, потомками 
древних албанцев, а частью – беженцами из 
Турции и Ирана, для которых азербайджанская 
земля стала убежищем от преследований и 
гонений»23.
Aрмянские ученые писали о Кавказской 
Албании как о «значительной, наравне с Арменией 
и Грузией, из стран кавказского культурного 
мира», а об албанском искусстве и архитектуре – 
как об отдельной теме в истории культуры Кавказа. 
По мнению армянского историка Иосифa Орбели, 
возвышение и расцвет Хаченского княжества, 
входившего в состав Албании, приходится на 
22  Suny, Ronald G. Looking Toward Ararat: Armenia in Modern History. 
Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, 1993, p. 193.
23   Алиев, Играр. Нагорный Карабах: История. Факты. События. 
Баку: Элм, 1989, сс. 73-74.
138 Рамиз Мехтиев |
XII–XIII вв.24 Тот же Орбели писал о захвате и 
колонизации армянскими феодалами областей 
современного Нагорного Карабаха25.
Армянский академик С.Т.Еремян писал: 
«Огромное количество христианских 
памятников, значительная 
часть которых относится к 
доарабскому периоду, сохранилась 
в арменизированной части 
древней Албании, на территории 
древнеалбанских областей Арцах 
и Утик, где в настоящее время 
в основном живет армянское 
население»26. 
Зачем этим армянским авторам 
нужно было честно писать об 
Арцахе как провинции Албании, 
если данный факт, как утверждают 
сегодня армянские руководители, 
является ложью, вымыслом и 
продуктом «азербайджанской 
пропаганды»? Если Арцах не имел к Албании 
отношения, а Гянджасарский монастырь был 
основан как чисто «армянский», то зачем нужно 
24  Орбели, Иосиф. «Гасан-Джалал – князь Хаченский.» В Избранные 
труды, создатель Иосиф Орбели, Ереван: АН Арм.ССР, 1993, стр. 146.
25  Орбели, Иосиф. Избранные труды. Ереван: АН Арм.ССР, 1963, сс. 
296, 297, 317, 347. 
26  Очерки истории СССР (III-IХ вв.). Москва: АН СССР, 1958, стр. 326.
Говоря в Горисе о 
едва превышающем 
пять процентов 
тюрко-мусульманском 
«кочевом» населении 
и «однородном» 
«коренном» 
армянском населении 
Карабаха, Серж 
Саргсян поменял 
местами армян и 
тюрок и не по адресу 
использовал слово 
«кочевники». 
139ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
было князю Гасан Джалалу, построившему этот 
храм, оставлять надпись, в котором он был назван 
«престольным собором Албании», воздвигнутым 
для «моего албанского народа»? Разве их кто-то 
заставлял это делать или, может быть, они были 
завербованы «азербайджанской разведкой»? 
Сами же армянские историки признавали 
албанский характер Арцаха!
Примечательно, что до начала армяно-
азербайджанского, нагорно-карабахского 
конфликта армянские историки не особо 
оспаривали вхождение Арцаха в состав 
Кавказской Албании и факт албанского населения 
этой области. В самом начале конфликта 
ереванские горе-историки попытались сперва 
и вовсе отрицать существование в античную 
и раннесредневековую эпоху государства 
Кавказская Албания и албанцев. Некоторые из 
них даже сравнили ее с мифической Атлантидой. 
Когда эти «историки» поняли, что поставили себя 
в академической среде в незавидное положение 
и превратились в объект насмешек со стороны 
ученых, они решили выйти из этой ситуации, 
впрочем, довольно оригинальным образом: 
признав неопровержимый факт существования 
Кавказской Албании, они слегка «подправили» 
ее границы, установив ее по реке Кура, то есть 
аккурат до того места, до которого простирались их 
140 Рамиз Мехтиев |
территориальные аппетиты. Надо полагать, если бы 
армянские претензии распространялись вплоть до 
Абшерона (а наиболее умалишенные и сегодня не 
перестают говорить об «армянском Бакуракерте»), 
то Албании пришлось бы «переместиться» за 
Каспий. И в таком случае ереванским «историкам» 
пришлось бы срочно придумывать объяснение, 
почему Албания «ошибочно» называется 
Кавказской, а не Среднеазиатской. В стремлении 
подчинить науку мифам и поставить ее на 
службу внешнеполитическим целям, армянская 
историческая наука порой доходит до абсурда.
В отличие от хаев, албанцы были автохтонами 
в Арцахе и других провинциях Кавказской 
Албании. История застает албанские племена 
на обеих берегах Куры. А.Е.Крымский 
очень точно заметил: «Страбон знал про 
одноплеменность «части» правобережного 
населения с левобережным».27 О том, что Кура 
протекает через Албанию, как отмечалось выше, 
свидетельствует прямое указание Страбона (XI, 
I, 5; XI, III, 2; XI, IV, 2; XI, VIII, 3)28.
27  Крымский, Агафангел Е. «Страницы из истории Северного или 
Кавказского Азербайджана (Классической Албании).» В Памяти 
академика Н.Я.Марра (1864-1934). Москва, 1938.
28  Крымский, Агафангел Е. «Страницы из истории Северного 
или Кавказского Азербайджана (Кавказская Албания).» В Сборник 
статей в честь Е.Ф.Ольденбурга. К 50-летию научно-общественной 
деятельности., сс. 289–290. Москва, 1934.
141ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
Албанское государство возникло 
приблизительно в IV–III вв. до н.э., и албанское 
население впервые упоминается в связи с 
событиями того времени. 29 С I в. н. э. Албанией 
правил парфянский род Аршакидов. Сообщая 
об этом периоде, как армянские, так и албанские 
источники свидетельствуют о том, что южная 
граница Албании проходила по реке Аракс30, т.е. 
все междуречье Куры и Аракса входило в состав 
Албанского государства. Именно здесь были 
расположены исторические земли Карабаха 
– Орхистена (Арцах), Цавдея, Отена, частично 
Араксена.
Армянский автор Мовсес Хоренаци, 
сведения которого подтверждает и албанский 
историк Моисей Каланкатуйский, сообщает об 
учреждении парфянским царем Валаршаком 
(очевидно Вологезом I (51/52–79/80 гг. н.э.), сыном 
Вонона II) наместничества «в великом, славном, 
многолюдном северо-восточном крае, вдоль 
большой реки по названию Кур, что прорезает 
обширную равнину, (назначив) Арана31, мужа 
именитого, первого во всех делах мудрости и 
29  Флавий, Арриан. Поход Александра. Москва: АМН СССР, 1962.
30  Мовсес Хоренаци. «История Армении». Москва, 1858; Каланка-
туйский Моисей. «История агван». Санкт-Петербург, 1861.
31  Один из случаев персонификации Мовсесом Хоренаци названия мес-
тности. Араном называлась область в восточной части междуречья 
Араза и Куры. Она называлась также Алванком, Алванией, Албанией.
142 Рамиз Мехтиев |
Не сами ли армяне (напр., 
А.М.Назаретян) голосовали 
на пленуме Кавбюро в 
июле 1921 года за то, чтобы 
Карабах остался в составе 
Азербайджана? Не сами ли 
лидеры карабахских армян 
(напр., Серо Мануцян) 
приветствовали это решение, 
отмечая: «Акт автономии 
в составе Азербайджана 
со стороны армянскиx 
крестьян встречен полным 
единодушием».
143ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
разума». Чуть ниже выясняется, что этим великим 
и славным краем была Албания: «Узнай, однако, 
и о людях Сисака, – ибо это великое и именитое 
племя мы забыли упомянуть в Первой книге, 
– которые унаследовали Алванскую равнину, 
включая ее обращенную к горам сторону от реки 
Ерасх32 до крепости, называемой Хнаракерт33. 
Страна же получила название Алвании из-за его 
кроткого нрава, ибо его называли «алу»34. И вот, 
один из его потомков, упомянутый именитый и 
доблестный Драя, и был назначен парфянином 
Валаршаком наместником-десятитысячником. 
Говорят, что племя утийцев и княжества 
гардманцев, цавдейцев и гаргарцев35 происходят 
от его отпрысков».36
Важно подчеркнуть, что данное признание 
исходит от албанофоба Мовсеса Хоренаци, 
который отзывался о жителях Арана (междуречье 
Араза и Куры) как «погрязших в постоянной 
32  Араз.
33  Агстафа.
34 «Aлу» – приятный, вкусный.
35  Все они – албанские племена, не имеющие к армянам отноше-
ния.
36 Xоренаци, Mовсес. «История Армении, книга 2, глава 8 
(Назначение второго (лица) в государстве из потомков Аждахака, 
царя маров), Ереван: Айастан, 1990.» Библиотека «Вехи». http://
www.vehi.net/istoriya/armenia/khorenaci/02.html (дата обращения: 30 
Октября 2010 г.).
144 Рамиз Мехтиев |
лживости алванских мужьях»37. Из числа названных 
албанских племен утии, цавдеи несомненно, 
а гаргары – почти несомненно обитали в зоне 
Карабаха. Следовательно, все правобережье Куры 
от излучины реки Араз до Агстафы занято было 
албанскими племенами. Источники определенно 
свидетельствуют об албанском происхождении 
племен Карабахского региона и принадлежности 
этой территории Албанскому государству.
Мовсес Хоренаци свидетельствует также об 
албанском населении провинции Пайтакаран, 
куда царь Трдат в сопровождении некоего 
Санатрука  отправил молодого миссионера 
Григориса, старшего сына Вртанеса, очевидно, 
для обращения местных жителей (их Хоренаци 
называет «варварами») в христианство. «Но когда 
пришла весть о кончине Трдата, варвары, по 
проискам самого Санатрука и некоторых других 
погрязших в постоянной лживости алванских 
мужей, убили блаженного, растоптав его 
копытами лошадей на поле Ватнеан близ моря, 
называемого Каспийским... Санатрук же, возложив 
на себя корону, завладел городом Пайтакараном и 
37  —. «История Армении, книга 3, глава 3 (Кончина святого 
Григориса от рук варваров). Ереван: Айастан, 1990.» Библиотека 
«Вехи». http://www.vehi.net/istoriya/armenia/khorenaci/03.html (дата 
обращения: 30 Октября  2010 г.).
145ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
замышлял захватить власть над всей Арменией 
при помощи чужих народов». Под «чужими 
народами», помогавшими Санатруку овладеть 
Пайтакараном, Мовсес Хоренаци, несомненно, 
имеет в виду непокорное местное население – 
«алванских мужей».38
Один из наиболее авторитетных западных 
специалистов Кавказской Албании, профессор 
Оксфордского университета Чарльз Доусет 
писал: «Католикосом Джоном и Товма Аркруни 
упомянуты три албанских князя среди 
пленников, взятых Бога Аль-Кабиром в 854 
году: князь Хачена Атрнерсех, князь Шаки Сахл, 
сын Смбата, и Эсай Абу Муса, князь Ктиша в 
Арцахе»39. Год спустя ученый написал следующее: 
«В Албании часть старинной области Арцаха 
Хачен сохранил свою независимость. Известно, 
что Мхитар составил свод законов частично 
по просьбе правителя – князя Вахтанга»40. 
Кавказовед В.Ф.Минорский писал, что территория 
сегодняшней Азербайджанской ССР примерно 
совпадает с древней Кавказской Албанией.41
38  Ibid.
39  Dowsett, Charles. J. F. “The Albanian Chronicle of Mxit’ar Gos.” Bulle-
tin of the School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London, Vol. 
21, No. 1/3, 1958: 463.
40   Ibid., p. 475.
41  Minorsky, Vladimir. “Caucasica IV.” Bulletin of the School of Oriental 
and African Studies, University of London, Vol. 15, No. 3., 1953: p. 504.
146 Рамиз Мехтиев |
После падения Албанского самостоятельного 
государства Карабах, будучи частью 
географического и политического понятия 
Азербайджан, входил в состав азербайджанского 
государства Саджидов; в Х в. – в состав государства 
Саларидов; в ХI–ХII вв. был частью государства 
Шеддадидов; в ХII–ХIII вв. Карабах составлял 
часть aзербайджанского государства Атабеков-
Ильденизидов. Позже он входит в состав государств 
Гарагоюнлу, Аггоюнлу, а в ХVI–ХVII вв. Карабах, 
будучи в составе Карабахского беглярбегства, 
входит в состав тюркского государства Сефевидов. 
Во второй половине XVIII в. Карабах входит в 
состав Карабахского ханства, в составе которого и 
был присоединен в начале ХIХ в. к России.
Христианские памятники Азербайджана всегда 
были объектом фальсификаций со стороны 
армянского духовенства и связанной с ним науки. 
Армянская церковь, испокон веков ведущая борьбу 
с албанской церковью, планомерно добивалась 
ее подчинения, а затем и ликвидации. Частью 
этой политики было уничтожение албанских 
рукописей и эпиграфики. На христианских 
архитектурных памятниках Азербайджана нет 
армяноязычной эпиграфики вплоть до XI века 
(если только современные камнетесы не успели 
147ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
выдолбить новые «древние» армянские надписи 
на памятниках оккупированной территории). 
Более ранние албанские надписи были стерты 
после подчинения албанской церкви армянской 
по решению русского Синода в 1836 г. Наличие 
армяноязычной эпиграфики и исторических 
письменных источников после XI века говорит 
лишь о конфессиональной принадлежности их 
авторов, но не  этнической.
В 1975–76 гг. при строительстве дороги 
Амасия – Газанчы официальные власти Армении 
сровняли с землей старинное кладбище, которое 
азербайджанское население села Геллу (Озерное) 
Амассийского района считали христианским из-
за надгробных крестов и высеченных надписей, 
которые не были похожи на армянские кресты и 
буквы армянского алфавита. Ученые-специалисты 
и заведующий отделом пропаганды и агитации 
Амассийского райкома компартии Армаис 
Арутунян, извлекая из могил человеческие останки, 
изучали их антропологические характеристики. 
Через некоторое время надгробные памятники 
полностью разрушили и сровняли с землей. На 
вопрос жителей, почему вы разрушаете могилы 
своих предков, А. Арутунян отвечал, что это, мол, 
не армянские могилы. Вот так уничтожились следы 
148 Рамиз Мехтиев |
неармянского христианского населения Албании. 
Памятники христианской архитектуры 
Азербайджана, в том числе и Карабаха, говорят 
сами за себя, и их этническую и культурную 
принадлежность подтверждают труды албанских 
историков Моисея Каланкатуйского и Киракоса 
Гандзакского. Это памятники, построенные 
албанскими царями и 
князьями. Среди них – руины 
ранних христианских храмов, 
воздвигнутых царем Албании 
Вачаганом Благочестивым, 
который, по сведениям Моисея 
Каланкатуйского, построил 
столько церквей, «сколько дней 
в году». Много памятников 
архитектуры было построено 
князям Джаванширом. Они 
построены в XII–XIII веках, в период 
расцвета албанских княжеств, 
среди которых особенно выделялoсь Хаченское. 
Представитель этой ветви Гасан Джалал сумел за 
короткий период объединить албанские княжества 
и получил титул царя Албании. Построенный им 
Гянджасарский храм стал центром албанского 
католикосата. Монастырский комплекс Худаванк 
В Армении 
надеются, что им 
удастся присоединить 
к себе Нагорный 
Карабах, бездарно 
сфальсифицировав 
историю и «доказав» 
международным 
организациям, что это 
якобы древнеармянская 
земля. 
149ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
был построен албанскими хаченскими князьями 
Гасаном Великим, его сыном Вахтангом и его 
женой Арзу Хатун – дочерью «великого князя 
князей Курда».
Монастырь святого Елисея носил имя 
просветителя Албании. Он существует со 
времени правления албанского царя Вачагана 
Благочестивого, и именно здесь 
в одной из часовен находится его 
могила. Поминальный монастырь 
Хатираванк был построен 
как усыпальница еще одной 
албанской княжеской семьи. 
История этих и других монастырей 
и церквей Карабаха тесно 
связана с историей Кавказской 
Албании, начиная с глубокой 
древности и до 1836 года, когда 
был упразднен Гянджасарский 
католикосат. Их основатели – 
албанские правители и князья. Их 
названия красноречиво говорят об их этнической 
принадлежности. Армянский исследователь 
С.Лисицян вынужден был признать, что «судя по 
названиям современных монастырей Нагорного 
Карабаха, деятельность чисто армянских святых 
Право нации на 
самоопределение, 
которое Азербайджан 
поддерживает, 
не предполагает 
вседозволенность и 
право менять границы, 
как вздумается. 
Манера трактовки 
этого права, которую 
позволяют себе в 
Армении, недопустима.
150 Рамиз Мехтиев |
проявилась здесь слабо». Даже в ХХ веке 
после арменизации христианского населения 
Карабаха здесь не почитали чисто армянских 
святых. Естественно, что в более ранние века 
монастыри и церква, посвященные армянским 
святым в Карабахе, и вовсе отсутствовали. 
Албанские монастыри и церква посвящались 
общехристианским или местным албанским 
святым, что и отличает их от армянских.
Сегодня на оккупированных армянами землях 
осуществляется культурный террор. Сепаратистами 
разрушен историко-архитектурный заповедник 
– средневековый азербайджанский город Шуша. 
Здесь разрушены мечети, жилые дома XVIII–XIX 
веков, памятники гражданской и оборонительной 
архитектуры. В зоне оккупации остались 
выдающиеся памятники гражданской архитектуры 
– одиннадцатипролетный и пятнадцатипролетный 
мосты на Худаферинской переправе через реку 
Араз. Разрушены многочисленные мечети, 
в том числе и построенные выдающимся 
азербайджанским архитектором Кербалаи Сефи 
ханом Карабаги, мосты, бани, мемориальныe 
сооружения, мавзолеи Мелик Аждара ХII–ХIII 
вв., Мир Али ХIV в., Хачын Дорбатлы ХIV в., 
Шейха Бабаин ХIII в., Панах хана ХVII в. и другие. 
151ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
Объектами уничтожения стали также кладбища 
азербайджанцев. Все это – результат культурного 
террора и планомерного уничтожения следов 
азербайджанцев на оккупированных территориях.
Если по отношению к памятникам ислама 
проводится политика террора, то другая часть 
азербайджанского культурного наследия – 
памятники христианской архитектуры Кавказской 
Албании – подвергаются разрушению или 
же арменизации.  Христианские храмы и 
монастырские комплексы, построенные 
албанскими князьями и  связанные с историей 
Кавказской Албании, становятся «армянскими». 
Армянские исследователи проводят на этих 
памятниках так называемые «реставрационные» 
работы, направленные на их арменизацию. Это 
незаконные работы, так как они проводятся на 
оккупированной территории, на чужих памятниках 
и без участия ученых из Азербайджана. С них 
стираются следы принадлежности к албанской 
культуре. Под видом «реставрационных» 
работ ведутся фальсификация и уничтожение 
характерных черт албанской карабахской 
архитектуры. К сожалению, к этим работам иногда 
привлекаются и зарубежные специалисты, участие 
которых, по мнению оккупантов, должно придать 
152 Рамиз Мехтиев |
«научную достоверность» их измышлениям.
Армяне (хаи) до середины XV века на Южном 
Кавказе почти не жили. В 1441 году правитель 
тюркско-азербайджанского государства 
Гарагоюнлу Джаханшах перенес центр 
армянского католикосата из киликийского города 
Сис в располагавшийся недалеко от полностью 
тюрконаселенного Иревана монастырь Уч-
Кился (или Уч-Муадзин), который в древности 
был албанским монастырем. Позднее армяне 
исказили название Уч-Муадзин и стали называть 
его «Эчмиадзин». В армянском языке это 
слово ничего не означает (разумеется, если не 
подогнать под него какое-нибудь армянское 
слово), в то время как на азербайджанском 
тюркском языке оно означает «три муадзина» 
(муадзин по-арабски – «читающий азан»). В 
содержащихся в Матенадаране средневековых 
документах название храма упоминается именно 
как «Уч-Кился»42. С перенесением армянского 
католикосата в Уч-Кился сюда устремились 
армянские миссионеры, у которых появилась 
возможность для распространения своего влияния 
на Южном Кавказе. Вскоре сам монастырь 
42 Персидские документы Матенадарана (указы, сост. А.Д.Папазян). 
Вып. I (XV–XVII вв.). Ереван, 1956; Персидские документы Матенадарана 
(указы, сост. А.Д.Папазян). Вып.II (1601–1650 гг.) Ереван, 1959.
153ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
превратился в религиозный центр армян. Вплоть 
до присоединения этих земель к России в первой 
половине XIX века за пределами Уч-Кился армян в 
западном Закавказье было ничтожно мало.
До своего переселения на Южный Кавказ, где 
до них преобладало местное тюркское население, 
хаи жили вокруг озера Ван, куда они, впрочем, 
тоже прибыли из Балкан.  Древнегреческий 
историк Геродот писал, что предки армян были 
переселенцами из Фригийской земли43. Данный 
факт признается и самими армянскими учеными. 
В частности, М.Г.Нерсисян, под редакцией 
которого вышла «История армянского народа», 
констатирует следующее: «В период известных 
переселений «народов моря» (XIII–XII вв. до 
н.э.) армены проникли в Малую Азию вместе с 
родственными им фрако-фригийскими племенами 
из Балкан»44. С этим согласен и А.Пастрмачян, 
считающий, что переселение армян как одного 
из фригийских племен индоевропейского 
происхождения с Балкан в Малую Азию является 
фактом, общепринятым в научном мире45, правда, 
43  Геродот. История в девяти книгах. Ленинград: Наука, 1972, стр. 
334.
44  История армянского народа с древнейших времен до наших 
дней. П/р проф. М.Нерсисяна. Ереван: АН Арм.ССР, 1980, стр. 27.
45  Pastermadjian, Herand. Histoire de l’Armenie. Paris (1st edn, 1949, 
2nd edn, 1964), 1949, p. 23.
154 Рамиз Мехтиев |
считает, что переселение это произошло на 6 
веков позже – в VII–VI вв. до н.э., что признается 
большинством исследователей.
Видный русский востоковед И.М.Дьяконов 
писал, что «первоначальные носители предка 
армянского языка пришли на Армянское Нагорье 
в качестве подвижных скотоводов с подсобным 
земледелием, не знавших классового общества, а 
с природой Нагорья и с социальными условиями 
раннеклассового общества они знакомились 
у автохтонов, тогда еще не перешедших на 
армянский язык».46
Ничего общего с наукой и историческими 
фактами не имеет совершенно абсурдное 
заявление армянского президента о том, что 
население Карабаха на протяжении тысячелетий 
было якобы «однородным армянским», а «турко-
мусульманские кочевые племена начали селиться 
здесь только во второй половине XVIII века, 
численность которых в начале прошлого века 
едва достигала 5% от общего числа населения». 
Для пущей убедительности Саргсян сослался на 
таинственные «турецкие официальные источники 
XVIII века». Разумеется, дополнительного уточнения 
46 Дьяконов, Игорь М. «К преистории армянского языка (о фактах, 
свидетельствах и логике).» Историко-филологический журнал Но. 4, 
1983: стр. 166.
155ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
о том, какие именно источники имеет в виду автор 
этой антинаучной ахинеи, не последовало, так как 
за стенами армянских лабораторий исторической 
фальсификации таких источников нет. Tурецкие 
архивы, в действительности, свидетельствуют 
о противоположном. В ноябре 2009 года 
Центральное управление государственным 
архивом при Кабинете министров Турции издало 
660-страничную книгу «Карабах в османских 
документах», составленную на основе архивных 
материалов. Книга состоит из двух частей – 
«Политические, военные и дипломатические 
отношения» и «Переселение», где на основе 
архивных документов приводятся доказательства 
о переселении армян в Карабах. В османских 
архивах нет никакого упоминания об армянах 
Карабаха, а все документы говорят о процессе 
заселения армянами Карабаха в XVII–XIX вв. и 
изменения этнического составa населения.
«Открытие» Саргсянa, мягко говоря, не совсем 
соотносится с тем, о чем пишут сами армянские 
историки. К примеру, Джордж Бурнутян отмечает: 
«Ряд армянских историков, говоря о статистике 
после 1830-х гг., неверно оценивает количество 
армян в Восточной Армении в годы персидского 
владения, приводя цифру от 30 до 50 процентов 
от общего населения (Серж Саргсян оценил 
156 Рамиз Мехтиев |
количество армян в 95% от общего населения!). 
В действительности же, согласно официальным 
статистическим данным, после российского 
завоевания армяне с трудом дотягивали до 
20 процентов общего населения Восточной 
Армении, в то время как мусульмане составляли 
более 80 процентов. В любом случае, до 
российского покорения армяне здесь никогда 
не были в большинстве. Несмотря на то, что 
Камеральное Описание свидетельствует об 
армянском большинстве в нескольких махалах 
Восточной Армении, это изменение произошло 
уже после эмиграции более 35 тысяч мусульман 
из этого региона. Таким образом, нет никаких 
свидетельств армянского большинства ни в 
одном округе в годы персидской администрации. 
Пожалуй, единственным местом, где армяне 
составляли на местном уровне большинство, 
был Карбибасарский махал, в котором 
располaгался армянский духовный центр Уч-
килиса (Эчмиадзин). С отъездом тысяч мусульман 
и прибытием сюда из Персии и Османской 
Империи 57 тысяч армянских иммигрантов к 
1832 году христианское населениe значительно 
выросло и сравнялось с мусульманским. И все же 
только после русско-турецких войн 1855–56 и 
1877–78 гг., в результате которых в регион из 
157ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
Османской Империи прибыли еще больше армян, 
a отсюда уехали еще больше мусульман, армяне 
наконец достигли здесь большинства населения. 
И даже после этого вплоть до начала XX века 
город Иреван оставался преимущественно 
мусульманским»47.
Приведя статистические данные, согласно 
которым с 1826 по 1832 гг. количество мусульман 
в Иреванском и Нахчыванском ханствах 
сократилось почти на треть, а количество армян за 
счет переселенцев возросло в 3,5 раза, Бурнутян 
далее отмечает: «Как видно из статистики, до 
российского завоевания армяне составляли около 
20 процентов общего населения Восточной 
Армении, а мусульмане – 80 процентов. После 
российской аннексии из Персии и Османской 
Империи сюда прибыли 57 тысяч армянских 
иммигрантов, и 35 тысяч мусульман покинули 
Восточную Армению. К 1832 году армяне 
составили половину общего населения».48
До заключения Туркманчайского договора 
армян в Карабахском ханстве, согласно 
47 Bournoutian, George A. “The Ethnic Composition and the Socio-Eco-
nomic Condition of Eastern Armenia in the First Half of the Nineteenth 
Century.” In Transcaucasia, Nationalism and Social Change: Essays in the 
History of Armenia, Azerbaijan, and Georgia, by Ronald Grigor Suny, pp. 
77-80. Ann Harbor : University of Michigan Press, 1996.
48 Ibid., p. 79.
158 Рамиз Мехтиев |
российским статистическим данным, было еще 
меньше. «Согласно российской переписи, в 1823 
году армяне составляли 9 процентов от общего 
населения Карабаха (остальные 91 процент 
были зарегистрированы как мусульмане), в 1832 
году – 35 процентов, а в 1880 году достигли 
уже большинства – 53 процента», – отмечает 
шведский автор Сванте Корнелл.49
После заключения в 1828 году Туркманчайского 
договора началось массовое переселение армян 
из Персии и восточных областей Османской 
Империи в Иреван, Нахчыван и Карабах. 
Операцией руководил русский дипломат и поэт 
Александр Грибоедов, который в своей «Записке 
о переселении армян из Персии в наши области» 
писал: «Армяне большей частью поселены на 
землях помещичьих мусульманских. Летом 
это еще можно было допустить. Хозяева, 
мусульмане, большей частью находились на 
кочевьях и мало имели случаев сообщаться с 
иноверными пришельцами». При этом Грибоедов 
предупреждал о возможных в будущем 
конфликтах между армянскими пришельцами и 
местными мусульманами (как видно из статистики 
49 Cornell, Svante. Small Nations and Great Powers: A study of Ethnopo-
litical Confl ict in the Caucasus. Surrey: Curzon Press, 2001, p. 68.
159ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
Камерального Описания, мусульманами были 
в основном тюрки, то есть азербайджанцы): 
«Также мы с ним (князем Аргутинским) немало 
рассуждали о внушениях, которые нужно сделать 
мусульманам, чтобы помирить их с нынешним их 
отягощением, которое не будет долговременно 
и искоренит из них опасение насчет того, что 
армяне завладеют навсегда землями, куда их на 
первый раз пустили»50!
Переселение армян в Карабах, Иреван и 
Нахчыван было детально описано русским 
писателeм и историкoм С.Н.Глинкoй в «Описании 
переселения армян аддербиджанских в пределы 
России, с кратким предварительным изложением 
исторических времен Армении», изданном в 1831 
году в Москве. С 26 февраля по 11 июня 1828 
года, то есть в течение трех с половиной месяцев, 
сюда из Персии было переселено 8249 армянских 
семейств, или, по меньшей мере, 40 тысяч армян51. 
В следующие несколько лет в эти три бывших 
ханства из Османской Империи было переселено 
50  Грибоедов, Александр С. «Записка о переселении армян из Пер-
сии в наши области.» Фундаментальная электронная библиотека 
“Русская литература и фольклор”. http://feb-web.ru/feb/griboed/
texts/piks3/3_4_v3.htm (дата обращения: 30 Октября 2010 г.).
51 Глинка, Сергей Н. Описание переселения армян аддербиджанских 
в пределы России, с кратким предварительным изложением 
исторических времен Армении. Москва, 1831, стр. 131.
160 Рамиз Мехтиев |
еще 90 тысяч армян52.
В 1911 году еще один русский автор, Н.Шавров, 
писал: «Из живущих в настоящее время в Закавказье 
1 миллиона 300 тысяч армян свыше одного 
миллиона не является коренным населением, 
а переселено нами». «Армяне размещались в 
основном на благодатных землях Елизаветполя и 
Эриванской губернии, где их было ничтожно мало. 
Нагорная часть Елизаветпольской губернии 
(Нагорный-Карабах) и берега озера Гейча были 
заселены этими армянами»53.
Исторический факт переселения армян в 
Карабах, Иреван и Нахчыван нашел отражение 
даже в работах деятелей искусств, в частности, 
в картине известного русского художника 
В.И.Машкова, написанной в 1828 году и ярко 
отразившей тему массового переселения армян 
из Персии на северный берег р. Араз.
Таким образом, говоря в Горисе о едва 
превышающем пять процентов тюрко-
мусульманском «кочевом» населении и 
«однородном» «коренном» армянском населении 
52  Акты Кавказской Археографической Комиссии (АКАК), т. VII, док. 
829. Тифлис, 1878, стр. 845.
53 Шавров, Николай И. Новая угроза русскому делу в Закавказье: 
предстоящая распродажа Мугани инородцам. Санкт-Петербург: СПб, 
1911, сс. 59-61.
161ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
Карабаха, Серж Саргсян поменял местами 
армян и тюрок и не по адресу использовал 
слово «кочевники». Статистические данные и 
описания современников тех событий, авторов 
которых вряд ли можно заподозрить в службе 
«азербайджанской пропаганде», свидетельствуют 
о подавляющем численном превосходстве 
тюркского населения над армянским до 
Туркманчайского договора и резком росте 
армянского населения в результате их переселения 
в Карабах и сегодняшнюю Армению (Иреванское 
ханство) после присоединения этих земель к 
России. Это подтверждают и сами армянские 
историки. Никто из них не пишет о переселении 
«тюркских кочевников» на «древнеармянские» 
земли и «однородном армянском» населении этих 
областей. Они подробно и с точностью фиксируют 
противоположные события. 
Сегодняшние руководители Армении вряд 
ли найдут в Карабахе памятник, воздвигнутый к 
годовщине прибытия сюда «тюрко-мусульманских 
кочевников». Зато в 1978 году в селе Маргушеван 
Агдеринского района был открыт памятник к 
150-летию переселения в Карабах совершенно 
иных пришельцев. Что стало с этим монументом 
после начала конфликта, и зачем землякам 
162 Рамиз Мехтиев |
Саргсяна понадобилось в спешном порядке 
его разрушить, президент Армении расскажет 
своим журналистам из диаспоры в следующий 
раз. И заодно объяснит, почему в 1805 году 
Tрактат о вхождении Карабаха в состав России 
(Кюрекчайский договор)54 был подписан не каким-
нибудь армянским князем, а заключен между 
тюркским (азербайджанским) ханом Ибрагимом 
Халилом и представителем российского 
императора генералом Цициановым. Наверное, 
потому что хан Ибрагим Халил представлял 
«появившееся там недавно» «пятипроцентное 
кочевое население». 
По данным российской статистики, примерно в 
это время (1810 г.) население Карабаха состояло 
из 9500 тюркских и 2500 армянских семей55. 
Неудивительно, что в тексте Трактата нет, и не 
могло быть, слова «Армения» или «армяне». Тем не 
менее много лет спустя в Армении создадут миф 
о «добровольном вхождении армян Карабаха» в 
состав России.
54 «Трактат между Карабахским ханом и Российской Империей о 
переходе ханства под власть России от 14 мая 1805 г.» azeri.ru. http://
azeri.ru/az/karabakh/412/ (дата обращения: 16 Августа 2010 г.).
55  Акты Кавказской Археографической Комиссии, т. IV. Изданъ под 
редакциею председателя комиссии дсс. А.Д.Берже, док. 37. Тифлис: 
Типография главного управления наместника Кавказского, 1870, сс. 
38-39.
163ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
Академик Ц.П.Агаян в своем труде, 
посвященном азербайджанскому просветителю 
А.А.Бакиханову, опубликовал карту северо-
азербайджанских ханств XVIII века56. Однако 
армянский академик не включил в нее территорию 
одного из азербайджанских ханств, а именно 
Иреванского ханства. При этом в приведенном к 
карте примечании Агаян отметил, что эту карту 
он взял из книги П.И.Ковалевского «Завоевание 
Кавказа Россией»57 в том виде, в каком она 
была. Агаян сказал неправду, поскольку в карте, 
опубликованной в работе Ковалевского, была 
представлена территория всех ханств, в том числе 
и Иреванского ханства. Таков наглядный пример 
изощренного армянского фальсификаторства!
21 марта 1828 года – в день празднования 
азербайджанскими тюрками праздника 
Новруз – император Николай I своим указом 
упразднил существовавшие на протяжении 
веков Иреванское и Нахчыванское ханства и 
образовал на этих территориях так называемую 
«Армянскую область» для переселенных сюда из 
56 Агаян, Цатур П. А.Бакиханов. Баку: АН Азерб. ССР, 1948, стр. 9.
57 Ковалевский, Павел И. Завоевание Кавказа Россией (Исторический 
очерк), (без выходных данных). Санкт-Петербург: СПб., 1911, сс. 65, 
113.
164 Рамиз Мехтиев |
Ирана и Турции армян58. Тем самым, был сделан 
первый шаг на пути создания для армянских 
переселенцев новой родины на азербайджанских 
землях Иреванского и Нахчыванского ханств.
Не мешало бы напомнить господину Сержу 
Саргсяну и его идейно-политическим соратникам, 
что 28 мая 1918 года армяне объявили о создании 
независимого государства, не имея политического 
центра. 29 мая 1918 года только что провозгла-
шенная Азербайджанская Демократическая 
Республика под давлением великих держав 
вынуждена была уступить армянам древний 
азербайджанский город Иреван с прилегающей 
к нему территорией с площадью примерно 9,5 
тыс. кв. км. Кстати, сегодня территория Армении 
составляет более 29 тыс. кв. км. Спрашивается, 
за счет кого? Так вот, на этой подаренной 
армянам территории Северного Азербайджана, 
которая в прошлом принадлежала Иреванскому 
ханству, и было создано современное армянское 
государство. 
Председатель Кабинета Министров АДР 
Фатали Хан Хойский предполагал, что на этом все 
58 Полное собрание законов Российской империи (ПСЗРИ). Собрание 
второе, т. III, 1828. Санкт-Петербург: СПб, 1830; Акты Кавказской 
Археографической Комиссии, т. VII, док. 437, Тифлис, 1878, стр. 487.
165ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
территориальные притязания армян закончатся. 
Но он глубоко ошибался. Судьба его сложилась так, 
что после падения АДР ему не суждено было видеть 
того, как дальше развивается экспансионистская 
политика  Армении, ибо 19 июня 1920 года в рамках 
операции партии «Дашнакцутюн» «Немезис» по 
уничтожению руководителей Османской Империи 
и Азербайджанской Демократической Республики 
он был убит в Тбилиси армянскими террористами-
дашнакцаканами Арамом Ерканяном и Мисаком 
Киракосяном.
Все это – исторические факты, основанные на 
достоверных архивных материалах, свидетельствах 
современников и историков. Как нейтральных, 
так и армянских. Как можно их игнорировать 
или, что еще хуже, отвергать, называя их 
«азербайджанскими фальсификациями»? Может 
это «азербайджанцы», вместо А.Микояна, писали 
в 1919 году Ленину: «Дашнаки, агенты армянского 
правительства, добиваются присоединения 
Карабаха к Армении. Но это для населения 
Карабаха значило бы лишиться источника своей 
жизни в Баку и связаться с Эриванью, с которой 
никогда и ни в чем не были связаны. Армянское 
крестьянство на пятом съезде решило 
166 Рамиз Мехтиев |
присоединиться к Азербайджану».59 Не сами ли 
армяне (напр., А.М.Назаретян) голосовали на 
пленуме Кавбюро в июле 1921 года за то, чтобы 
Карабах остался в составе Азербайджана? Не 
сами ли лидеры карабахских армян (напр., Серо 
Мануцян) приветствовали это решение, отмечая: 
«Акт автономии в составе Азербайджана со 
стороны армянскиx крестьян встречен полным 
единодушием». Несмотря на публикацию 
архивных документов, в которых говорится о 
том, что Карабах остался в 1921 году в пределах 
Азербайджана, руководители сегодняшней 
Армении продолжают «пиарить» на весь мир 
созданный ими миф о «выделении» Сталиным 
Карабаха из состава Армении и «передаче» его 
Азербайджану, надеясь на то, что им удастся 
ввести в заблуждение мировое сообщество и 
вызвать к себе сочувствие. Между тем, Сталин и 
Чичерин были сторонниками передачи Карабаха 
Армении.
Автономная область в Нагорном Карабахе 
являлась искусственным образованием, границы 
которого были проведены путем произвольного 
объединения локально расположенных здесь 
59 Центральный партийный архив Института марксизма-
ленинизма (ЦПА ИМЛ), ф. 461, оп. 1, ед.хр.4525, л. 1. 
167ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
азербайджанских селений с уже преобладающим к 
тому времени армянским населением. И здесь дело 
доходило до абсурда. Согласно постановлению 
Президиума ЦК АКП(б) от 16 сентября 1923 года, в 
Карабах выехала комиссия в составе И.Довлатова, 
М.Багирова и Э.Ханбудагова для обследования 
положения дел в регионе. Позже, по результатам 
обследования, М.Д.Багиров в докладной записке 
от 8 октября 1923 г. в ЦК АКП(б) писал: «В 
районе Ханкенди, Шуша и Абдалар находится 
ряд мусульманских селений: Халфалы, Зарыслы, 
Мусульманлар и ряд других с числом населения до 
8000 душ. Гораздо легче управлять ими с Абдалар, 
чем с Ханкенди. Только потому, что среди этих 
мусульманских сел находится село Каладараси 
с числом населения около 1150 душ-армян, весь 
этот район присоединили почему-то к Ханкенди, 
плюс к этому и Шушу с числом  населения около 
10.000 душ тоже мусульман.  В Джеванширском 
уезде среди трех десятков мусульманских сел 
находится одно армянское селение, которое 
почему-то через голову этих мусульманских 
сел присоединили к Ханкенди»60. Как видно из 
отчетов комиссии, армянам, которые постоянно 
60 Архив политических документов при Управлении делами 
Президента Азербайджанской Республики (АПДУДПАР), ф.1, оп.74, 
д.136, сс. 4-8.
168 Рамиз Мехтиев |
жаловались на «малоземелье», передавались 
даже территории мусульманских кладбищ.
В момент своего образования Автономная 
Область Нагорного Карабаха имела площадь в 
4160,5 кв.км.61 Только за два года (1923–1925) из 
земельного фонда Азербайджанской ССР в состав 
АОНК было передано 16 тысяч десятин земли62. 
Tерритория АОНК непрерывно расширялась и, 
по данным на 1 января 1933 года, составила уже 
4431,7 кв.км.63
За годы советской власти самой Армении 
были переданы обширные земли, входившие 
в состав Азербайджанской ССР. Вскоре после 
установления советской власти в Армении в 
декабре 1920 года ей был передан Зангезур. 
Затем, через два года, к теперь уже «армянскому» 
Зангезуру были переданы дополнительные земли. 
В справке от 22 октября 1922 года, подготовленной 
Наркоматом земледелия Азербайджанской ССР, 
сообщалось: «Вся территория Азербайджанской 
61  Азербайджанская сельскохозяйственная перепись 1921 г. 
Итоги по сельским обществам во вновь образованных уездах 
АССР, Нагорного Карабаха и по тем (основным) уездам, в которых 
произошли изменения границ. Т. III. Вып. XVII. Баку: АзЦСУ, 1924, стр. 9.
62  К истории образования Нагорно-Карабахской Автономной 
Области Азербайджанской ССР 1918–1925. Документы и материалы. 
Баку: Азернешр, 1989, стр. 295.
63  Социалистическое строительство АССР. Статистический 
сборник. Баку: Союзоргучет, 1935, стр. 9.
169ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
ССР составляла 7.989.105 десятин. Из указанной 
общей площади: а) от Газахского уезда отошло 
к Армении 379.984 десятин, б) от бывшего 
Зангезурского уезда отошло к Армении 405.000 
десятин земли»64.
В отчете  управления землеустройства 
Наркомата земледелия за 1920–1923 гг. говорится: 
«Часть летних пастбищ до 150.000 десятин, 
находившихся ранее в границах Зангезурского, 
Джеванширского и Газахского уездов и 
состоявших в обладании Азербайджана, ныне 
с передачей Армении вошли в зону, спорную 
между этими двумя республиками, ввиду чего 
исконные пользователи этими пастбищами – 
азербайджанские скотоводы, при перекочевке на 
них испытывают крупные неудобства»65.
18 февраля 1929 года Армении был передан 
последний кусок исторически азербайджанского 
Зангезура – его южная оконечность, выходящая к 
границе с Ираном. Постановлением Закавказского 
ЦИК от 18 февраля  1929 года ей были переданы 
территории низменного Карабаха – селения 
Нюведи, Ейнадзор и Тугут Джебраильского уезда 
64 Государственный Архив Азербайджанской Республики (ГААР), 
ф.28, оп.1, д.155, сс. 19-20.
65  Государственный Архив Азербайджанской Республики (ГААР), 
ф.2502, оп.1, д.20, лл. 56–57.
170 Рамиз Мехтиев |
Азербайджанской ССР66, а также село Кяркиван 
Ордубадского уезда и часть земель села Килид67, 
после чего на новых «армянских» землях с 
азербайджанским населением был искусственно 
создан несуществовавший доселе Мегринский 
уезд Армянской ССР. Так было завершено отделение 
Нахчывана от большей части Азербайджана и 
создание искусственного географического клина 
внутри тюркского мира. Тем же постановлением 
Армении были переданы другие села Нахчывана: 
Гурдгулаг, Горадиз, Хачик, Агбин, Агхач, Алмалы, 
Дагалмалы, Итгыран, Султанбей. Таким образом, 
к 1933 году территория Нахчыванской автономии 
сократилась от первоначальных 5988 кв.км.68, 
определенных Карсским договором, до 5329,6 
кв.км.69
В Армении не стесняются даже отрицать 
факты из новейшей, совершенно недавней 
истории, свидетелями которых является живущее 
сегодня поколение, искажать хронологию, 
менять местами причину и следствие. К примеру, 
66  Государственный Архив Азербайджанской Республики (ГААР), 
ф.2502, оп.1, д.26, л. 98 об.
67  Государственный Архив Азербайджанской Республики (ГААР), 
ф.2502, оп.2, д.26, л. 99.
68  Аzərbaycan Xalq Cümhuriyyəti Ensiklopediyası. II cild. Bakı: Lider, 
2005, s. 250.
69  Социалистическое строительство АССР. Статистический 
сборник. Баку: Союзоргучет, 1935, стр. 9.
171ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
армяне везде говорят о погромах в Сумгайыте, 
Кировабаде и Баку, но предпочитают молчать о 
том, что они стоят за погромами и убийствами 
в Гафане, Мегри, Аскеране, Гукарке, в ходе 
которых пострадало намного больше жителей 
Армении азербайджанской национальности, чем 
армян – в азербайджанских городах. Несмотря 
на неопровержимые доказательства, показания 
свидетелей и пострадавших, нашедших отражение 
в материалах союзной прокуратуры, в Армении 
предпочитают не упоминать (а иной раз и вовсе 
отрицают и называют «выдумкой») факт участия 
самих армян в убийствах своих соплеменников 
в Сумгайыте и других городах. Был ли хотя бы 
один азербайджанец, принимавший участие 
в погромах против своих соплеменников в 
Гукарке и других районах Армении, наподобие 
сумгайытского убийцы Э.Григоряна? Нашелся 
ли хотя бы один житель Армении, укрывший у 
себя азербайджанца и спасший жизнь соседа? 
Воздвигнув обелиск в память погибших в 
результате авиакатастрофы шести югославских 
спасателей, в Армении даже не выразили (хотя 
бы ради элементарного приличия) устное 
соболезнование семьям 79 азербайджанских 
спасателей, спешивших на помощь в зону 
172 Рамиз Мехтиев |
стихийного бедствия в 1988 году и погибших в 
результате непонятных и противоречивых команд 
армянских авиадиспетчеров, действия которых 
так и не были расследованы.
Попытки вывести бывшую НКАО из состава 
Азербайджана в последние годы существования 
союзного государства носили односторонний 
характер, противоречили ряду статей Конституции 
СССР и нарушали положения Закона СССР от 3 
апреля 1990 года «О порядке решения вопросов, 
связанных с выходом союзной республики из 
СССР». Поэтому все эти усилия сепаратистов не 
имели юридической силы с момента их принятия. 
С прекращением существования СССР на его 
месте образовались 15 независимых государств, 
которые были признаны международным 
сообществом и приняты в ООН в прежних 
границах. Как отметил член Подкомиссии ООН по 
защите прав человека А.Эйде, «...в рамках ООН 
был достигнут широкий консенсус в отношении 
того, что границы союзных республик как в 
бывшем СССР, так и бывшей Югославии должны 
быть установлены не на основе этнического 
расселения, а на основе принципа uti possidetis juris, 
означающего, что новыми должны считаться 
границы, которые ранее существовали как 
173ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
границы союзных республик федерации»70. 
Докладчик ПАСЕ Д.Аткинсон в своем докладе oт 
29 ноября 2004 года однозначно отметил, что 
«существенная часть территории Азербайджана 
все еще оккупирована со стороны армянских 
сил», и при этом особо подчеркнул, что «границы 
Азербайджана были признаны международным 
сообществом в тот момент, когда страна в 1991 
году была признана независимым государством», 
«территория которого включала Нагорно-
Карабахский регион»71.
Политическая история армян дает достаточное 
основание говорить, что национальное сознание 
армян усилиями его политиков и идеологов 
пропитано тюркофобией, ненавистью ко всему 
азербайджанскому и тюркскому. Они даже не 
скрывают, что исходной базой этого ущербного 
мировоззрения армянства, поддерживающего 
существование самого армянского государства, 
являются такие идейно-политические установки, 
как «геноцид 1915», «аннексия Карабаха и 
70   Eide, Asbjørn. «Territorial integrity of States, minority protection and 
guarantees for autonomy arrangements: approaches and roles of the Un-
tied Nations.» Local self-government, territorial integrity and protection of 
minorities. Lausanne: Council of Europe Publishing, 1996, p. 282.
71   Atkinson, David. “The confl ict over the Nagorno-Karabakh region 
dealt with by the OSCE Minsk Conference.” Council of Europe. 29 Ноября, 
2004 г. http://assembly.coe.int/Main.asp?link=/Documents/Working-
Docs/Doc04/EDOC10364.htm (дата обращения:  20 Октября, 2010 г.).
174 Рамиз Мехтиев |
Джавахка» и иных территорий. И в целях реализации 
этих абсурдных идей данное мировоззрение 
оправдывает самые изощренные преступления 
армянских террористов и сепаратистов.
В Армении надеются, что им удастся 
присоединить к себе Нагорный Карабах, бездарно 
сфальсифицировав историю и «доказав» 
международным организациям, что это якобы 
древнеармянская земля. С. Саргсяну и армянским 
«интеллектуалам» из лабораторий исторической 
фальсификации давно пора знать, что 
исторический процесс движется в поступательном 
направлении, а не вспять. А то, что Нагорный 
Карабах, или Арцах в его древнем названии 
- древнеалбанская земля доказано самими 
же армянскими историками. Так, например, 
С.Т. Еремян писал: «Огромное количество 
христианских памятников, значительная часть 
которых относится к доарабскому периоду, 
сохранилось в арменизированной части древней 
Албании, на территории древнеалбанских 
областей Арцах и Утик, где в настоящее время 
в основном живет армянское население»72. Но 
удивляет другое – наглость фальсификаторов и 
72 Очерки истории СССР (III-IХ вв.). Москва: АН СССР, 1958, стр. 326.
175ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
иже с ними политиков, которые бесцеремонно 
врут и пытаются этим обманом расположить к 
себе некоторых членов мирового сообщества. 
С. Саргсян в силу своего положения не должен 
играть судьбой армянского народа. Ведь еще 
никому за свои злодеяния не удавалось избежать 
гнева своих сородичей. Не в пору ли знать, что в 
современном мире государственные границы не 
устанавливаются на основе мифов и античных 
летописей и не меняются по причине наличия на 
какой-то территории монастырей или проживания 
там национального меньшинства. В противном 
случае политическая карта мира выглядела бы 
сегодня иначе (к примеру, Армении пришлось 
бы вновь потерять независимость и вернуться в 
состав возродившейся Римской Империи, а самим 
армянам вернуться вo Фригию), ООН занималась 
бы сбором и изучением археологических данных 
и манускриптов, нежели выработкой своего 
Устава, а Совет Безопасности превратился бы в 
место дебатов между историками. Руководителям 
Армении пора понять, что в современном мире 
территориальные вопросы решаются на основе 
международного права, а не в историческом 
контексте по принципу «кто где исконно жил и кто 
176 Рамиз Мехтиев |
куда перекочевал», и поскорее избавить самих себя 
и свое общество от подобного провинциального 
мышления. Искажение истории и уничтожение 
памятников, даже если они и успешные, не 
помогут им в обосновании захвата территории 
других государств. Насильственное изменение 
границ всегда ведет к войнам. А политический 
лидер должен оберегать свой народ от войн, а не 
толкать его в ее пучину. 
Право нации на самоопределение, которое 
Азербайджан поддерживает, не предполагает 
вседозволенность и право менять границы, 
как вздумается. Манера трактовки этого права, 
которую позволяют себе в Армении, недопустима. 
В противном случае в мире сегодня не было бы 
национальных меньшинств, так как все они, даже 
мало-мальские, воспользовались бы правом на 
самоопределение, объявили себя независимыми 
субъектами мирового сообщества и попросили 
бы о международном признании. Очевидно, 
опасения, основанные на подобном примитивном 
истолковывании данного принципа, заставили 
власти Армении осуществить планомерное 
изгнание азербайджанцев из исконных земель 
бывшего Иреванского ханства, превратить свое 
177ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
государство в моноэтническое, а затем провести 
этнические чистки также в оккупированной 
части территории Азербайджана. Армении 
придется смириться с тем, что самоопределение 
национальных меньшинств, каковым является 
армянское население Нагорного Карабаха, 
возможно только в рамках международного права, 
принципы которого закреплены в многочисленных 
конвенциях и документах и с формулировками 
которого в Армении, не сомневаемся, хорошо 
знакомы. Правовой основой для урегулирования 
армяно-азербайджанского, нагорно-
карабахского конфликта является Хельсинкский 
Заключительный Акт 1975 года, в котором 
право на самоопределение очерчено рамками 
территориальной целостности государства.
Нагорный Карабах был и останется частью 
Азербайджана. В качестве такового он признан 
целым рядом авторитетных международных 
организаций, такими как ООН, ОБСЕ, Совет 
Европы, Европарламент, ОИК, НАТО, ГУАМ, 
парламентами и главами многих государств. 
Как часть Азербайджана он признан также 
сопредседателями Минской группы ОБСЕ, 
использующими в своих заявлениях, наряду 
178 Рамиз Мехтиев |
с армянским названием, также историческое 
название Ханкенди, проводящими встречи не 
только с фактическими лидерами армянской 
общины, но и с руководителями азербайджанской 
общины Нагорного Карабаха и называющими 
свое посещение региона с территории 
Азербайджана «пересечением не границы, а 
линии соприкосновения войск». В резолюциях 
Совета Безопасности ООН Нагорный Карабах 
фигурирует как «Нагорно-Карабахский регион 
Азербайджанской Республики». Aналогичные 
формулировки можно встретить также в 
документах других международных организаций. 
Если в Армении так и не научились читать 
между строк и замечать все эти нюансы, то для 
того, чтобы понять, что мировое сообщество 
их не поддерживает, пусть хотя бы обратятся к 
документам, где об этом сказано открыто, без 
тонких намеков.
Только в речах армянских руководителей 
можно услышать название «нагорно-карабахская 
республика». Несмотря на полное одиночество, 
они продолжают питать себя и своих граждан 
иллюзиями, что мировое сообщесто поддерживает 
их «чаяния». Созданная на оккупированной 
179ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
территории марионеточная псевдореспублика 
никем не признана. Признание ее со стороны 
Армении, чем иногда грозятся руководители 
этой страны, не добавит этому незаконному 
образованию легитимности и еще больше 
усугубит положение самой Армении. Вместо 
осознания реальности Серж Саргсян своей речью 
в Горисе поставил себя в незавидное положение 
и дал гостям не те советы. Не сложно понять, что 
тяжесть последствий этих ошибок почувствуют на 
себе будущие поколения в Армении.
180 Рамиз Мехтиев |
БИБЛИОГРАФИЯ
1. Abbott, Keith E. «Extracts from a Memorandum on the 
Country of Azerbaijan.» Proceedings of the Royal Geographical 
Society of London, Vol. 8, No. 6, 1863-1864: p. 275-279.
2. Adshead, Samuel Adrian Miles. China in World History. 
London: Macmillan, 2000.
3. Atkinson, David. «The confl ict over the Nagorno-Karabakh 
region dealt with by the OSCE Minsk Conference.» Council 
of Europe. 29 Ноября, 2004 г. http://assembly.coe.int/Main.
asp?link=/Documents/WorkingDocs/Doc04/EDOC10364.htm 
(дата обращения:  20 Октября, 2010 г.).
4. Bournoutian, George A. «The Ethnic Composition and the 
Socio-Economic Condition of Eastern Armenia in the First Half of 
the Nineteenth Century.» В Transcaucasia, Nationalism and Social 
Change: Essays in the History of Armenia, Azerbaijan, and Georgia, 
создатель Ronald Grigor Suny, 77-80. Ann Harbor : University of 
Michigan Press, 1996.
5. Cheetham, Samuel. A History of the Christian Church during 
the First Six Centuries. New York: Macmillan and Co., 1905.
6. Cornell, Svante. Small Nations and Great Powers: A study of 
Ethnopolitical Confl ict in the Caucasus. Surrey: Curzon Press, 2001.
7. Dowsett, Charles. J. F. «The Albanian Chronicle of Mxit'ar Gos.» 
Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies, University of 
London, Vol. 21, No. 1/3, 1958: 475.
8. Eide, Asbjørn. «Territorial integrity of States, minority protection 
and guarantees for autonomy arrangements: approaches and 
roles of the Untied Nations.» Local self-government, territorial 
integrity and protection of minorities. Lausanne: Council of Europe 
Publishing, 1996. 282.
9. Harnack, Adolph von. The Expansion of Christianity in the First 
Three Centuries. London: Williams & Norgate, 1905.
181ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
10. Lockyer, Herbert. All the Postles of the Bible. Grand Rapids: 
Zondervan, 1988.
11. Minorsky, Vladimir. «Caucasica IV .» Bulletin of the School of 
Oriental and African Studies, University of London, Vol. 15, No. 3., 
1953: p. 504.
12. Pastermadjian, Herand. Histoire de l'Armenie. Paris (1st edn, 
1949, 2nd edn, 1964), 1949.
13. Shahid, Irfan. Rome and the Arabs: A Prolegomenon to the 
Study of Byzantium and the Arabs. Washington D.C.: Dumbarton 
Oaks, 1984.
14. Strabo. Geographica, XI, XIV. 
15. Suni, Ronald G. «What Happened in Soviet Armenia?» Middle 
East Report, No. 153, Islam and the State, July - August, 1988: 37.
16. Suny, Ronald G. Looking Toward Ararat: Armenia in Modern 
History. Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, 1993.
17. Waal, Thomas de. Black Garden: Armenia and Azerbaijan 
through peace and war. New York: NYU Press, 2003.
18. Аzərbaycan Xalq Cümhuriyyəti Ensiklopediyası. II cild. Bakı: 
Lider, 2005.
19. Агаян, Цатур П. А.Бакиханов. Баку: АН Азерб. ССР, 1948.
20. Азербайджанская сельскохозяйственная перепись 1921 г. 
Итоги по сельским обществам во вновь образованных уездах 
АССР, Нагорного Карабаха и по тем (основным) уездам, в 
которых произошли изменения границ. Т. III. Вып. XVII. Баку: 
АзЦСУ, 1924.
21. Акты Кавказской Археографической Комиссии, т. IV. 
Изданъ под редакциею председателя комиссии дсс. А.Д.Берже, 
док. 37. Тифлис: Типография главного управления наместника 
Кавказского, 1870.
182 Рамиз Мехтиев |
22. Акты Кавказской Археографической Комиссии, т. VII, док. 
437, с. 487. Тифлис, 1878.
23. Акты Кавказской Археографической Комиссии, т. VII, док. 
829. Тифлис, 1878.
24. Алиев, Играр. Нагорный Карабах: История. Факты. 
События. Баку: Элм, 1989.
25. «Армения: бедная родственница Закавказья или 
прекрасная незнакомка инвестору?» Биржевой Лидер. 24 
Октября 2010 г. http://profi -forex.org/news/entry1008057044.
html (дата обращения: 30 Октября 2010 г.).
26. Архив политических документов при Управлении делами 
Президента Азербайджанской Республики (АПДУДПАР), ф.1, 
оп.74, д.136. 
27. Велиханова, Наиля М. «Изменение исторической 
географии Азербайджана в результате арабского завоевания.» 
В Историческая география Азербайджана, 53, 58. Баку: Элм, 
1987.
28. Геродот. История в девяти книгах. Ленинград: Наука, 
1972.
29. Глинка, Сергей Н. Описание переселения армян 
аддербиджанских в пределы России, с кратким 
предварительным изложением исторических времен 
Армении. Москва, 1831.
30. Государственный Aрхив Азербайджанской Республики 
(ГААР), ф.2502, оп.1, д.20, лл. 56–57. 
31. Государственный Архив Азербайджанской Республики 
(ГААР), ф.2502, оп.1, д.26, л. 98 об. 
32. Государственный Архив Азербайджанской Республики 
(ГААР), ф.2502, оп.2, д.26, л. 99. 
183ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
33. Государственный Архив Азербайджанской Республики 
(ГААР), ф.28, оп.1, д.155. 
34. Александр, Грибоедов С. «Записка о переселении армян 
из Персии в наши области.» Фундаментальная электронная 
библиотека «Русская литература и фольклор». http://feb-
web.ru/feb/griboed/texts/piks3/3_4_v3.htm (accessed October 
30, 2010).
35. Джаукян, Геворк Б. Общее и армянское языкознание. 
Ереван: АН Арм. ССР, 1978.
36. Дьяконов, Игорь М. «К преистории армянского языка (о 
фактах, свидетельствах и логике).» Историко-филологический 
журнал Но. 4, 1983: 166.
37. История армянского народа с древнейших времен до 
наших дней. П/р проф. М.Нерсисяна. Ереван: АН Арм. ССР, 
1980.
38. К истории образования Нагорно-Карабахской 
Автономной Области Азербайджанской ССР 1918–
1925. Документы и материалы. Баку: Азернешр, 1989.
39. Каланкатуйский, Моисей. История агван. Санкт-
Петербург: СПб., 1861.
40. Ковалевский, Павел И. Завоевание Кавказа Россией 
(Исторический очерк), (без выходных данных). Санкт-
Петербург: СПб., 1911.
41. Крымский, Агафангел Е. «Страницы из истории Северного 
или Кавказского Азербайджана (Кавказская Албания).» В 
Сборник статей в честь Е.Ф.Ольденбурга. К 50-летию 
научно-общественной деятельности., сс. 289–290. Москва, 
1934.
42. Крымский, Агафангел Е. «Страницы из истории Северного 
или Кавказского Азербайджана (Классической Албании).» В 
Памяти академика Н.Я.Марра (1864-1934). Москва, 1938.
184 Рамиз Мехтиев |
43. Меликишвили, Георгий А. К истории древней Грузии. 
Тбилиси: АН Груз. ССР, 1959.
44. «Миграция в Армении: минусов больше, чем плюсов.» 
Радио Организации Объединенных Наций. 14 Мая 2010 г. 
http://www.unmultimedia.org/radio/russian/detail/69756.html 
(дата обращения: 20 Сентября 2010 г.).
45. Орбели, Иосиф. «Гасан-Джалал – князь Хаченский.» В 
Избранные труды, by Иосиф Орбели, стр. 146. Ереван: АН 
Арм.ССР, 1993.
46. —. Избранные труды. Ереван: АН Арм.ССР, 1963.
47. Очерки истории СССР (III-IХ вв.). Москва: АН СССР, 1958.
48. Персидские документы Матенадарана (указы, сост. 
А.Д.Папазян). Вып. I (XV–XVII вв.). Ереван, 1956.
49. Персидские документы Матенадарана (указы, сост. 
А.Д.Папазян). Вып.II (1601–1650 гг.). Ереван, 1959.
50. Полное собрание законов Российской империи (ПСЗРИ). 
Собрание второе, т. III, 1828. Санкт-Петербург: СПб, 1830.
51. Социалистическое строительство АССР. 
Статистический сборник. Баку: Союзоргучет, 1935.
52. Тер-Нерсесян, Сирарпи. Армения: Быт, религия, культура. 
Москва: Центрполиграф, 2008.
53. «Трактат между Карабахским ханом и Российской 
Империей о переходе ханства под власть России от 14 
мая 1805 г.» azeri.ru. http://azeri.ru/az/karabakh/412/ (дата 
обращения: 16 Августа 2010 г.).
54. Флавий, Арриан. Поход Александра. Москва: АМН СССР, 
1962.
55. Хоренаци, Мовсес. История Армении. Москва, 1858.
185ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДА
56. —. «История Армении, книга 2, глава 8 (Назначение 
второго (лица) в государстве из потомков Аждахака, 
царя маров), Ереван: Айастан, 1990.» Библиотека «Вехи». 
http://www.vehi.net/istoriya/armenia/khorenaci/02.html 
(дата обращения: 30 Октября 2010 г.).
57. —. «История Армении, книга 3, глава 3 (Кончина 
святого Григориса от рук варваров). Ереван: Айастан, 1990.» 
Библиотека «Вехи». http://www.vehi.net/istoriya/armenia/
khorenaci/03.html (дата обращения: 30 Октября  2010 г.).
58. Центральный партийный архив Института марксизма-
ленинизма (ЦПА ИМЛ), ф. 461, оп. 1, ед.хр.4525, л. 1. 
59. Шавров, Николай И. Новая угроза русскому делу в 
Закавказье: предстоящая распродажа Мугани инородцам. 
Санкт-Петербург: СПб, 1911.
60. Шаумян, Степан Г. Избранные произведения. Т.2. Москва: 
Политиздат, 1978.
61. Этническая одонтология СССР. Москва: Наука, 1979.
62. Яков Я. Рогинский, Григорий М. Левин. Антропология, 2 
изд. Москва: Высшая школа, 1963.
186 Рамиз Мехтиев | NOTES / ДЛЯ ЗАМЕТОК
187ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДАNOTES / ДЛЯ ЗАМЕТОК
188 Рамиз Мехтиев | NOTES / ДЛЯ ЗАМЕТОК
189ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДАNOTES / ДЛЯ ЗАМЕТОК
190 Рамиз Мехтиев | NOTES / ДЛЯ ЗАМЕТОК
191ГОРИС – 2010:  СЕЗОН ТЕАТРА АБСУРДАNOTES / ДЛЯ ЗАМЕТОК
192 Рамиз Мехтиев |
Формат: 60x90 1/16.
Тираж: 1000
Тбилиси - 2010
