Praise for the New York Times Bestseller
Harry Potter and tHe Sorcerer’S Stone
“you don’t have to be a wizard or a kid to appreciate  
the spell cast by Harry Potter.” —USA Today
 “a charming, imaginative, magical  
confection of a novel.” —Boston Globe
 “Harry is destined for greatness.”  
 —The New York Times
780439
064866
9
52499
E
A
N
ISBN 978-0-439-06486-6
were so mean and hideous that summer that all 
Harry Potter wanted was to get back to the 
Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry. 
But just as he’s packing his bags, Harry receives a 
warning from a strange, impish creature named 
dobby who says that if Harry Potter returns to 
Hogwarts, disaster will strike.
and strike it does. For in Harry’s second year 
at Hogwarts, fresh torments and horrors arise, 
including an outrageously stuck-up new profes-
sor, Gilderoy Lockhart; a spirit named Moaning 
Myrtle who haunts the girls’ bathroom; and the 
unwanted attentions of ron Weasley’s younger 
sister, Ginny.
But each of these seem minor annoyances 
when the real trouble begins, and someone—or 
something—starts turning Hogwarts students to 
stone. could it be draco Malfoy, a more poison-
ous rival than ever? could it possibly be Hagrid, 
whose mysterious past is finally told? or could it 
be the one everyone at Hogwarts most sus- 
pects . . . Harry Potter himself!
$24.99 US
The Dursleysawards and accolades for Harry Potter 
and the Sorcerer’s Stone
★  “a delightful romp. rowling leaves the door wide open 
for a sequel; bedazzled readers will surely clamor for 
one.” —Publishers Weekly, starred review
★  “Surely the vilest household in children’s literature since 
the family roald dahl created for Matilda. Harry himself 
is the perfect confused and unassuming hero.”
—School Library Journal, starred review
★  “a brilliantly imagined and beautifully written fantasy.”
—Booklist, starred review
♦  Winner of the national Book award (UK)
♦  Winner of the Gold Medal Smarties Prize (UK)
♦  Publishers Weekly Best Book of 1998
♦  School Library Journal Best Book of 1998
♦  Parenting Book of the year award 1998
♦  new york Public Library Best Book of the year 1998
♦  an aLa notable Book
artHUr a. Levine BooKS
An Imprint of Scholastic Inc.
557 Broadway, new york, new york 10012
Jacket art by Mary GrandPré
Jacket design by Mary GrandPré and David Saylor
J. K. Rowling
Rowling
ARTHuR A.
levine BooKS
ScHolASTic
H
A
R
R
y
 P
o
T
T
e
R
  A
n
D
 T
H
e c
H
A
m
BeR
 o
f
 Sec
R
eT
S
 Harry Potter
 and the Chamber of Secrets
00_Front Matter.indd   i 3/11/09   6:17:58 PM
Process Black
   . . 
Harry Potter and the Sorcerer’s Stone
Year One at Hogwarts
Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban
Year  ree at Hogwarts
Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire
Year Four at Hogwarts
Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix
Year Five at Hogwarts
Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince
Year Six at Hogwarts
Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows
Year Seven
00_Front Matter.indd   ii 3/11/09   6:17:58 PM
Process Black
Harry Potter
and the Chamber of Secrets
by
J. K. Rowling
illustrations by Mary GrandPré
Arthur A. Levine Books
An Imprint of Scholastic Inc.
00_Front Matter.indd   iii 3/20/09   1:55:31 PM
Process Black
Text copyright ©  by J. K. Rowling
Illustrations by Mary GrandPré copyright ©  by Warner Bros.
  and all related characters and elements are  of and © WBEI. 
Harry Potter Publishing Rights © J. K. Rowling.
All rights reserved. Published by Arthur A. Levine Books, an imprint of Scholastic Inc., 
Publishers since . 
 and the   
are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of Scholastic Inc.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted 
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, 
without written permission of the publisher. For information regarding permission, write 
to Scholastic Inc., Attention: Permissions Department,  Broadway, New York, NY .
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Rowling, J. K.
 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets / by J. K. Rowling.
p. cm.
 Summary: When the Chamber of Secrets is opened again at the Hogwarts School 
of Witchcraft and Wizardry, second-year student Harry Potter fi nds himself in danger 
from a dark power that has once more been released on the school.
 ISBN-: ----
ISBN-: ---
[. Wizards — Fiction. . Magic — Fiction. . Schools — Fiction.
. England — Fiction.] I. Title.
PZ.RHar 
[Fic] — dc -
               
Printed in the U.S.A. 
First edition, June 
We try to produce the most beautiful books possible, and we are extremely concerned 
about the impact of our manufacturing process on the forests of the world and the 
environment as a whole. Accordingly, we made sure that all of the paper we used contains 
% post-consumer recycled fi ber, and has been certifi ed as coming from forests that are 
managed to insure the protection of the people and wildlife dependent upon them.
00_Front Matter.indd   iv 3/20/09   2:04:46 PM
Process Black
For  Seán P. F. Harris,
getaway driver and foul-weather friend 
00_Front Matter.indd   v 3/11/09   6:17:59 PM
Process Black
00_Front Matter.indd   vi 3/11/09   6:17:59 PM
Process Black
vii
 C o n t e n t s
one
The Worst Birthday . 
two
Dobby’s Warning . 
three
The Burrow . 
four
At Flourish and Blotts . 
five
The Whomping Willow . 
six
Gilderoy Lockhart . 
seven
Mudbloods and Murmurs . 
eight
The Deathday Party . 
00_Front Matter.indd   vii 3/11/09   6:17:59 PM
Process Black
viii
c o n t e n t s
nine
The Writing on the Wall . 
ten
The Rogue Bludger . 
eleven
The Dueling Club . 
twelve
The Polyjuice Potion . 
thirteen
The Very Secret Diary . 
fourteen
Cornelius Fudge . 
fifteen
Aragog . 
sixteen
The Chamber of Secrets . 
seventeen
The Heir of Slytherin . 
eighteen
Dobby’s Reward . 
00_Front Matter.indd   viii 3/11/09   6:17:59 PM
Process Black
 Harry Potter
 and the Chamber of Secrets
00_Front Matter.indd   ix 3/11/09   6:17:59 PM
Process Black
00_Front Matter.indd   x 3/11/09   6:17:59 PM
Process Black
1
c h a p t e r  o n e
N
ot for the fi rst time, an argument had broken out over 
breakfast at number four, Privet Drive. Mr. Vernon Durs-
ley had been woken in the early hours of the morning by a loud, 
hooting noise from his nephew Harry’s room.
“ ird time this week!” he roared across the table. “If you can’t 
control that owl, it’ll have to go!”
Harry tried, yet again, to explain.
“She’s bored,” he said. “She’s used to fl ying around outside. If I 
could just let her out at night —”
“Do I look stupid?” snarled Uncle Vernon, a bit of fried egg 
dangling from his bushy mustache. “I know what’ll happen if that 
owl’s let out.”
He exchanged dark looks with his wife, Petunia.
Harry tried to argue back but his words were drowned by a long, 
loud belch from the Dursleys’ son, Dudley.
the worst birthday
01_Worst Birthday.indd   1 3/10/09   8:30:04 PM
Process Black
2
“I want more bacon.”
“ ere’s more in the frying pan, sweetums,” said Aunt Petunia, 
turning misty eyes on her massive son. “We must build you up 
while we’ve got the chance.  . . .  I don’t like the sound of that school 
food. . . .”
“Nonsense, Petunia, I never went hungry when I was at Smelt-
ings,” said Uncle Vernon heartily. “Dudley gets enough, don’t you, 
son?”
Dudley, who was so large his bottom drooped over either side of 
the kitchen chair, grinned and turned to Harry.
“Pass the frying pan.”
“You’ve forgotten the magic word,” said Harry irritably.
 e eff ect of this simple sentence on the rest of the family was 
incredible: Dudley gasped and fell off  his chair with a crash that 
shook the whole kitchen; Mrs. Dursley gave a small scream and 
clapped her hands to her mouth; Mr. Dursley jumped to his feet, 
veins throbbing in his temples.
“I meant ‘please’!” said Harry quickly. “I didn’t mean —”
“WHAT HAVE I TOLD YOU,” thundered his uncle, spray-
ing spit over the table, “ABOUT SAYING THE ‘M’ WORD IN 
OUR HOUSE?”
“But I —”
“HOW DARE YOU THREATEN DUDLEY!” roared Uncle 
Vernon, pounding the table with his fi st.
“I just —”
“I WARNED YOU! I WILL NOT TOLERATE MENTION 
OF YOUR ABNORMALITY UNDER THIS ROOF!”
Harry stared from his purple-faced uncle to his pale aunt, who 
was trying to heave Dudley to his feet.
c h ap t e r  o n e
01_Worst Birthday.indd   2 3/10/09   8:30:05 PM
Process Black
3
“All right,” said Harry, “all right  . . . ”
Uncle Vernon sat back down, breathing like a winded  rhinoceros 
and watching Harry closely out of the corners of his small, sharp 
eyes.
Ever since Harry had come home for the summer holidays, Un-
cle Vernon had been treating him like a bomb that might go off  at 
any moment, because Harry Potter wasn’t a normal boy. As a mat-
ter of fact, he was as not normal as it is possible to be.
Harry Potter was a wizard  — a wizard fresh from his fi rst year at 
Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry. And if the Dursleys 
were unhappy to have him back for the holidays, it was nothing to 
how Harry felt.
He missed Hogwarts so much it was like having a constant 
stomachache. He missed the castle, with its secret passageways and 
ghosts, his classes (though perhaps not Snape, the Potions  master), 
the mail arriving by owl, eating banquets in the Great Hall, sleep-
ing in his four-poster bed in the tower dormitory, visiting the game-
keeper, Hagrid, in his cabin next to the Forbidden Forest in the 
grounds, and, especially, Quidditch, the most popular sport in the 
Wizarding world (six tall goalposts, four fl ying balls, and fourteen 
players on broomsticks).
All Harry’s spellbooks, his wand, robes, cauldron, and top-of-
the-line Nimbus Two  ousand broomstick had been locked in a 
cupboard under the stairs by Uncle Vernon the instant Harry had 
come home. What did the Dursleys care if Harry lost his place on 
the House Quidditch team because he hadn’t practiced all sum-
mer? What was it to the Dursleys if Harry went back to school 
without any of his homework done?  e Dursleys were what wiz-
ards called Muggles (not a drop of magical blood in their veins), 
t h e  w o r s t  b i rt h day
01_Worst Birthday.indd   3 3/10/09   8:30:05 PM
Process Black
4
and as far as they were concerned, having a wizard in the family 
was a matter of deepest shame. Uncle Vernon had even padlocked 
Harry’s owl, Hedwig, inside her cage, to stop her from carrying 
messages to anyone in the Wizarding world.
Harry looked nothing like the rest of the family. Uncle Vernon 
was large and neckless, with an enormous black mustache; Aunt 
Petunia was horse-faced and bony; Dudley was blond, pink, and 
porky. Harry, on the other hand, was small and skinny, with bril-
liant green eyes and jet-black hair that was always untidy. He wore 
round glasses, and on his forehead was a thin, lightning-shaped 
scar.
It was this scar that made Harry so particularly unusual, even 
for a wizard.   is scar was the only hint of Harry’s very mysteri-
ous past, of the reason he had been left on the Dursleys’ doorstep 
eleven years before.
At the age of one year old, Harry had somehow survived a curse 
from the greatest Dark sorcerer of all time, Lord Vol de mort, whose 
name most witches and wizards still feared to speak. Harry’s par-
ents had died in Vol de mort’s attack, but Harry had escaped with 
his lightning scar, and somehow  — nobody understood why  —
Vol de mort’s powers had been destroyed the instant he had failed to 
kill Harry.
So Harry had been brought up by his dead mother’s sister and 
her husband. He had spent ten years with the Dursleys, never 
understanding why he kept making odd things happen without 
meaning to, believing the Dursleys’ story that he had got his scar 
in the car crash that had killed his parents.
And then, exactly a year ago, Hogwarts had written to Harry, 
c h ap t e r  o n e
01_Worst Birthday.indd   4 3/10/09   8:30:05 PM
Process Black
5
and the whole story had come out. Harry had taken up his place 
at wizard school, where he and his scar were famous  . . .  but now 
the school year was over, and he was back with the Dursleys for the 
summer, back to being treated like a dog that had rolled in some-
thing smelly.
  e Dursleys hadn’t even remembered that today happened to 
be Harry’s twelfth birthday. Of course, his hopes hadn’t been high; 
they’d never given him a real present, let alone a cake  — but to ig-
nore it completely  . . . 
At that moment, Uncle Vernon cleared his throat importantly 
and said, “Now, as we all know, today is a very important day.”
Harry looked up, hardly daring to believe it.
“  is could well be the day I make the biggest deal of my ca-
reer,” said Uncle Vernon.
Harry went back to his toast. Of course, he thought bitterly, Un-
cle Vernon was talking about the stupid dinner party. He’d been talk-
ing of nothing else for two weeks. Some rich builder and his wife 
were coming to dinner and Uncle Vernon was hoping to get a huge 
order from him (Uncle Vernon’s company made drills).
“I think we should run through the schedule one more time,” 
said Uncle Vernon. “We should all be in position at eight o’clock. 
Petunia, you will be  — ?”
“In the lounge,” said Aunt Petunia promptly, “waiting to wel-
come them graciously to our home.”
“Good, good. And Dudley?”
“I’ll be waiting to open the door.” Dudley put on a foul, sim-
pering smile. “May I take your coats, Mr. and Mrs. Mason?”
“  ey’ll love him!” cried Aunt Petunia rapturously.
t h e  w o r s t  b i rt h day
01_Worst Birthday.indd   5 3/10/09   8:30:05 PM
Process Black
6
“Excellent, Dudley,” said Uncle Vernon.  en he rounded on 
Harry. “And you?”
“I’ll be in my bedroom, making no noise and pretending I’m not 
there,” said Harry tonelessly.
“Exactly,” said Uncle Vernon nastily. “I will lead them into the 
lounge, introduce you, Petunia, and pour them drinks. At eight-
 fi fteen —”
“I’ll announce dinner,” said Aunt Petunia.
“And, Dudley, you’ll say —”
“May I take you through to the dining room, Mrs. Mason?” said 
Dudley, off ering his fat arm to an invisible woman.
“My perfect little gentleman!” sniff ed Aunt Petunia.
“And you?” said Uncle Vernon viciously to Harry.
“I’ll be in my room, making no noise and pretending I’m not 
there,” said Harry dully.
“Precisely. Now, we should aim to get in a few good compli-
ments at dinner. Petunia, any ideas?”
“Vernon tells me you’re a wonderful golfer, Mr. Mason.  . . .  Do 
tell me where you bought your dress, Mrs. Mason. . . .”
“Perfect  . . .  Dudley?”
“How about  — ‘We had to write an essay about our hero at 
school, Mr. Mason, and I wrote about you.’”
 is was too much for both Aunt Petunia and Harry. Aunt Petu-
nia burst into tears and hugged her son, while Harry ducked under 
the table so they wouldn’t see him laughing.
“And you, boy?”
Harry fought to keep his face straight as he emerged.
“I’ll be in my room, making no noise and pretending I’m not 
there,” he said.
c h ap t e r  o n e
01_Worst Birthday.indd   6 3/10/09   8:30:05 PM
Process Black
7
“Too right, you will,” said Uncle Vernon forcefully. “ e Ma-
sons don’t know anything about you and it’s going to stay that way. 
When dinner’s over, you take Mrs. Mason back to the lounge for 
coff ee, Petunia, and I’ll bring the subject around to drills. With 
any luck, I’ll have the deal signed and sealed before the news at 
ten. We’ll be shopping for a vacation home in Majorca this time 
tomorrow.”
Harry couldn’t feel too excited about this. He didn’t think the 
Dursleys would like him any better in Majorca than they did on 
Privet Drive.
“Right  — I’m off  into town to pick up the dinner jackets for 
Dudley and me. And you,” he snarled at Harry. “You stay out of 
your aunt’s way while she’s cleaning.”
Harry left through the back door. It was a brilliant, sunny day. 
He crossed the lawn, slumped down on the garden bench, and sang 
under his breath:
“Happy birthday to me  . . .  happy birthday to me . . .”
No cards, no presents, and he would be spending the evening 
pretending not to exist. He gazed miserably into the hedge. He had 
never felt so lonely. More than anything else at Hogwarts, more 
even than playing Quidditch, Harry missed his best friends, Ron 
Weasley and Her mi one Granger.  ey, however, didn’t seem to be 
missing him at all. Neither of them had written to him all  summer, 
even though Ron had said he was going to ask Harry to come and 
stay.
Countless times, Harry had been on the point of unlocking 
Hedwig’s cage by magic and sending her to Ron and Her mi one 
with a letter, but it wasn’t worth the risk. Underage wizards weren’t 
allowed to use magic outside of school. Harry hadn’t told the 
t h e  w o r s t  b i rt h day
01_Worst Birthday.indd   7 3/10/09   8:30:05 PM
Process Black
8
 Dursleys this; he knew it was only their terror that he might turn 
them all into dung beetles that stopped them from locking him in 
the cupboard under the stairs with his wand and broomstick. For 
the fi rst couple of weeks back, Harry had enjoyed muttering non-
sense words under his breath and watching Dudley tearing out of 
the room as fast as his fat legs would carry him. But the long  silence 
from Ron and Her mi one had made Harry feel so cut off  from the 
magical world that even taunting Dudley had lost its appeal  — and 
now Ron and Her mi one had forgotten his birthday.
What wouldn’t he give now for a message from Hogwarts? From 
any witch or wizard? He’d almost be glad of a sight of his arch-
enemy, Draco Malfoy, just to be sure it hadn’t all been a dream.  . . .
Not that his whole year at Hogwarts had been fun. At the very 
end of last term, Harry had come face-to-face with none other than 
Lord Vol de mort himself. Vol de mort might be a ruin of his former 
self, but he was still terrifying, still cunning, still determined to re-
gain power. Harry had slipped through Vol de mort’s clutches for a 
second time, but it had been a narrow escape, and even now, weeks 
later, Harry kept waking in the night, drenched in cold sweat, won-
dering where Vol de mort was now, remembering his livid face, his 
wide, mad eyes  —
Harry suddenly sat bolt upright on the garden bench. He had 
been staring absent-mindedly into the hedge  — and the hedge was 
staring back. Two enormous green eyes had appeared among the 
leaves.
Harry jumped to his feet just as a jeering voice fl oated across the 
lawn.
“I know what day it is,” sang Dudley, waddling toward him.
c h ap t e r  o n e
01_Worst Birthday.indd   8 3/10/09   8:30:05 PM
Process Black
9
 e huge eyes blinked and vanished.
“What?” said Harry, not taking his eyes off  the spot where they 
had been.
“I know what day it is,” Dudley repeated, coming right up to 
him.
“Well done,” said Harry. “So you’ve fi nally learned the days of 
the week.”
“Today’s your birthday,” sneered Dudley. “How come you 
haven’t got any cards? Haven’t you even got friends at that freak 
place?”
“Better not let your mum hear you talking about my school,” 
said Harry coolly.
Dudley hitched up his trousers, which were slipping down his 
fat bottom.
“Why’re you staring at the hedge?” he said suspiciously.
“I’m trying to decide what would be the best spell to set it on 
fi re,” said Harry.
Dudley stumbled backward at once, a look of panic on his fat 
face.
“You c-can’t  — Dad told you you’re not to do m-magic  — he 
said he’ll chuck you out of the house  — and you haven’t got any-
where else to go  — you haven’t got any friends to take you —”
“Jiggery pokery!” said Harry in a fi erce voice. “Hocus pocus  —
squiggly wiggly —”
“MUUUUUUM!” howled Dudley, tripping over his feet as he 
dashed back toward the house. “MUUUUM! He’s doing you know 
what!”
Harry paid dearly for his moment of fun. As neither Dudley nor 
t h e  w o r s t  b i rt h day
01_Worst Birthday.indd   9 3/10/09   8:30:05 PM
Process Black
10
the hedge was in any way hurt, Aunt Petunia knew he hadn’t really 
done magic, but he still had to duck as she aimed a heavy blow at 
his head with the soapy frying pan.  en she gave him work to do, 
with the promise he wouldn’t eat again until he’d fi nished.
While Dudley lolled around watching and eating ice cream, 
Harry cleaned the windows, washed the car, mowed the lawn, 
trimmed the fl ower beds, pruned and watered the roses, and re-
painted the garden bench.  e sun blazed overhead, burning the 
back of his neck. Harry knew he shouldn’t have risen to Dudley’s 
bait, but Dudley had said the very thing Harry had been thinking 
himself  . . .  maybe he didn’t have any friends at Hogwarts.  . . . 
Wish they could see famous Harry Potter now, he thought savagely 
as he spread manure on the fl ower beds, his back aching, sweat run-
ning down his face.
It was half past seven in the evening when at last, exhausted, he 
heard Aunt Petunia calling him.
“Get in here! And walk on the newspaper!”
Harry moved gladly into the shade of the gleaming kitchen. 
On top of the fridge stood tonight’s pudding: a huge mound of 
whipped cream and sugared violets. A loin of roast pork was siz-
zling in the oven.
“Eat quickly!  e Masons will be here soon!” snapped Aunt Pe-
tunia, pointing to two slices of bread and a lump of cheese on 
the kitchen table. She was already wearing a salmon-pink cocktail 
dress.
Harry washed his hands and bolted down his pitiful supper.  e 
moment he had fi nished, Aunt Petunia whisked away his plate. 
“Upstairs! Hurry!”
c h ap t e r  o n e
01_Worst Birthday.indd   10 3/10/09   8:30:05 PM
Process Black
11
As he passed the door to the living room, Harry caught a glimpse 
of Uncle Vernon and Dudley in bow ties and dinner jackets. He 
had only just reached the upstairs landing when the doorbell rang 
and Uncle Vernon’s furious face appeared at the foot of the stairs.
“Remember, boy  — one sound —”
Harry crossed to his bedroom on tiptoe, slipped inside, closed 
the door, and turned to collapse on his bed.
  e trouble was, there was already someone sitting on it.
t h e  w o r s t  b i rt h day
01_Worst Birthday.indd   11 3/10/09   8:30:05 PM
Process Black
12
c h a p t e r  t w o
H arry managed not to shout out, but it was a close thing.  e little creature on the bed had large, bat-like ears and 
bulging green eyes the size of tennis balls. Harry knew instantly 
that this was what had been watching him out of the garden hedge 
that morning.
As they stared at each other, Harry heard Dudley’s voice from 
the hall.
“May I take your coats, Mr. and Mrs. Mason?”
 e creature slipped off  the bed and bowed so low that the end 
of its long, thin nose touched the carpet. Harry noticed that it was 
wearing what looked like an old pillowcase, with rips for arm- and 
leg-holes.
“Er  — hello,” said Harry nervously.
“Harry Potter!” said the creature in a high-pitched voice Harry 
was sure would carry down the stairs. “So long has Dobby wanted 
to meet you, sir  . . .  Such an honor it is. . . .”
dobby’s warning
02_Dobby's Warning.indd   12 3/10/09   8:30:32 PM
Process Black
13
“ -thank you,” said Harry, edging along the wall and sinking 
into his desk chair, next to Hedwig, who was asleep in her large 
cage. He wanted to ask, “What are you?” but thought it would 
sound too rude, so instead he said, “Who are you?”
“Dobby, sir. Just Dobby. Dobby the house-elf,” said the crea-
ture.
“Oh  — really?” said Harry. “Er  — I don’t want to be rude or 
anything, but  — this isn’t a great time for me to have a house-elf 
in my bedroom.”
Aunt Petunia’s high, false laugh sounded from the living room. 
 e elf hung his head.
“Not that I’m not pleased to meet you,” said Harry quickly, “but, 
er, is there any particular reason you’re here?”
“Oh, yes, sir,” said Dobby earnestly. “Dobby has come to tell 
you, sir  . . .  it is diffi  cult, sir  . . .  Dobby wonders where to be-
gin. . . .”
“Sit down,” said Harry politely, pointing at the bed.
To his horror, the elf burst into tears  — very noisy tears.
“S-sit down!” he wailed. “Never  . . .  never ever . . .”
Harry thought he heard the voices downstairs falter.
“I’m sorry,” he whispered, “I didn’t mean to off end you or any-
thing —”
“Off end Dobby!” choked the elf. “Dobby has never been asked 
to sit down by a wizard  — like an equal  —”
Harry, trying to say “Shh!” and look comforting at the same 
time, ushered Dobby back onto the bed where he sat  hiccoughing, 
looking like a large and very ugly doll. At last he managed to con-
trol himself, and sat with his great eyes fi xed on Harry in an ex-
pression of watery adoration.
d o b by ’ s  warn i n g
02_Dobby's Warning.indd   13 3/10/09   8:30:33 PM
Process Black
14
“You can’t have met many decent wizards,” said Harry, trying to 
cheer him up.
Dobby shook his head.   en, without warning, he leapt up and 
started banging his head furiously on the window, shouting, “Bad 
Dobby! Bad Dobby!”
“Don’t  — what are you doing?” Harry hissed, springing up and 
pulling Dobby back onto the bed  — Hedwig had woken up with a 
particularly loud screech and was beating her wings wildly against 
the bars of her cage.
“Dobby had to punish himself, sir,” said the elf, who had gone 
slightly cross-eyed. “Dobby almost spoke ill of his family, sir. . . .”
“Your family?”
“  e wizard family Dobby serves, sir.  . . .  Dobby is a house-
elf — bound to serve one house and one family forever. . . .”
“Do they know you’re here?” asked Harry curiously.
Dobby shuddered.
“Oh, no, sir, no  . . .  Dobby will have to punish himself most 
grievously for coming to see you, sir. Dobby will have to shut his 
ears in the oven door for this. If they ever knew, sir —”
“But won’t they notice if you shut your ears in the oven door?”
“Dobby doubts it, sir. Dobby is always having to punish himself 
for something, sir.   ey lets Dobby get on with it, sir. Sometimes 
they reminds me to do extra punishments. . . .”
“But why don’t you leave? Escape?”
“A house-elf must be set free, sir. And the family will never set 
Dobby free  . . .  Dobby will serve the family until he dies, sir. . . .”
Harry stared.
“And I thought I had it bad staying here for another four weeks,” 
c h ap t e r  t w o
02_Dobby's Warning.indd   14 3/10/09   8:30:33 PM
Process Black
15
he said. “  is makes the Dursleys sound almost human. Can’t any-
one help you? Can’t I?”
Almost at once, Harry wished he hadn’t spoken. Dobby dis-
solved again into wails of gratitude.
“Please,” Harry whispered frantically, “please be quiet. If the 
Dursleys hear anything, if they know you’re here —”
“Harry Potter asks if he can help Dobby  . . .  Dobby has heard of 
your greatness, sir, but of your goodness, Dobby never knew. . . .”
Harry, who was feeling distinctly hot in the face, said, “What-
ever you’ve heard about my greatness is a load of rubbish. I’m not 
even top of my year at Hogwarts; that’s Her mi one, she —”
But he stopped quickly, because thinking about Her mi one was 
painful.
“Harry Potter is humble and modest,” said Dobby reverently, his 
orb-like eyes aglow. “Harry Potter speaks not of his triumph over 
He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named —”
“Vol de mort?” said Harry.
Dobby clapped his hands over his bat ears and moaned, “Ah, 
speak not the name, sir! Speak not the name!”
“Sorry,” said Harry quickly. “I know lots of people don’t like it. 
My friend Ron —”
He stopped again.   inking about Ron was painful, too.
Dobby leaned toward Harry, his eyes wide as headlights.
“Dobby heard tell,” he said hoarsely, “that Harry Potter met the 
Dark Lord for a second time, just weeks ago  . . .  that Harry Potter 
escaped yet again.”
Harry nodded and Dobby’s eyes suddenly shone with tears.
“Ah, sir,” he gasped, dabbing his face with a corner of the grubby 
d o b by ’ s  warn i n g
02_Dobby's Warning.indd   15 3/10/09   8:30:33 PM
Process Black
16
pillowcase he was wearing. “Harry Potter is valiant and bold! He 
has braved so many dangers already! But Dobby has come to pro-
tect Harry Potter, to warn him, even if he does have to shut his ears 
in the oven door later.  . . .  Harry Potter must not go back to Hogwarts.”
 ere was a silence broken only by the chink of knives and forks 
from downstairs and the distant rumble of Uncle Vernon’s voice.
“W-what?” Harry stammered. “But I’ve got to go back  — term 
starts on September fi rst. It’s all that’s keeping me going. You don’t 
know what it’s like here. I don’t belong here. I belong in your 
world — at Hogwarts.”
“No, no, no,” squeaked Dobby, shaking his head so hard his ears 
fl apped. “Harry Potter must stay where he is safe. He is too great, 
too good, to lose. If Harry Potter goes back to Hogwarts, he will be 
in mortal danger.”
“Why?” said Harry in surprise.
“ ere is a plot, Harry Potter. A plot to make most terrible 
things happen at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry 
this year,” whispered Dobby, suddenly trembling all over. “Dobby 
has known it for months, sir. Harry Potter must not put himself in 
peril. He is too important, sir!”
“What terrible things?” said Harry at once. “Who’s plotting 
them?”
Dobby made a funny choking noise and then banged his head 
frantically against the wall.
“All right!” cried Harry, grabbing the elf ’s arm to stop him. “You 
can’t tell me. I understand. But why are you warning me?” A sud-
den, unpleasant thought struck him. “Hang on  — this hasn’t got 
anything to do with Vol-  — sorry  — with You-Know-Who, has it? 
c h ap t e r  t w o
02_Dobby's Warning.indd   16 3/10/09   8:30:33 PM
Process Black
17
You could just shake or nod,” he added hastily as Dobby’s head 
tilted worryingly close to the wall again.
Slowly, Dobby shook his head.
“Not  — not He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named, sir —”
But Dobby’s eyes were wide and he seemed to be trying to give 
Harry a hint. Harry, however, was completely lost.
“He hasn’t got a brother, has he?”
Dobby shook his head, his eyes wider than ever.
“Well then, I can’t think who else would have a chance of mak-
ing horrible things happen at Hogwarts,” said Harry. “I mean, 
there’s Dum ble dore, for one thing  — you know who Dum ble dore 
is, don’t you?”
Dobby bowed his head.
“Albus Dum ble dore is the greatest headmaster Hogwarts has 
ever had. Dobby knows it, sir. Dobby has heard Dum ble dore’s 
powers rival those of He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named at the height 
of his strength. But, sir”  — Dobby’s voice dropped to an urgent 
whisper  — “there are powers Dum ble dore doesn’t  . . .  powers no 
decent wizard . . .”
And before Harry could stop him, Dobby bounded off  the bed, 
seized Harry’s desk lamp, and started beating himself around the 
head with earsplitting yelps.
A sudden silence fell downstairs. Two seconds later Harry, heart 
thudding madly, heard Uncle Vernon coming into the hall, calling, 
“Dudley must have left his television on again, the little tyke!”
“Quick! In the closet!” hissed Harry, stuffi  ng Dobby in, shutting 
the door, and fl inging himself onto the bed just as the door handle 
turned.
d o b by ’ s  warn i n g
02_Dobby's Warning.indd   17 3/10/09   8:30:33 PM
Process Black
18
“What  — the  — devil—are  — you  — doing?” said Uncle Ver-
non through gritted teeth, his face horribly close to Harry’s. “You’ve 
just ruined the punch line of my Japanese golfer joke.  . . .  One 
more sound and you’ll wish you’d never been born, boy!”
He stomped fl at-footed from the room.
Shaking, Harry let Dobby out of the closet.
“See what it’s like here?” he said. “See why I’ve got to go back 
to Hogwarts? It’s the only place I’ve got  — well, I think I’ve got 
friends.”
“Friends who don’t even write to Harry Potter?” said Dobby slyly.
“I expect they’ve just been  — wait a minute,” said Harry, frown-
ing. “How do you know my friends haven’t been writing to me?”
Dobby shuffl  ed his feet.
“Harry Potter mustn’t be angry with Dobby. Dobby did it for 
the best —”
“Have you been stopping my letters?”
“Dobby has them here, sir,” said the elf. Stepping nimbly out of 
Harry’s reach, he pulled a thick wad of envelopes from the inside of 
the pillowcase he was wearing. Harry could make out Her mi one’s 
neat writing, Ron’s untidy scrawl, and even a scribble that looked 
as though it was from the Hogwarts gamekeeper, Hagrid.
Dobby blinked anxiously up at Harry.
“Harry Potter mustn’t be angry.  . . .  Dobby hoped  . . .  if Harry 
Potter thought his friends had forgotten him  . . .  Harry Potter 
might not want to go back to school, sir. . . .”
Harry wasn’t listening. He made a grab for the letters, but Dobby 
jumped out of reach.
“Harry Potter will have them, sir, if he gives Dobby his word 
c h ap t e r  t w o
02_Dobby's Warning.indd   18 3/10/09   8:30:33 PM
Process Black
19
that he will not return to Hogwarts. Ah, sir, this is a danger you 
must not face! Say you won’t go back, sir!”
“No,” said Harry angrily. “Give me my friends’ letters!”
“ en Harry Potter leaves Dobby no choice,” said the elf sadly.
Before Harry could move, Dobby had darted to the bedroom 
door, pulled it open, and sprinted down the stairs.
Mouth dry, stomach lurching, Harry sprang after him, trying 
not to make a sound. He jumped the last six steps, landing catlike 
on the hall carpet, looking around for Dobby. From the dining 
room he heard Uncle Vernon saying, “. . . tell Petunia that very 
funny story about those American plumbers, Mr. Mason. She’s 
been dying to hear . . .”
Harry ran up the hall into the kitchen and felt his stomach dis-
appear.
Aunt Petunia’s masterpiece of a pudding, the mountain of cream 
and sugared violets, was fl oating up near the ceiling. On top of a 
cupboard in the corner crouched Dobby.
“No,” croaked Harry. “Please  . . .  they’ll kill me. . . .”
“Harry Potter must say he’s not going back to school —”
“Dobby  . . .  please . . .”
“Say it, sir —”
“I can’t —”
Dobby gave him a tragic look.
“ en Dobby must do it, sir, for Harry Potter’s own good.”
 e pudding fell to the fl oor with a heart-stopping crash. Cream 
splattered the windows and walls as the dish shattered. With a 
crack like a whip, Dobby vanished.
 ere were screams from the dining room and Uncle Vernon 
d o b by ’ s  warn i n g
02_Dobby's Warning.indd   19 3/10/09   8:30:33 PM
Process Black
20
burst into the kitchen to fi nd Harry, rigid with shock, covered from 
head to foot in Aunt Petunia’s pudding.
At fi rst, it looked as though Uncle Vernon would manage to 
gloss the whole thing over. (“Just our nephew  — very disturbed —
meeting strangers upsets him, so we kept him upstairs. . . .”) He 
shooed the shocked Masons back into the dining room, promised 
Harry he would fl ay him to within an inch of his life when the Ma-
sons had left, and handed him a mop. Aunt Petunia dug some ice 
cream out of the freezer and Harry, still shaking, started scrubbing 
the kitchen clean.
Uncle Vernon might still have been able to make his deal  — if it 
hadn’t been for the owl.
Aunt Petunia was just passing around a box of after-dinner 
mints when a huge barn owl swooped through the dining room 
window, dropped a letter on Mrs. Mason’s head, and swooped out 
again. Mrs. Mason screamed like a banshee and ran from the house 
shouting about lunatics. Mr. Mason stayed just long enough to tell 
the Dursleys that his wife was mortally afraid of birds of all shapes 
and sizes, and to ask whether this was their idea of a joke.
Harry stood in the kitchen, clutching the mop for support, as 
Uncle Vernon advanced on him, a demonic glint in his tiny eyes.
“Read it!” he hissed evilly, brandishing the letter the owl had de-
livered. “Go on  — read it!”
Harry took it. It did not contain birthday greetings.
Dear Mr. Potter,
We have received intelligence that a Hover Charm was 
used at your place of residence this evening at twelve min-
utes past nine.
c h ap t e r  t w o
02_Dobby's Warning.indd   20 3/10/09   8:30:33 PM
Process Black
21
As you know, underage wizards are not permitted to per-
form spells outside school, and further spellwork on your 
part may lead to expulsion from said school (Decree for the 
Reasonable Restriction of Underage Sorcery, , Para-
graph C).
We would also ask you to remember that any magical 
 activity that risks notice by members of the non-magical 
community (Muggles) is a serious off ense under section  
of the International Confederation of Warlocks’ Statute of 
Secrecy.
Enjoy your holidays!
Yours sincerely,
Mafalda Hopkirk
    
Ministry of Magic
Harry looked up from the letter and gulped.
“You didn’t tell us you weren’t allowed to use magic outside 
school,” said Uncle Vernon, a mad gleam dancing in his eyes. “For-
got to mention it.  . . .  Slipped your mind, I daresay. . . .”
He was bearing down on Harry like a great bulldog, all his teeth 
bared. “Well, I’ve got news for you, boy.  . . .  I’m locking you up. 
. . .  You’re never going back to that school  . . .  never  . . .  and if you 
try and magic yourself out  — they’ll expel you!”
And laughing like a maniac, he dragged Harry back upstairs.
Uncle Vernon was as bad as his word.   e following morning, 
d o b by ’ s  warn i n g
02_Dobby's Warning.indd   21 3/10/09   8:30:33 PM
Process Black
22
he paid a man to fi t bars on Harry’s window. He himself fi tted a 
cat-fl ap in the bedroom door, so that small amounts of food could 
be pushed inside three times a day.  ey let Harry out to use the 
bathroom morning and evening. Otherwise, he was locked in his 
room around the clock.
 ree days later, the Dursleys were showing no sign of relenting, 
and Harry couldn’t see any way out of his situation. He lay on his 
bed watching the sun sinking behind the bars on the window and 
wondered miserably what was going to happen to him.
What was the good of magicking himself out of his room if 
Hogwarts would expel him for doing it? Yet life at Privet Drive had 
reached an all-time low. Now that the Dursleys knew they weren’t 
going to wake up as fruit bats, he had lost his only weapon. Dobby 
might have saved Harry from horrible happenings at Hogwarts, 
but the way things were going, he’d probably starve to death any-
way.
 e cat-fl ap rattled and Aunt Petunia’s hand appeared, pushing 
a bowl of canned soup into the room. Harry, whose insides were 
aching with hunger, jumped off  his bed and seized it.  e soup was 
stone-cold, but he drank half of it in one gulp.  en he crossed the 
room to Hedwig’s cage and tipped the soggy vegetables at the bot-
tom of the bowl into her empty food tray. She ruffl  ed her feathers 
and gave him a look of deep disgust.
“It’s no good turning your beak up at it  — that’s all we’ve got,” 
said Harry grimly.
He put the empty bowl back on the fl oor next to the cat-fl ap and 
lay back down on the bed, somehow even hungrier than he had 
been before the soup.
c h ap t e r  t w o
02_Dobby's Warning.indd   22 3/10/09   8:30:33 PM
Process Black
23
Supposing he was still alive in another four weeks, what would 
happen if he didn’t turn up at Hogwarts? Would someone be sent 
to see why he hadn’t come back? Would they be able to make the 
Dursleys let him go?

 e room was growing dark. Exhausted, stomach rumbling, 
mind spinning over the same unanswerable questions, Harry fell 
into an uneasy sleep.
He dreamed that he was on show in a zoo, with a card reading 
  attached to his cage. People goggled through 
the bars at him as he lay, starving and weak, on a bed of straw. He 
saw Dobby’s face in the crowd and shouted out, asking for help, 
but Dobby called, “Harry Potter is safe there, sir!” and vanished. 

 en the Dursleys appeared and Dudley rattled the bars of the 
cage, laughing at him.
“Stop it,” Harry muttered as the rattling pounded in his sore 
head. “Leave me alone  . . .  cut it out  . . .  I’m trying to sleep. . . .”
He opened his eyes. Moonlight was shining through the bars on 
the window. And someone was goggling through the bars at him: a 
freckle-faced, red-haired, long-nosed someone.
Ron Weasley was outside Harry’s window.
d o b by ’ s  warn i n g
02_Dobby's Warning.indd   23 3/10/09   8:30:33 PM
Process Black
24
c h a p t e r  t h r e e
R on!” breathed Harry, creeping to the window and pushing it up so they could talk through the bars. “Ron, how did 
you — What the  — ?”
Harry’s mouth fell open as the full impact of what he was see -
ing hit him. Ron was leaning out of the back window of an 
old turquoise car, which was parked in midair. Grinning at Harry 
from the front seats were Fred and George, Ron’s elder twin 
 brothers.
“All right, Harry?” asked George.
“What’s been going on?” said Ron. “Why haven’t you been an-
swering my letters? I’ve asked you to stay about twelve times, and 
then Dad came home and said you’d got an offi  cial warning for us-
ing magic in front of Muggles —”
“It wasn’t me  — and how did he know?”
“He works for the Ministry,” said Ron. “You know we’re not sup-
posed to do spells outside school —”
the burrow
03_The Burrow.indd   24 3/10/09   8:31:01 PM
Process Black
25
“You should talk,” said Harry, staring at the fl oating car.
“Oh, this doesn’t count,” said Ron. “We’re only borrowing this. 
It’s Dad’s, we didn’t enchant it. But doing magic in front of those 
Muggles you live with —”
“I told you, I didn’t  — but it’ll take too long to explain now  —
look, can you tell them at Hogwarts that the Dursleys have locked 
me up and won’t let me come back, and obviously I can’t magic 
myself out, because the Ministry’ll think that’s the second spell I’ve 
done in three days, so —”
“Stop gibbering,” said Ron. “We’ve come to take you home 
with us.”
“But you can’t magic me out either —”
“We don’t need to,” said Ron, jerking his head toward the front 
seat and grinning. “You forget who I’ve got with me.”
“Tie that around the bars,” said Fred, throwing the end of a rope 
to Harry.
“If the Dursleys wake up, I’m dead,” said Harry as he tied the 
rope tightly around a bar and Fred revved up the car.
“Don’t worry,” said Fred, “and stand back.”
Harry moved back into the shadows next to Hedwig, who 
seemed to have realized how important this was and kept still 
and silent.  e car revved louder and louder and suddenly, with a 
crunching noise, the bars were pulled clean out of the window as 
Fred drove straight up in the air. Harry ran back to the window to 
see the bars dangling a few feet above the ground. Panting, Ron 
hoisted them up into the car. Harry listened anxiously, but there 
was no sound from the Dursleys’ bedroom.
When the bars were safely in the back seat with Ron, Fred re-
versed as close as possible to Harry’s window.
t h e  b urro w
03_The Burrow.indd   25 3/10/09   8:31:01 PM
Process Black
26
“Get in,” Ron said.
“But all my Hogwarts stuff  — my wand  — my broomstick —”
“Where is it?”
“Locked in the cupboard under the stairs, and I can’t get out of 
this room —”
“No problem,” said George from the front passenger seat. “Out 
of the way, Harry.”
Fred and George climbed catlike through the window into 
 Harry’s room. You had to hand it to them, thought Harry, as 
George took an ordinary hairpin from his pocket and started to 
pick the lock.
“A lot of wizards think it’s a waste of time, knowing this sort of 
Muggle trick,” said Fred, “but we feel they’re skills worth learning, 
even if they are a bit slow.”
 ere was a small click and the door swung open.
“So  — we’ll get your trunk  — you grab anything you need from 
your room and hand it out to Ron,” whispered George.
“Watch out for the bottom stair  — it creaks,” Harry whispered 
back as the twins disappeared onto the dark landing.
Harry dashed around his room, collecting his things and pass-
ing them out of the window to Ron.  en he went to help Fred and 
George heave his trunk up the stairs. Harry heard Uncle Vernon 
cough.
At last, panting, they reached the landing, then carried the trunk 
through Harry’s room to the open window. Fred climbed back into 
the car to pull with Ron, and Harry and George pushed from the 
bedroom side. Inch by inch, the trunk slid through the window.
Uncle Vernon coughed again.
c h ap t e r  t h re e
03_The Burrow.indd   26 3/10/09   8:31:01 PM
Process Black
27
“A bit more,” panted Fred, who was pulling from inside the car. 
“One good push —”
Harry and George threw their shoulders against the trunk and it 
slid out of the window into the back seat of the car.
“Okay, let’s go,” George whispered.
But as Harry climbed onto the windowsill there came a sudden 
loud screech from behind him, followed immediately by the thun-
der of Uncle Vernon’s voice.
“THAT RUDDY OWL!”
“I’ve forgotten Hedwig!”
Harry tore back across the room as the landing light clicked 
on  — he snatched up Hedwig’s cage, dashed to the window, and 
passed it out to Ron. He was scrambling back onto the chest of 
drawers when Uncle Vernon hammered on the unlocked door  —
and it crashed open.
For a split second, Uncle Vernon stood framed in the doorway; 
then he let out a bellow like an angry bull and dived at Harry, grab-
bing him by the ankle.
Ron, Fred, and George seized Harry’s arms and pulled as hard 
as they could.
“Petunia!” roared Uncle Vernon. “He’s getting away! HE’S 
GETTING AWAY!”
But the Weasleys gave a gigantic tug and Harry’s leg slid out of 
Uncle Vernon’s grasp  — Harry was in the car  — he’d slammed the 
door shut  —
“Put your foot down, Fred!” yelled Ron, and the car shot sud-
denly toward the moon.
Harry couldn’t believe it  — he was free. He rolled down the 
t h e  b urro w
03_The Burrow.indd   27 3/10/09   8:31:01 PM
Process Black
28
window, the night air whipping his hair, and looked back at the 
shrinking rooftops of Privet Drive. Uncle Vernon, Aunt Petu-
nia, and Dudley were all hanging, dumbstruck, out of Harry’s 
 window.
“See you next summer!” Harry yelled.
 e Weasleys roared with laughter and Harry settled back in his 
seat, grinning from ear to ear.
“Let Hedwig out,” he told Ron. “She can fl y behind us. She 
hasn’t had a chance to stretch her wings for ages.”
George handed the hairpin to Ron and, a moment later,  Hedwig 
soared joyfully out of the window to glide alongside them like a 
ghost.
“So  — what’s the story, Harry?” said Ron impatiently. “What’s 
been happening?”
Harry told them all about Dobby, the warning he’d given Harry 
and the fi asco of the violet pudding.  ere was a long, shocked si-
lence when he had fi nished.
“Very fi shy,” said Fred fi nally.
“Defi nitely dodgy,” agreed George. “So he wouldn’t even tell 
you who’s supposed to be plotting all this stuff ?”
“I don’t think he could,” said Harry. “I told you, every time he 
got close to letting something slip, he started banging his head 
against the wall.”
He saw Fred and George look at each other.
“What, you think he was lying to me?” said Harry.
“Well,” said Fred, “put it this way  — house-elves have got pow-
erful magic of their own, but they can’t usually use it without their 
master’s permission. I reckon old Dobby was sent to stop you com-
c h ap t e r  t h re e
03_The Burrow.indd   28 3/10/09   8:31:01 PM
Process Black
29
ing back to Hogwarts. Someone’s idea of a joke. Can you think of 
anyone at school with a grudge against you?”
“Yes,” said Harry and Ron together, instantly.
“Draco Malfoy,” Harry explained. “He hates me.”
“Draco Malfoy?” said George, turning around. “Not Lucius 
Malfoy’s son?”
“Must be, it’s not a very common name, is it?” said Harry. 
“Why?”
“I’ve heard Dad talking about him,” said George. “He was a big 
supporter of You-Know-Who.”
“And when You-Know-Who disappeared,” said Fred, craning 
around to look at Harry, “Lucius Malfoy came back saying he’d 
never meant any of it. Load of dung  — Dad reckons he was right 
in You-Know-Who’s inner circle.”
Harry had heard these rumors about Malfoy’s family before, and 
they didn’t surprise him at all. Malfoy made Dudley Dursley look 
like a kind, thoughtful, and sensitive boy.
“I don’t know whether the Malfoys own a house-elf. . . .” said 
Harry.
“Well, whoever owns him will be an old Wizarding family, and 
they’ll be rich,” said Fred.
“Yeah, Mum’s always wishing we had a house-elf to do the iron-
ing,” said George. “But all we’ve got is a lousy old ghoul in the at-
tic and gnomes all over the garden. House-elves come with big old 
manors and castles and places like that; you wouldn’t catch one in 
our house. . . .”
Harry was silent. Judging by the fact that Draco Malfoy usually 
had the best of every thing, his family was rolling in wizard gold; he 
t h e  b urro w
03_The Burrow.indd   29 3/10/09   8:31:02 PM
Process Black
30
could just see Malfoy strutting around a large manor house. Send-
ing the family servant to stop Harry from going back to Hogwarts 
also sounded exactly like the sort of thing Malfoy would do. Had 
Harry been stupid to take Dobby seriously?
“I’m glad we came to get you, anyway,” said Ron. “I was getting 
really worried when you didn’t answer any of my letters. I thought 
it was Errol’s fault at fi rst —”
“Who’s Errol?”
“Our owl. He’s ancient. It wouldn’t be the fi rst time he’d col-
lapsed on a delivery. So then I tried to borrow Hermes —”
“Who?”
“ e owl Mum and Dad bought Percy when he was made pre-
fect,” said Fred from the front.
“But Percy wouldn’t lend him to me,” said Ron. “Said he needed 
him.”
“Percy’s been acting very oddly this summer,” said George, 
frowning. “And he has been sending a lot of letters and spending a 
load of time shut up in his room.  . . .  I mean, there’s only so many 
times you can polish a prefect badge.  . . .  You’re driv ing too far 
west, Fred,” he added, pointing at a compass on the dashboard. 
Fred twiddled the steering wheel.
“So, does your dad know you’ve got the car?” said Harry, guess-
ing the answer.
“Er, no,” said Ron, “he had to work tonight. Hopefully we’ll be 
able to get it back in the garage without Mum noticing we fl ew it.”
“What does your dad do at the Ministry of Magic, anyway?”
“He works in the most boring department,” said Ron. “ e 
 Misuse of Muggle Artifacts Offi  ce.”
c h ap t e r  t h re e
03_The Burrow.indd   30 3/10/09   8:31:02 PM
Process Black
31
“ e what?”
“It’s all to do with bewitching things that are Muggle-made, 
you know, in case they end up back in a Muggle shop or house. 
Like, last year, some old witch died and her tea set was sold to an 
antiques shop.  is Muggle woman bought it, took it home, and 
tried to serve her friends tea in it. It was a nightmare  — Dad was 
working overtime for weeks.”
“What happened?”
“ e teapot went berserk and squirted boiling tea all over the 
place and one man ended up in the hospital with the sugar tongs 
clamped to his nose. Dad was going frantic  — it’s only him and 
an old warlock called Perkins in the offi  ce  — and they had to do 
Memory Charms and all sorts of stuff  to cover it up —”
“But your dad  — this car —”
Fred laughed. “Yeah, Dad’s crazy about every thing to do with 
Muggles; our shed’s full of Muggle stuff . He takes it apart, puts 
spells on it, and puts it back together again. If he raided our house 
he’d have to put himself under arrest. It drives Mum mad.”
“ at’s the main road,” said George, peering down through the 
windshield. “We’ll be there in ten minutes.  . . .  Just as well, it’s get-
ting light. . . .”
A faint pinkish glow was visible along the horizon to the east.
Fred brought the car lower, and Harry saw a dark patchwork of 
fi elds and clumps of trees.
“We’re a little way outside the village,” said George. “Ottery St. 
Catchpole.”
Lower and lower went the fl ying car.  e edge of a brilliant red 
sun was now gleaming through the trees.
t h e  b urro w
03_The Burrow.indd   31 3/10/09   8:31:02 PM
Process Black
32
“Touchdown!” said Fred as, with a slight bump, they hit the 
ground. 
 ey had landed next to a tumbledown garage in a small 
yard, and Harry looked out for the fi rst time at Ron’s house.
It looked as though it had once been a large stone pigpen, but 
extra rooms had been added here and there until it was several 
stories high and so crooked it looked as though it were held up by 
magic (which, Harry reminded himself, it probably was). Four or 
fi ve chimneys were perched on top of the red roof. A lopsided sign 
stuck in the ground near the entrance read,  . Around 
the front door lay a jumble of rubber boots and a very rusty caul-
dron. Several fat brown chickens were pecking their way around 
the yard.
“It’s not much,” said Ron.
“It’s wonderful,” said Harry happily, thinking of Privet Drive.

 ey got out of the car.
“Now, we’ll go upstairs really quietly,” said Fred, “and wait for 
Mum to call us for breakfast. 
 en, Ron, you come bounding 
downstairs going, ‘Mum, look who turned up in the night!’ and 
she’ll be all pleased to see Harry and no one need ever know we 
fl ew the car.”
“Right,” said Ron. “Come on, Harry, I sleep at the — at the 
top —”
Ron had gone a nasty greenish color, his eyes fi xed on the house. 

 e other three wheeled around.
Mrs. Weasley was marching across the yard, scattering chickens, 
and for a short, plump, kind-faced woman, it was remarkable how 
much she looked like a saber-toothed tiger.
“Ah,” said Fred.
c h ap t e r  t h re e
03_The Burrow.indd   32 3/10/09   8:31:02 PM
Process Black
33
“Oh, dear,” said George.
Mrs. Weasley came to a halt in front of them, her hands on her 
hips, staring from one guilty face to the next. She was wearing a 
fl owered apron with a wand sticking out of the pocket.
“So,” she said.
“Morning, Mum,” said George, in what he clearly thought was 
a jaunty, winning voice.
“Have you any idea how worried I’ve been?” said Mrs. Weasley 
in a deadly whisper.
“Sorry, Mum, but see, we had to —”
All three of Mrs. Weasley’s sons were taller than she was, but 
they cowered as her rage broke over them.
“Beds empty! No note! Car gone  — could have crashed  — out of my 
mind with worry  — did you care?  — never, as long as I’ve lived —
you wait until your father gets home, we never had trouble like this 
from Bill or Charlie or Percy —”
“Perfect Percy,” muttered Fred.
“YOU COULD DO WITH TAKING A LEAF OUT OF 
 PERCY’S BOOK!” yelled Mrs. Weasley, prodding a fi nger in 
Fred’s chest. “You could have died, you could have been seen, you 
could have lost your father his job  —”
It seemed to go on for hours. Mrs. Weasley had shouted herself 
hoarse before she turned on Harry, who backed away.
“I’m very pleased to see you, Harry, dear,” she said. “Come in 
and have some breakfast.”
She turned and walked back into the house and Harry, after a 
nervous glance at Ron, who nodded encouragingly, followed her.
 e kitchen was small and rather cramped.  ere was a scrubbed 
t h e  b urro w
03_The Burrow.indd   33 3/10/09   8:31:02 PM
Process Black
34
wooden table and chairs in the middle, and Harry sat down on the 
edge of his seat, looking around. He had never been in a wizard 
house before.
 e clock on the wall opposite him had only one hand and no 
numbers at all. Written around the edge were things like Time 
to make tea, Time to feed the chickens, and You’re late. Books were 
stacked three deep on the mantelpiece, books with titles like 
Charm Your Own Cheese, Enchantment in Baking, and One Minute 
Feasts  — It’s Magic! And unless Harry’s ears were deceiving him, 
the old radio next to the sink had just announced that coming up 
was “Witching Hour, with the popular singing sorceress, Celestina 
Warbeck.”
Mrs. Weasley was clattering around, cooking breakfast a little 
haphazardly, throwing dirty looks at her sons as she threw sausages 
into the frying pan. Every now and then she muttered things like 
“don’t know what you were thinking of,” and “never would have 
believed it.”
“I don’t blame you, dear,” she assured Harry, tipping eight or 
nine sausages onto his plate. “Arthur and I have been worried about 
you, too. Just last night we were saying we’d come and get you our-
selves if you hadn’t written back to Ron by Friday. But really” (she 
was now adding three fried eggs to his plate), “fl ying an illegal car 
halfway across the country  — anyone could have seen you —”
She fl icked her wand casually at the dishes in the sink, which be-
gan to clean themselves, clinking gently in the background.
“It was cloudy, Mum!” said Fred.
“You keep your mouth closed while you’re eating!” Mrs. Weasley 
snapped.
“ ey were starving him, Mum!” said George.
c h ap t e r  t h re e
03_The Burrow.indd   34 3/10/09   8:31:02 PM
Process Black
35
“And you!” said Mrs. Weasley, but it was with a slightly softened 
expression that she started cutting Harry bread and buttering it for 
him.
At that moment there was a diversion in the form of a small, red-
headed fi gure in a long nightdress, who appeared in the kitchen, 
gave a small squeal, and ran out again.
“Ginny,” said Ron in an undertone to Harry. “My sister. She’s 
been talking about you all summer.”
“Yeah, she’ll be wanting your autograph, Harry,” Fred said with 
a grin, but he caught his mother’s eye and bent his face over his 
plate without another word. Nothing more was said until all four 
plates were clean, which took a surprisingly short time.
“Blimey, I’m tired,” yawned Fred, setting down his knife and 
fork at last. “I think I’ll go to bed and —”
“You will not,” snapped Mrs. Weasley. “It’s your own fault you’ve 
been up all night. You’re going to de-gnome the garden for me; 
they’re getting completely out of hand again —”
“Oh, Mum —”
“And you two,” she said, glaring at Ron and George. “You can 
go up to bed, dear,” she added to Harry. “You didn’t ask them to 
fl y that wretched car —”
But Harry, who felt wide awake, said quickly, “I’ll help Ron. I’ve 
never seen a de-gnoming —”
“ at’s very sweet of you, dear, but it’s dull work,” said Mrs. 
 Weasley. “Now, let’s see what Lockhart’s got to say on the sub-
ject —”
And she pulled a heavy book from the stack on the mantelpiece. 
George groaned.
“Mum, we know how to de-gnome a garden —”
t h e  b urro w
03_The Burrow.indd   35 3/10/09   8:31:02 PM
Process Black
36
Harry looked at the cover of Mrs. Weasley’s book. Written across 
it in fancy gold letters were the words Gilderoy Lockhart’s Guide to 
Household Pests.  ere was a big photograph on the front of a very 
good-looking wizard with wavy blond hair and bright blue eyes. As 
always in the Wizarding world, the photograph was moving; the 
wizard, who Harry supposed was Gilderoy Lockhart, kept winking 
cheekily up at them all. Mrs. Weasley beamed down at him.
“Oh, he is marvelous,” she said. “He knows his household pests, 
all right, it’s a wonderful book. . . .”
“Mum fancies him,” said Fred, in a very audible whisper.
“Don’t be so ridiculous, Fred,” said Mrs. Weasley, her cheeks 
rather pink. “All right, if you think you know better than  Lockhart, 
you can go and get on with it, and woe betide you if there’s a single 
gnome in that garden when I come out to inspect it.”
Yawning and grumbling, the Weasleys slouched outside with 
Harry behind them.  e garden was large, and in Harry’s eyes, ex-
actly what a garden should be.  e Dursleys wouldn’t have liked 
it — there were plenty of weeds, and the grass needed cutting  —
but there were gnarled trees all around the walls, plants Harry had 
never seen spilling from every fl ower bed, and a big green pond full 
of frogs.
“Muggles have garden gnomes, too, you know,” Harry told Ron 
as they crossed the lawn.
“Yeah, I’ve seen those things they think are gnomes,” said Ron, 
bent double with his head in a peony bush, “like fat little Santa 
Clauses with fi shing rods. . . .”
 ere was a violent scuffl  ing noise, the peony bush shuddered, 
and Ron straightened up. “  is is a gnome,” he said grimly.
c h ap t e r  t h re e
03_The Burrow.indd   36 3/10/09   8:31:02 PM
Process Black
37
“Gerroff  me! Gerroff  me!” squealed the gnome.
It was certainly nothing like Santa Claus. It was small and leath-
ery looking, with a large, knobby, bald head exactly like a potato. 
Ron held it at arm’s length as it kicked out at him with its horny lit-
tle feet; he grasped it around the ankles and turned it upside down.
“ is is what you have to do,” he said. He raised the gnome 
above his head (“Gerroff  me!”) and started to swing it in great cir-
cles like a lasso. Seeing the shocked look on Harry’s face, Ron 
added, “It doesn’t hurt them  — you’ve just got to make them really 
dizzy so they can’t fi nd their way back to the gnomeholes.”
He let go of the gnome’s ankles: It fl ew twenty feet into the air 
and landed with a thud in the fi eld over the hedge.
“Pitiful,” said Fred. “I bet I can get mine beyond that stump.”
Harry learned quickly not to feel too sorry for the gnomes. He 
decided just to drop the fi rst one he caught over the hedge, but the 
gnome, sensing weakness, sank its razor-sharp teeth into Harry’s 
fi nger and he had a hard job shaking it off  — until  —
“Wow, Harry  — that must’ve been fi fty feet. . . .”
 e air was soon thick with fl ying gnomes.
“See, they’re not too bright,” said George, seizing fi ve or six 
gnomes at once. “ e moment they know the de-gnoming’s going 
on they storm up to have a look. You’d think they’d have learned 
by now just to stay put.”
Soon, the crowd of gnomes in the fi eld started walking away in 
a straggling line, their little shoulders hunched.
“ ey’ll be back,” said Ron as they watched the gnomes disap-
pear into the hedge on the other side of the fi eld. “ ey love it 
here.  . . .  Dad’s too soft with them; he thinks they’re funny. . . .”
t h e  b urro w
03_The Burrow.indd   37 3/10/09   8:31:02 PM
Process Black
38
Just then, the front door slammed.
“He’s back!” said George. “Dad’s home!”
 ey hurried through the garden and back into the house.
Mr. Weasley was slumped in a kitchen chair with his glasses off  
and his eyes closed. He was a thin man, going bald, but the little 
hair he had was as red as any of his children’s. He was wearing long 
green robes, which were dusty and travel-worn.
“What a night,” he mumbled, groping for the teapot as they all 
sat down around him. “Nine raids. Nine! And old Mundungus 
Fletcher tried to put a hex on me when I had my back turned. . . .”
Mr. Weasley took a long gulp of tea and sighed.
“Find anything, Dad?” said Fred eagerly.
“All I got were a few shrinking door keys and a biting kettle,” 
yawned Mr. Weasley. “ ere was some pretty nasty stuff  that 
wasn’t my department, though. Mortlake was taken away for ques-
tioning about some extremely odd ferrets, but that’s the Commit-
tee on Experimental Charms, thank goodness. . . .”
“Why would anyone bother making door keys shrink?” said 
George.
“Just Muggle-baiting,” sighed Mr. Weasley. “Sell them a key that 
keeps shrinking to nothing so they can never fi nd it when they 
need it.  . . .  Of course, it’s very hard to convict anyone because no 
Muggle would admit their key keeps shrinking  — they’ll insist 
they just keep losing it. Bless them, they’ll go to any lengths to ig-
nore magic, even if it’s staring them in the face.  . . .  But the things 
our lot have taken to enchanting, you wouldn’t believe —”
“LIKE CARS, FOR INSTANCE?”
Mrs. Weasley had appeared, holding a long poker like a sword. 
Mr. Weasley’s eyes jerked open. He stared guiltily at his wife.
c h ap t e r  t h re e
03_The Burrow.indd   38 3/10/09   8:31:02 PM
Process Black
39
“C-cars, Molly, dear?”
“Yes, Arthur, cars,” said Mrs. Weasley, her eyes fl ashing. “Imag-
ine a wizard buying a rusty old car and telling his wife all he wanted 
to do with it was take it apart to see how it worked, while really he 
was enchanting it to make it fl y.”
Mr. Weasley blinked.
“Well, dear, I think you’ll fi nd that he would be quite within the 
law to do that, even if  — er  — he maybe would have done better 
to, um, tell his wife the truth.  . . .   ere’s a loophole in the law, 
you’ll fi nd.  . . .  As long as he wasn’t intending to fl y the car, the fact 
that the car could fl y wouldn’t —”
“Arthur Weasley, you made sure there was a loophole when you 
wrote that law!” shouted Mrs. Weasley. “Just so you could carry on 
tinkering with all that Muggle rubbish in your shed! And for your 
information, Harry arrived this morning in the car you weren’t in-
tending to fl y!”
“Harry?” said Mr. Weasley blankly. “Harry who?”
He looked around, saw Harry, and jumped.
“Good lord, is it Harry Potter? Very pleased to meet you, Ron’s 
told us so much about —”
“Your sons fl ew that car to Harry’s house and back last night!” 
shouted Mrs. Weasley. “What have you got to say about that, eh?”
“Did you really?” said Mr. Weasley eagerly. “Did it go all right? 
I  — I mean,” he faltered as sparks fl ew from Mrs. Weasley’s eyes, 
“that  — that was very wrong, boys  — very wrong indeed. . . .”
“Let’s leave them to it,” Ron muttered to Harry as Mrs. Weasley 
swelled like a bullfrog. “Come on, I’ll show you my bedroom.”
 ey slipped out of the kitchen and down a narrow passage-
way to an uneven staircase, which wound its way, zigzagging up 
t h e  b urro w
03_The Burrow.indd   39 3/10/09   8:31:02 PM
Process Black
40
through the house. On the third landing, a door stood ajar. Harry 
just caught sight of a pair of bright brown eyes staring at him be-
fore it closed with a snap.
“Ginny,” said Ron. “You don’t know how weird it is for her to be 
this shy. She never shuts up normally —”
 ey climbed two more fl ights until they reached a door with 
peeling paint and a small plaque on it, saying ’ .
Harry stepped in, his head almost touching the sloping ceiling, 
and blinked. It was like walking into a furnace: Nearly every thing 
in Ron’s room seemed to be a violent shade of orange: the bed-
spread, the walls, even the ceiling.  en Harry realized that Ron 
had covered nearly every inch of the shabby wallpaper with posters 
of the same seven witches and wizards, all wearing bright orange 
robes, carrying broomsticks, and waving energetically.
“Your Quidditch team?” said Harry.
“ e Chudley Cannons,” said Ron, pointing at the orange bed-
spread, which was emblazoned with two giant black C’s and a 
speeding cannonball. “Ninth in the league.”
Ron’s school spellbooks were stacked untidily in a corner, next to 
a pile of comics that all seemed to feature   e Adventures of Martin 
Miggs, the Mad Muggle. Ron’s magic wand was lying on top of a fi sh 
tank full of frog spawn on the windowsill, next to his fat gray rat, 
Scabbers, who was snoozing in a patch of sun.
Harry stepped over a pack of Self-Shuffl  ing playing cards on the 
fl oor and looked out of the tiny window. In the fi eld far below he 
could see a gang of gnomes sneaking one by one back through the 
Weasleys’ hedge.  en he turned to look at Ron, who was watching 
him almost nervously, as though waiting for his opinion.
c h ap t e r  t h re e
03_The Burrow.indd   40 3/10/09   8:31:03 PM
Process Black
41
“It’s a bit small,” said Ron quickly. “Not like that room you had 
with the Muggles. And I’m right underneath the ghoul in the attic; 
he’s always banging on the pipes and groaning. . . .”
But Harry, grinning widely, said, “  is is the best house I’ve ever 
been in.”
Ron’s ears went pink.
t h e  b urro w
03_The Burrow.indd   41 3/10/09   8:31:03 PM
Process Black
