
ASSOCATION FOR CIVIL SOCIETY 
DEVELOPMENT IN AZERBAIJAN
HISTORICAL FACTS 
vs. 
THE ARMENIAN MYTHS
BAKU 2010
 Author of the Project, President of the Association for Civil 
Society Development in Azerbaijan
Elkhan Suleymanov
 Scientific editor , Doctor of Political Sciences
Ramiz Sevdimaliyev
Creative Group
Vali Alibayov
Fuad Babayev
Khalid Mammadov
Muslim Mammadov
Dilara Mustafayeva
Kamil Salimov
“Apostrof“ Publishing House
ISBN  978-9952-444-27-8
                                                                        
                                                             ©Association for Civil Society  
Development in Azerbaijan
3www.avciya.az
Introduction
Dear reader,
The Armenian-Azerbaijani conflict over Nagorno-Karabakh started in the end of 
80s of XX century by the armed assault of Armenia against Azerbaijan has resulted 
in death and injury of hundred of thousands of people, more than a million of people 
became refugees and IDPs, and finally, occupation of 20% of Azerbaijan’s territory 
by Armenia. Although an agreement establishing cease-fire regime was signed in 
May 1994, this conflict has not been resolved on the basis of the main principles of 
the international law so far, the number of killed and injured as a result of regular 
violation of cease-fire regime in the contact lines of fighting parties increases. 
Armenian-Azerbaijani Nagorno-Karabakh conflict is the most complicated con-
flict not only in the South Caucasus region but we would say in the post-Soviet area 
in general, creating serious problems for the proper integration of the region to the 
world community as well as establishment and development of the democratic val-
ues. However, Armenian ideologists continue to falsify the historical facts creating 
myths for justification of Armenia’s territorial claims against Azerbaijan. They try to 
convince both the Armenian and world community in the veracity of these falsified 
“historical facts”. This process is actually continued under the form of spreqding of 
“Armenian mythology” all over the world by the Armenian mythologists. 
Nevertheless, the humanity prefers to believe not in ungrounded myths but solid 
historical facts. This is why we based this book on the myths of Armenian ideoogists 
about Armenian-Azerbaijani Nagorno –Karabakh conflict and the historical facts 
disclosing these myths. For the sake of objectivity, only non-Azerbaijani, including 
Armenian sources were used for presentation of the historical facts. 
We invite you to a short journey of Armenian myths and historical facts proving 
that they are nothing but myths. We believe that this book will help you to get an 
objective information on the genesis of Armenian-Azerbaijani Nagorno-Karabakh 
conflict and problems of its solution.
Since the day it was established ACSDA has carried out different local and in-
ternational projects on the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict between Armenia and Azer-
baijan. In 2006, ASCDA started gathering  materials on the tragedy in Khojali, the 
4 www.avciya.az
testimony of  witnesses, facts, news in the world press, and then published them in 
“The Khojali Genocide (in documents, facts and foreign media)”. 
In 2007, ASCDA conducted a wide scale campaign under the slogan “The Kho-
jali Genocide: Million Signatures - One Demand”. As a result of this campaign, the 
Association was able to have signatures of one million Azerbaijani citizens who 
demand the recognition of the Khojali tragedy as a genocide. These signatures were 
published in form of a book and sent to the parliaments of different countries and to 
many well-known libraries. 
The brochure presented to you is a part of one of our current projects.
5www.avciya.az
The first myth: 
Is Karabakh the historical land of settlement of Armenians?
It is immoral to justify the occupation, murder of peaceful population, its ex-
pulsion from their lands and to make efforts for legalizing this. The Armenian 
ideologists are trying to convince the world community that the Karabakh is his-
torically Armenian territory. Without any explanation we present some historical 
facts which prove that this is wrong. 
The facts against this myth: 
I. The Treaty of Turkmenchay (1828) that ended the war between the Russian 
Empire and Iran, and the Treaty of Edirne (1929) signed between Russia and Turkey 
gave a legal basis to the movement of the Armenian population living in Iran and 
Turkey to Azerbaijan. The reason of this movement was to create a stronghold of 
the Christian Armenians for Russia in Muslim Azerbaijan. The Russian writer and 
diplomat Alexander Griboyedov (1795-1829) who participated in the signing of the 
Treaty of Turkmenchay and shortly after was appointed the Russian Ambassador 
to Iran directly led this process¹, as a response to the appeal of the Karabakh local 
population on prevention of the Armenian movements, he gave promise that these 
movements were temporary, the Armenians would not stay here for a long time and 
would be moved to Russia². At the same time Griboyedov wrote to the Russian 
Emperor: 
“Your majesty, perhaps you gave the Armenians permission to move to the 
central lands of Russia. They are such a nation that after living a couple of years 
they will proclaim that these lands are of their ancestors’”.³
II. Isaac Azimov, famous American writer and scientist writes: “When the 
Urartu was destroyed by the Medians, a knew ethnicity of the Armenians emerged 
in the region and began to move towards the Asia Minor. Initially they were the 
subjects of the Medians, then of the Persians, then of the Seleucids. When Antioch 
was destroyed by the Romans (190 AD), they made the first step on the road of 
independence…. In the centuries that followed, they rolled like a ball of Ping-
Pong between the states of the east and west, they have never been their own 
lords, never been a part of a country completely, but a battle field for diplomats 
and armies all the time” 4
III. The Armenian historian B. Ishkhanyan wrote in his book “The Peoples of 
6 www.avciya.az
the Caucasus”:5
“… The real motherland of the Armenians is in the Asia Minor, that is, beyond 
the borders of the territory of Russia, they were settled in the Caucasus, mainly 
within the borders of the gubernia of Erivan, in some provinces populated purely 
by the Armenians and in the next centuries in other places of the Caucasus,…” 
IV. The Armenian historian, professor of Columbian University, George 
(Gevork) Burnutyan writes: “Before the Russian occupation the Armenians never 
formed the majority in this region. Although “Kameralnoe opisanie”6 writes about 
the Armenian majority in some Armenian provinces, this change in the region 
took place when over 35,000 Muslims migrated from this region. Thus, during 
the Persian rule not a single fact gives evidence that the Armenians formed the 
majority in any province. Perhaps, on the local level it may be said only about 
the province of Kerbibasar, where the religious centre of the Armenians Uchkilsa 
(Echmiadzin) was located and the Armenians could form majority there. After 
the migration of thousands of Muslims from this region and arrival of 57,000 
Armenians from Persia and the Ottoman Empire the number of the Christian 
population here grew and equaled to that of the Muslims. The Armenians could 
form the majority only after the Russian-Turkish wars of 1855-1856 and 1877-
1878 as a result of their migration from the area of the Ottoman Empire and 
immigration of Muslim population. But even after these events, in the beginning 
of XX century Erivan 7 remained a town consisting mainly of Muslims”8. 
V. The Armenian historian, professor of Michigan University Ronald Suny 
writes: “Since the Ancient times and in the Middle Ages Karabakh was a part 
of the kingdom of the Caucasian Albanians. This independent ethno-religious 
group, which already does not exist, was converted to Christianity in IV century 
and drew together with the Armenian Church. With the lapse of time the Albanian 
nobility became Armenianized. When in XI century the Seljuks intruded into the 
Transcaucasus, the process of Islamisation began, as a result, the population of 
the lowlands in Karabakh adopted Islam. This ethnicity was the direct ancestors 
of the present Azerbaijanis and spoke in Turkic, they adopted Islam of the Shiite 
sect widely spread in the neighboring Iran.
The mountainous part remained mainly Christian, and with the lapse of time 
the Albanians of Karabakh merged with the Armenians. Ganzasar, the centre of 
the Albanian Church, became one of the episcopacies of the Armenian Church. 
And the echo of the national church, which once was independent, remained only 
in the status of the local archbishop called Catholicos”9.
VI. “...From the fourth century b.c. to the eighth century a.d., the territory of 
7www.avciya.az
the current Nagorno-Karabakh region of Azerbaijan was one of the provinces 
of Caucasian Albania, the most ancient state of Northern Azerbaijan. Karabakh 
has never been a part of the Armenian state until the Armenians captured it by 
brute force in 1992. Armenians love to claim they are descended from Hayk, 
the great-great grandson of the Biblical patriarch Noah. Because Noah’s arc is 
supposed to have come to rest on Mount Ararat, Armenians conclude that all of 
eastern Anatolia must have been the original Armenian ancient homeland. This 
wild claim is based on nothing other than fables, certainly not on any scientific 
or archaeological evidence. Historian Auguste Carriere summarily dismisses this 
claim.
The actual truth is there were a few Armenians even in the Caucasus region at 
all in 1800. Christian Armenians were brought into the Caucasus by the Russians 
starting in the early to mid-1800s and given free lands – lands the Russians had 
taken from Muslims after forcing them out of the region at gunpoint.
Russia began annexing the Caucasus in 1826. According to the Russian 
documents of this period, there were ninety thousand people living in Karabakh. 
There was one large town and 600 villages, only 150 of them were Armenian. By 
the end of the nineteenth century and after the forced removal of most Muslims, 
Armenians became a majority. The reason the Russians brought in more than 
130,000 Armenians between the years 1828 and 1830 and gave them Muslim 
lands and homes was because they knew they would support the Russian Christian 
church as contrasted to the Muslims who would not do so.”10
The second myth: Have Armenians have been subjected to 
pressures on the part of other nations along the history?
The Armenians have tried to create the image of “a long-suffering nation” and 
gained certain successes in it. What do the historical documents say about it? 
The facts disproving this myth:
I. “Before the Armenian revolutionaries, mainly the party of Dashnaksutyun 
made their appearance; the Transcaucasus lived in peace and security. Nobody 
here remembers the shadow of terrors which we saw very often and which were very 
often repeated in the form of the Armenian-Tatar slaughters (the Tatars were very 
often named as Azerbaijanis which is a mistake). The Dashnaks came and began 
8 www.avciya.az
to propagate the idea of creating an Armenian territory free from other ethnicities 
for the future Autonomous Armenia, and the feeling of national hostility and 
hatred penetrated into the life of the Transcaucasian village that was patriarchal 
up to that time…. It is not already a secret for the Armenian population that 
the Dashnaksutyun Party, distinguished in the Armenian-Tatar slaughter, very 
often took to provocations to prove their actions like tactic attacks of the bands 
of “patriots” to the neighboring Tatar (Azerbaijani) population, who, of course, 
did not remain in debt to the Armenians. This aspiration of Dashnaksutyun was 
explained usually by their desire to win considerably more territory only for the 
Armenian population with the purpose of laying the foundations for creating an 
autonomous Armenia in future”11
II. Adviser of the former USA President Ronald Reagan on legal issues Bruce 
Fein writers: as result of studies conducted by the white House it has become 
clear that the Armenians have annihilated two millions of the Ottoman Turks. 
Expressing the view to the confirmations of the Armenians about the “genocide”, 
Bruce Fein stresses that during the presidency of Ronald Reagan in 1981 the White 
House studied the problem and it was proved that these claims of the Armenians 
are groundless. According to Fein, the Ottoman Empire paid a particular attention 
to national minorities and displayed care for them. “The national minorities lived 
comfortably, enjoyed religions freedom. It is true that in the World War I the 
Armenian terrorist organisations together with the French and Russian militaries 
exterminated over two million citizens of the Ottoman Empire. The studies prove 
that the loss of the very Armenians in the said period was 500 000. Besides, the 
Armenians, particularly those who live in the United States, get enormous incomes 
on the account of the lies about   the genocide”- says B. Fein. And the government 
of the United States does not act against the Armenians because of the great sum 
of money which is in circulation. According to the advisor, the Armenians are not 
eager to open their achieves, because, they do not want to lose the incomes which 
they get as soon as the archives open, the truth will be disclosed,” he thinks. 12
III. “... in the late eighties in the city of Tiflis, a few Armenian school teachers 
formed the group, which started publishing the journal “Gnchak”(“Nabat”).... 
The main programme of this party group was to gather under its banner all the 
Armenians in the territory of the three powers - Russia, Turkey and Iran, and 
by gathering to create a so-called “Great Armenia”.... ”13 Officially recognized 
date of the creation of Armenian organisation “Gnchak” can be considered in 
1886, when Jeneve Avetis Nazarbekyan, Maro Vardanyan, Gabriel Kafyan and 
Ruben Kchanazatyan proclaimed the main points of the organisation programme, 
9www.avciya.az
allowing researchers to classify it as the terrorist organisation. Thus, the paragraph 
4 of the programme of “Gnchak notes:” In order to achieve its objectives, the 
revolutionary government must apply the following methods: propaganda, 
agitation, terrorism, the establishment of subversive organisations ... Agitation 
and terrorism should serve to make people stronger and more courageous “. 
Another point of the programme of the Armenian terrorist organisation “Gnchak” 
states: “Kill the Turks and the Kurds in all conditions, never spare the Armenians 
who betrayed their purpose, avenge them.”14
IV. 1890. Tiflis. Georgia Khristofor Mikaelyan, Simon Zavareyan and Stefan 
Zoryan found the organisation by name of “Dashnak sutyun” (Armenian Revolutionary 
Union). It continued the terrorist and fascistic traditions of their predecessors 
“Armenakan”, “Gnchak”. The Armenian author M.Vardanyan summarizes the main 
features of Dashnaksutyun in his book “The history of Dashnaksutyun”like this: “The 
most important slogan of Dashnaksutyun is to shoot and kill the Turks, irrespective 
of any circumstance”. In their first Congress held in 1892, the Dashnaks developed 
and approved the strategy of “organisation and training of military formations 
of the Armenians, institution of revolutionary committees, use of terror against 
the government officials and clerks…” “According to the documents kept in the 
archives of Russia, the delegates of the Congress of 1892 adopted the principles” 
of the armament and organisation of the Armenians, of the conduction of terror acts 
murder of government officials and destruction of institutions… The Congress for 
the first time in history spoke of the movement of fighters (fedains)”, that is, the 
Armenian kamikadzes. These fighters won particular popularity when they began 
annihilate the innocent people systematically for implementing into the life their 
“absured-patholical idea” about the creation of the Great Armenia- a country from 
the sea to the sea”.
Four years after the birth of Dashnakstym  the American newspaper “The Boston 
Herald” (February 15, 1894) wrote: “The great majority of the Armenians are 
not able to read and write, they are hardly ready for self–administration, if even 
Armenia were a separate country populated only by the Armenians” Nevertheless, 
the ideologists of Dashnaksutyun continued their work on the development and 
materialisation of the scenario of the ethnically clean zones populated only by one 
ethnicity, that is, only by the Armenians.
V. March 1893. Ankara. Turkey. The Armenian band formations organized a 
mass slaughter of Muslims in the suburbs of Ankara. Its organizers were mainly 
the militants from the Armenian terrorist organisation “Gnchak”. According to 
the researches, the Armenian organisations have developed two principles: 1)to 
10 www.avciya.az
organize riots; 2) “to shout about these riots and bloodshed by increasing its scope 
consistently…Because they have assimilated the idea that politics is a lie from the 
beginning to the end, it is possible to save the nation by lies.”15
VI. August 29, 1903. Elizavetapol (Ganja) of Azerbaijan. In the suburb of the 
town, near the Armenian church several thousands of Armenians assembled as 
the church-bell rang in conformity with the scenario of the terrorist organisation 
Gnchak. As a result of fires from rifles there were dead and wounded among the non-
Armenian population. The Russian achieves preserve documents that explain the 
provocation of the Armenian Church: “… in divine service (the Gregorian Church 
is meant) in the first place there is only Catholicos, then there are the Gregorian 
Christians; and the rest-both the Christians and nations of other religions are” 
heretics and infidels,” and subject to damnation who not only attempt to oppress 
the Armenian church, but even those who connive at it. On the basis of such a 
teaching the ruling house of Russia was cursed by the Armenians in 1903…”16
VII. September 2, 1903. Baku. Azerbaijan. At 5 o’clock in the evening after the 
church hell a big crowd of armed Armenians gathered near the Armenian Church. 
To the order of the local authorities to leave the place they answered with shots 
from pistols. Only when 45 armed activists of various Armenian band formations 
were detained, it became possible to prevent the bloodshed. In the very church, 
behind the icons and under the altar a big quantity of arms were found. According to 
V.L.Velichko, a scholar in the Caucasian studies, “… in all the mutinies described 
above a number of characteristic facts catch the sight. First, the Armenian crowd, 
which usually is considered peaceful and timid, and which in reality is a coward 
by nature, has many arms; it seems that they have stores of arms obtained in 
advance, which tells of an existing organisation making preparations for definite 
actions. Secondly, the mutinous Armenians came to the place of disorder by the 
call of the church bell with their arms in their hands. Both in Kars and Baku in 
such circumstances they occupied a kind of strategic position; it becomes evident 
that everything was well-thought out and prepared in advance. Thirdly, here 
the church calls not to prayer, but to slaughter. The Church and its altar full 
of weapons for the slaughter of people is not a prayer house, but the hearth of 
brutality, savagery, a den of mutiny against the lawful authorities of power, which 
functions in the interests of this very church.17
According to Lowry Heath, a scholar, “….when the leaders of the Armenian 
church took part in memorial services of the diseased, or visited the terrorists 
in prisons and gave their consent to conduction of such services, in fact, they 
admitted that they had approved the conduction of such actions, which the 
11www.avciya.az
Armenian terrorists had committed”18
VIII. December of 1904 - January of 1905, Baku, Azerbaijan. There appeared 
proclamations in Baku calling the Azerbaijanis to join the Armenian terrorist 
organisations for joint struggle against the Russians. In case of refusal there was 
such a threat in the proclamation: “Get ready, we shall stain your lands with your 
own blood and put the corpses into fire that will cover the whole world”.
As the history of the next years evidence, these works were fully implemented 
into life by the Armenian international terrorist organisations. Senator Kuzminsky 
said: “It seems that such a provocative practice of the Armenians had gained a wide 
spread in the Muslim world…” The threatening proclamations of the Armenians 
with the replies of the Muslims in negation have been published in one of the issues 
of the magazine “Cakhre nume” in Persian in Alexandria.19
February 5, 1905. Baku Azerbaijan. Aga Rza Babayev, resident the village of 
Sabunchu of Baku uezd, was killed by an Armenian terrorist. It was committed in 
order to provoke disorder. On the same day the bandits murdered the pupils of the 
seventh grade of the technical school Jacob Lebedev and Ivan Volkov. According 
to the Armenian scholar J.Libardiyan, in the period of three years (1904-1906) the 
Armenians committed 105 “political murders”, 56 of them were against the Armenian, 
32 - for political reasons and against the Russians,Turkish clerks and officers: 2-3 
-  by accident and without a special goal, the rest - against the bankers and usurers”. 
Analyzing the figures demonstrated by Libardiyan, the scholar writes:..” within this 
short three-year period the Armenians killed by the Armenian terrorist was twice 
more than the number of the non-Armenians killed by the Armenians.
This fact, which is hardly taken into account today, deserves attention, because, 
it is a phenomenon characteristic not only for 1904-1906, but which still continues 
to take place nowadays, too. The goal has remained the same: intentional attempt 
to frighten the majority of the peaceful Armenians, to force them to encourage the 
actions of terrorism”.20
February 6, 1905. Baku. Azerbaijan. According to the documents of Mikhailovsky 
Hospital, terrorist groups protected by the Armenian millionaires Balabey Lalayan, 
Artem Babayants, Isay Ter-Osipov and other magnates 18 persons were killed, 33–
wounded, including 34 Azerbaijanis, 6 Russians, 6 Armenians  and 5 representatives 
other nations.21
February 5, 1905. Baku. Azerbaijan. About 100 peaceful residents were killed 
and wounded by the same Armenian terrorist organisation.22
The events of February 6-10, 1905, entered the history as “a bloody slaughter 
in Baku”. The above–named Armenian magnates together with Mantashev, Ter–
12 www.avciya.az
Gukasov, Melikyants were the members and sponsors of the international Armenian 
terrorist organisation Dashnaksutyun which began to implement their programme 
goals.23
The end of the August of 1905. Baku. Azerbaijan24. The Armenian band-
formations committed monstrous slaughter of the residents of the city – the ethnic 
Azerbaijanis. According to eye–witnesses, the events at the end of August in Baku 
exceeded the February tragedy of the same year due to brutality and mass nature of 
slaughters.
According to the materials from the Russian archives, the Armenian terrorist 
organisation Dashnaksutyun played a double game in 1905-1906, in fact:  “first, on 
the one hand, at least a part of wrath against the Muslims has been vented, on 
the other hand, with the help of press and propaganda the Russian government 
was presented as the culprit of the committed crimes, thus, there appeared a new 
material for a mighty propagation for revolutionizing not only the Armenians, 
but other inhabitants of the Caucasus, too… As a result, many administrative and 
private persons of the Russian nationality objectionable to the Armenians were 
killed”. 25
IX. In the March of 1918 the Armenians committed an unimaginable genocide 
in Azerbaijan. Hundreds of villages were destroyed in Shamakhi, Guba, Lankaran, 
Khachmaz, Hajigabul, Salyan. Civilians were killed. The number of the murdered 
only in Baku exceeded 12000. S. Shaumyan cynically admitted that “as a result of 
the civil war a mass of poor and homeless Muslims suffered”. He noted that “they 
were obliged to appeal for the help to the Armenian regiment. We could not allow 
us the luxury of refusing the service. It was necessary to use the service of the 
Armenian regiment, and the victory was so great that it can hardly overshadow the 
reality”.26
The document taken from the national archive in Vienna says:
“In March 21 the Bolsheviks sent an ultimatum to Tatars demanding to give 
up all arms till 5 o’clock in the afternoon and recognize the Soviet Government. 
Armenians behaved neutrally. They sent their representative to Tatars, who clearly 
stated the unwillingness of Armenians to consider with the Bolsheviks. In spite of 
this in the evening of March 31 Armenians had joined the Bolsheviks and attacked 
Tatars. The attack started suddenly. Tatars had 5 machine-guns and no artillery at 
all: the Bolsheviks and Armenians had 12 ordnances, not counting naval artillery. 
Regular Tatar forces counted 400-500 men, whereas Armenians had a regiment 
since January, and the Bolsheviks had one and a half regiment at their disposal. 
Imperfect organisation and Turkish officers’ commanding predetermined their 
13www.avciya.az
failure. There also were rumours that Tatars didn’t want to make donations for the 
formation of military units. The slaughter started in March 31 and stopped in April 
3. There were approximately 12000 dead. The houses have been partly burnt down 
and destroyed. The “Izmail” building, an architectural masterpiece, was completely 
destroyed. Those who did not manage to escape were killed by Armenians in their 
own houses. Armenians disembowelled female Muslims. There was no mercy even 
to children. Some estrangement between the Bolsheviks (Russians) and Armenians 
became consequence of all these infamous crimes.
I had a little chance to talk to the Tatar intelligentsia, as many of them escaped.
Partially to Tiflis.
At present Baku is almost completely cut off from the outer world.” 27
The third myth: Did Azerbaijanis committed Khojali 
Genocide themselves? 
On February 26, 1992 Armenian armed forces with the assistance of Russia’s 366-
th regiment, as it turned out later, mostly consisted of Armenian officers and warrant 
officers razed the Azerbaijani town Khojali. The victims of the barbaric actions were 
about a thousand people, mainly old people, women and children. This massacre 
became one of the most monstrous acts of the international terrorism against the 
civil population in the XX century. Hundreds of innocent people were massacred in 
one night. The tragic outcome of the Khojali crime: 613 dead, including 106 women 
and 23 children, 487 disabled persons, 1275 people lived through the horrors of 
Armenian captivity, 150 missing people. In the course of this barbaric operation, 
dozens of children, women and old people were shot at point blank range. Armenian 
terrorist organisations and hired armed units annihilated the whole families and 
organized “demonstrative” executions: skinned alive, cut off ears, and scalped. 
Common Fascism: disemboweled pregnant women... pulled out a child ... stuffed 
the cut heads of their husbands in the already dead women’s bellies... and sewed 
their bellies - all this is indescribable. The international censure on Armenians for 
this tragedy led to the fact that the Armenians fabricated the myth that the slaughter 
was committed by Azerbaijanis themselves...
14 www.avciya.az
The facts againts this myth:
I. When the Armenian military leader Serj Sarkisian28 was asked to speak about 
the occupation of Khojali, he replied discreetly: “We prefer not to speak about this 
aloud”. Regarding to the number of victims, he said, “much has been exaggerated”, 
and fleeing Azerbaijanis showed armed resistance. However, Sarkisian spoke more 
honest and more rigidly on the happened incidents: “But I think that the main 
issue was quite different. Before Khojali the Azerbaijanis thought that they could 
joke with us, they thought that the Armenians were not capable to attack civil 
population. We managed to break that [stereotype]. “29
II. One of the most active militant of Armenian terrorist organisations ASALA 
Vazgen Sislyan, whose name is associated with a number of bloody terrorist attacks 
around the world, did not hide from the press his involvement in the murder of Azeri 
children in Khojaly. It is significant that in the future V. Sislyan, on the initiative 
of President of the Republic of Armenia Robert Kocharian, will be recognized as a 
hero of Karabakh war 30
 From the book of Armenian author Heyriyan Daud, a participant of the Khojaly 
tragedy: «... on March 2 Armenian group Gaflan» (engaged in the burning of corpses), 
has gathered more than 100 bodies of Turks (Azerbaijanis - Ed.) and burned them 
about a kilometer to the west of Khojaly ... I saw a girl of ten years old, wounded on 
the forehead and hands in the last car. This child with her blue face was still alive, 
despite hunger, cold and received wounds. She was breathing softly. I can not forget 
the eyes of this child, struggling with the death ... Soon the soldier, who was called 
Tigranyan, took the motionless girl and threw her on the dead bodies ... Then they 
were burned. It seemed to me that someone among the burning corpses was crying, 
begging for help ... After that I could not go on….31
III. “Armenians occupy a quarter of Azerbaijan’s territory, and they’ve 
displaced almost a million Azerbaijani civilians. Friends of Armenia’s powerful 
lobby in Washington, including the U.S. Government are suddenly a bit aghast. 
‘What we see now is a systematic destruction of every village in their way’ says a 
senior state department official. It’s vandalism.”32 
IV.Thomas Goltz, ARMENIAN SOLDIERS 
MASSACRE HUNDREDS OF FLEEING FAMILIES 
Survivors reported that Armenian soldiers shot and bayoneted 
more than 450 Azeris, many of them women and children. 
Hundreds, possibly thousands, were missing and feared dead... 
   ...Agdam hospital was a scene of carnage and terror. Doctors said they had 140 
15www.avciya.az
patients who escaped slaughter, most with bullet injuries or deep stab wounds. 
Nor were they safe in Agdam. On friday night rockets fell on the city which has a 
population of 150,000, destroying several buildings and killing one person.33
V. CORPSES LITTER HILLS IN KARABAKH 
(ANATOL LIEVEN COMES UNDER FIRE WHILE FLYING TO INVESTIGATE 
THE MASS KILLINGS OF REFUGEES BY ARMENIAN TROOPS) 
As we swooped low over the snow-covered hills of Nagorno-Karabagh we saw 
the scattered corpses. Apparently, the refugees had been shot down as they ran. An 
Azerbaijani film of the places we flew over, shown to journalists afterwards, showed 
dozens of corpses lying in various parts of the hills.
The Azerbaijanis claim that as many as 1000 have died in mass killing 
of Azerbaijanis fleeing from the town of Khodjaly, seized by Armenians last 
week. A further 4,000 are believed to be wounded, frozen to death or missing. 
The civilian helicopter’s job was to land in the mountains and pick up bodies at sites 
of the mass killings. 
The civilian helicopter picked up four corpses, and it was during this and a 
previous mission that an Azerbaijani cameraman filmed the several dozen bodies 
on the hillsides. 
Back at the airfield in Agdam, we took a look at the bodies the civilian helicopter 
had picked up. Two old men and a small girl were covered with blood, their limbs 
contorted by the cold and rigor mortis. They had been shot. (The Times, 2 March 
1992)
VI. Jil SMOLOWE  Reported by Yuri ZARAKHOVICH/Moscow  MASSACRE 
IN KHOJALY
While the details are argued, this much is plain: something grim and unconscionable 
happened in the Azerbaijani town of Khojaly two weeks ago. So far, some 200 
dead Azerbaijanis, many of them mutilated, have been transported out of the town 
tucked inside the Armenian-dominated enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh for burial in 
neighboring Azerbaijan. The total number of deaths - the Azerbaijanis claim 1,324 
civilians have been slaughtered, most of them women and children - is unknown. 
Videotapes circulated by the Azerbaijanis include images of defaced civilians, some 
of them scalped, others shot in the head.( TIME, March 16, 1992)
“BBC reporter was live on line and he claimed that he saw more than 100 bodies 
of Azeri men, women and children as well as a baby who are shot dead from their 
heads from a very short distance.” 34
16 www.avciya.az
VII. MASSACRE UNCOVERED By ANATOL LIEVEN
More than sixty bodies, including those of women and children, have been 
spotted on hillsides in Nagorno-Karabakh, confirming claims that Armenian troops 
massacred Azeri refugees. Hundreds are missing.
Scattered amid the withered grass and bushes along a small 
valley and across the hillside beyond are the bodies of last 
Wednesday’s massacre by Armenian forces of Azerbaijani refugees. 
In all, 31 bodies could be counted at the scene. At least another 31 have been 
taken into Agdam over the past five days. These figures do not include civilians 
reported killed when the Armenians stormed the Azerbaijani town of Khodjaly on 
Tuesday night. The figures also do not include other as yet undiscovered bodies 
Zahid Jabarov, a survivor of the massacre, said he saw up to 200 people shot down 
at the point we visited, and refugees who came by different routes have also told of 
being shot at repeatedly and of leaving a trail of bodies along their path. Around the 
bodies we saw were scattered possessions, clothing and personnel documents. The 
bodies themselves have been preserved by the bitter cold which killed others as they 
hid in the hills and forest after the massacre.All are the bodies of ordinary people, 
dressed in the poor, ugly clothing of workers.
Of the 31 we saw, only one policeman and two apparent national volunteers were 
wearing uniform. All the rest were civilians, including eight women and three small 
children. Two groups, apparently families, had fallen together, the children cradled 
in the women’s arms.
Several of them, including one small girl, had terrible head injuries: only her 
face was left. Survivors have told how they saw Armenians shooting them point 
blank as they lay on the ground.( The Times, 3 March 1992) 
VIII. Helen WOMACK
 The exact number of victims is still unclear, but there can be little doubt that 
Azeri civilians were massacred by Armenian Army in the snowy mountains of 
Nagorno-Karabakh last week.
 Refugees from the enclave town of Khojaly, sheltering in the Azeri border town 
of Agdam, give largely consistent accounts of how Armenians attacked their homes 
on the night of 25 February, chased those who fled and shot them in the surrounding 
forests. Yesterday, I saw 75 freshly dug graves in one cemetery in addition to four 
mutilated corpses we were shown in the mosque when we arrived in Agdam late on 
Tuesday. I also saw women and children with bullet wounds in a makeshift hospital 
in a string of railway carriages. 
Khojaly, an Azeri settlement in the enclave mostly populated by Armenians, had 
17www.avciya.az
a population of about 6000. Mr. Rashid Mamedov Commander of Police in Agdam, 
said only about 500 escaped to his town. “So where are the rest?” Some might 
have taken prisoner, he said, or fled. Many bodies were still lying in the mountains 
because the Azeris were short of helicopters to retrieve them. He believed more 
than 1000 had perished, some of cold in temperatures as low as minus 10 degrees. 
When Azeris saw the Armenians with a convoy of armored personnel carriers, they 
realised they could not hope to defend themselves, and fled into the forests. In the 
small hours, the massacre started. 
Mr. Nasiru, who believes his wife and two children were taken prisoner, repeated 
what many other refugees have said - that troops of the former Soviet army helped the 
Armenians to attack Khojaly. “It is not my opinion, I saw it with my own eyes.”35
IX. Nagorno-Karabakh Victims Buried in Azerbaijani Town
“Refugees claim hundreds died in Armenian Attack...Of seven bodies seen here 
today, two were children and three were women, one shot through the chest at what 
appeared to be close range. Another 120 refugees being treated at Agdam's hospital 
include many with multiple stab wounds.»36
X. Helen Womack, 
“Elif Kaban, a Reuter correspondent in Agdam, reported that after a massacre 
on Wednesday, Azeris were burying scores of people who died when Armenians 
overran the town of Khojaly, the second-biggest Azeri settlement in the area. ‘The 
world is turning its back on what’s happening here. We are dying and you are just 
watching,’ one mourner shouted at a group of journalists.” 37 
XI. Massacre Reports Horrify Azerbaijan
“Azeri officials who returned from the scene to this town about nine miles away 
brought back three dead children, the backs of their heads blown off...’Women 
and children had been scalped,’ said Assad Faradzev, an aide to Karabagh’s Azeri 
governor. Azeri television showed pictures of one truckload of bodies brought to the 
Azeri town of Agdam, some with their faces apparently scratched with knives or 
their eyes gouged out.”38
XII.Killings Rife in Nagorno-Karabagh
“Journalists in the area reported seeing dozens of corpses, including some of the 
civilians, and Azerbaijani officials said Armenians began shooting at them when 
they sought to recover the bodies.”39
XIII. Bodies Mark Site of Karabagh Massacre
“A local truce was enforced to allow the Azerbaijanis to collect their dead and 
any refugees still hiding in the hills and forest. All are the bodies of ordinary people, 
dressed in the poor, ugly clorhing of workers...All the rest were civilians, including 
18 www.avciya.az
eight women and three small children. Two groups, apparently families, had fallen 
together, the children cradled in the women’s arms. Several of them, including one 
small girl, had terrible head injuries: only her face was left. Survivors have told how 
they saw Armenians shooting them point blank as they lay on the ground.40
19www.avciya.az
Appendix : UNO resolutions on Nagorno-Karabakh conflict
 the international law  with the Armenian position in the 
Nagorno-Karabakh conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan
From the beginning of the conflict up-to-date the international organisations 
try for peaceful solution of the conflict with the international rule of law. During 
these years Armenia does not keep the challenges of the international organisations 
acting disrespectfully to the international rule of law.  
RESOLUTION 822 (1993)
 Adopted by the Security Council at its 3205th meeting,
 on 30 April 1993
 The Security Council,
 Recalling the statements of the President of the Security Council of 
29 January 1993 (S/25199) and of 6 April 1993 (S/25539) concerning the 
Nagorny‑Karabakh conflict,
 Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General dated 14 April 1993 
(S/25600),
 Expressing its serious concern at the deterioration of the relations between 
the Republic of Armenia and the Republic of Azerbaijan,
 Noting with alarm the escalation in armed hostilities and, in particular, 
the latest invasion of the Kelbadjar district of the Republic of Azerbaijan by local 
Armenian forces,
 Concerned that this situation endangers peace and security in the region,
Expressing grave concern at the displacement of a large number of civilians and 
the humanitarian emergency in the region, in particular in the Kelbadjar district,
 Reaffirming the respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States 
in the region,
 Reaffirming also the inviolability of international borders and the 
inadmissibility of the use of force for the acquisition of territory,
 Expressing its support for the peace process being pursued within the 
framework of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe and deeply 
concerned at the disruptive effect that the escalation in armed hostilities can have 
on that process,
 1. Demands the immediate cessation of all hostilities and hostile acts 
with a view to establishing a durable cease‑fire, as well as immediate withdrawal of 
20 www.avciya.az
all occupying forces from the Kelbadjar district and other recently occupied areas 
of Azerbaijan;
 2. Urges the parties concerned immediately to resume negotiations for 
the resolution of the conflict within the framework of the peace process of the Minsk 
Group of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe and refrain from 
any action that will obstruct a peaceful solution of the problem;
 3. Calls for unimpeded access for international humanitarian relief 
efforts in the region, in particular in all areas affected by the conflict in order to 
alleviate the suffering of the civilian population and reaffirms that all parties are 
bound to comply with the principles and rules of international humanitarian law;
 4. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the 
Chairman‑in‑Office of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe as 
well as the Chairman of the Minsk Group of the Conference to assess the situation 
in the region, in particular in the Kelbadjar district of Azerbaijan, and to submit a 
further report to the Council;
5. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.
RESOLUTION 853 (1993) 
Adopted by the Security Council at its 3259th meeting, 
on 29 July 1993
 The Security Council,
 Reaffirming its resolution 822 (1993) of 30 April 1993,
 Having considered the report issued on 27 July 1993 by the Chairman of 
the Minsk Group of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) 
(S/26184),
 Expressing its serious concern at the deterioration of relations between 
the Republic of Armenia and the Azerbaijani Republic and at the tensions between 
them,
Welcoming acceptance by the parties concerned of the timetable of urgent steps 
to implement its resolution 822 (1993),
Noting with alarm the escalation in armed hostilities and, in particular, the 
seizure of the district of Agdam in the Azerbaijani Republic,
Concerned that this situation continues to endanger peace and security in the 
region,
Expressing once again its grave concern at the displacement of large numbers 
of civilians in the Azerbaijani Republic and at the serious humanitarian emergency 
in the region,
Reaffirming the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Azerbaijani Republic 
and of all other States in the region,
Reaffirming also the inviolability of international borders and the inadmissibility 
21www.avciya.az
of the use of force for the acquisition of territory,
1.Condemns the seizure of the district of Agdam and of all other recently occupied 
areas of the Azerbaijani Republic;
2.Further condemns all hostile actions in the region, in particular attacks on 
civilians and bombardments of inhabited areas;
3.Demands the immediate cessation of all hostilities and the immediate, complete 
and unconditional withdrawal of the occupying forces involved from the district of 
Agdam and all other recently occupied areas of the Azerbaijani Republic;
4.Calls on the parties concerned to reach and maintain durable cease‑fire 
arrangements;
5.Reiterates in the context of paragraphs 3 and 4 above its earlier calls for the 
restoration of economic, transport and energy links in the region;
6.Endorses the continuing efforts by the Minsk Group of the CSCE to achieve 
a peaceful solution to the conflict, including efforts to implement resolution 822 
(1993), and expresses its grave concern at the disruptive effect that the escalation of 
armed hostilities has had on these efforts;
7.Welcomes the preparations for a CSCE monitor mission with a timetable for its 
deployment, as well as consideration within the CSCE of the proposal for a CSCE 
presence in the region;
8.Urges the parties concerned to refrain from any action that will obstruct a 
peaceful solution to the conflict, and to pursue negotiations within the Minsk Group 
of the CSCE, as well as through direct contacts between them, towards a final 
settlement;
9.Urges the Government of the Republic of Armenia to continue to exert its 
influence to achieve compliance by the Armenians of the Nagorny‑Karabakh region 
of the Azerbaijani Republic with its resolution 822 (1993) and the present resolution, 
and the acceptance by this party of the proposals of the Minsk Group of the CSCE;
10.Urges States to refrain from the supply of any weapons and munitions which 
might lead to an intensification of the conflict or the continued occupation of 
territory;
11.Calls once again for unimpeded access for international humanitarian 
relief efforts in the region, in particular in all areas affected by the conflict, in 
order to alleviate the increased suffering of the civilian population and reaffirms 
that all parties are bound to comply with the principles and rules of international 
humanitarian law;
12.Requests the Secretary-General and relevant international agencies to 
provide urgent humanitarian assistance to the affected civilian population and to 
assist displaced persons to return to their homes;
13.Requests the Secretary‑General, in consultation with the Chairman‑in‑Office 
of the CSCE as well as the Chairman of the Minsk Group, to continue to report to 
the Council on the situation;
14.Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.
22 www.avciya.az
RESOLUTION 874 (1993)
Adopted by the Security Council at its 3292nd meeting, 
on 14 October 1993
The Security Council,
Reaffirming its resolutions 822 (1993) of 30 April 1993 and 853 (1993) of 
29 July 1993, and recalling the statement read by the President of the Council, on 
behalf of the Council, on 18 August 1993 (S/26326),
Having considered the letter dated 1 October 1993 from the Chairman of the 
Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) Minsk Conference on 
Nagorny Karabakh addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/26522),
Expressing its serious concern that a continuation of the conflict in and around 
the Nagorny Karabakh region of the Azerbaijani Republic, and of the tensions 
between the Republic of Armenia and the Azerbaijani Republic, would endanger 
peace and security in the region,
Taking note of the high‑level meetings which took place in Moscow on 
8 October 1993 and expressing the hope that they will contribute to the improvement 
of the situation and the peaceful settlement of the conflict,
Reaffirming the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Azerbaijani Republic 
and of all other States in the region,
Reaffirming also the inviolability of international borders and the inadmissibility 
of the use of force for the acquisition of territory,
Expressing once again its grave concern at the human suffering the conflict has 
caused and at the serious humanitarian emergency in the region and expressing in 
particular its grave concern at the displacement of large numbers of civilians in the 
Azerbaijani Republic,
1.Calls upon the parties concerned to make effective and permanent the cease‑fire 
established as a result of the direct contacts undertaken with the assistance of the 
Government of the Russian Federation in support of the CSCE Minsk Group;
2.Reiterates again its full support for the peace process being pursued within the 
framework of the CSCE, and for the tireless efforts of the CSCE Minsk Group;
3.Welcomes and commends to the parties the “Adjusted timetable of urgent steps 
to implement Security Council resolutions 822 (1993) and 853 (1993)” set out on 
28 September 1993 at the meeting of the CSCE Minsk Group and submitted to the 
parties concerned by the Chairman of the Group with the full support of nine other 
members of the Group, and calls on the parties to accept it;
4.Expresses the conviction that all other pending questions arising from the 
conflict and not directly addressed in the “Adjusted timetable” should be settled 
expeditiously through peaceful negotiations in the context of the CSCE Minsk 
process;
5.Calls for the immediate implementation of the reciprocal and urgent steps 
23www.avciya.az
provided for in the CSCE Minsk Group’s “Adjusted timetable”, including the 
withdrawal of forces from recently occupied territories and the removal of all 
obstacles to communications and transportation;
6.Calls also for an early convening of the CSCE Minsk Conference for the 
purpose of arriving at a negotiated settlement to the conflict as provided for in the 
timetable, in conformity with the 24 March 1992 mandate of the CSCE Council of 
Ministers;
7.Requests the Secretary-General to respond favourably to an invitation to send 
a representative to attend the CSCE Minsk Conference and to provide all possible 
assistance for the substantive negotiations that will follow the opening of the 
Conference;
8.Supports the monitoring mission developed by the CSCE;
9.Calls on all parties to refrain from all violations of international humanitarian 
law and renews its call in resolutions 822 (1993) and 853 (1993) for unimpeded 
access for international humanitarian relief efforts in all areas affected by the 
conflict;
10.Urges all States in the region to refrain from any hostile acts and from any 
interference or intervention which would lead to the widening of the conflict and 
undermine peace and security in the region;
11.Requests the Secretary-General and relevant international agencies to provide 
urgent humanitarian assistance to the affected civilian population and to assist 
refugees and displaced persons to return to their homes in security and dignity;
12.Requests also the Secretary‑General, the Chairman‑in‑Office of the CSCE and 
the Chairman of the CSCE Minsk Conference to continue to report to the Council on 
the progress of the Minsk process and on all aspects of the situation on the ground, 
and on present and future cooperation between the CSCE and the United Nations 
in this regard;
13.Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.
RESOLUTION 884 (1993)
 Adopted by the Security Council at its 3313th meeting, 
on 12 November 1993
The Security Council,
Reaffirming its resolutions 822 (1993) of 30 April 1993, 853 (1993) of 
29 July 1993 and 874 (1993) of 14 October 1993,
Reaffirming its full support for the peace process being pursued within the 
framework of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE), and 
for the tireless efforts of the CSCE Minsk Group,
Taking note of the letter dated 9 November 1993 from the Chairman‑in‑Office 
of the Minsk Conference on Nagorny Karabakh addressed to the President of the 
24 www.avciya.az
Security Council and its enclosures (S/26718, annex),
Expressing its serious concern that a continuation of the conflict in and around 
the Nagorny Karabakh region of the Azerbaijani Republic, and of the tensions 
between the Republic of Armenia and the Azerbaijani Republic, would endanger 
peace and security in the region,
Noting with alarm the escalation in armed hostilities as consequence of the 
violations of the cease‑fire and excesses in the use of force in response to those 
violations, in particular the occupation of the Zangelan district and the city of 
Goradiz in the Azerbaijani Republic,
Reaffirming the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Azerbaijani Republic 
and of all other States in the region,
Reaffirming also the inviolability of international borders and the inadmissibility 
of the use of force for the acquisition of territory,
Expressing grave concern at the latest displacement of a large number of 
civilians and the humanitarian emergency in the Zangelan district and the city of 
Goradiz and on Azerbaijan’s southern frontier,
1.Condemns the recent violations of the cease‑fire established between the 
parties, which resulted in a resumption of hostilities, and particularly condemns the 
occupation of the Zangelan district and the city of Goradiz,attacks on civilians and 
bombardments of the territory of the Azerbaijani Republic;
2.Calls upon the Government of Armenia to use its influence to achieve 
compliance by the Armenians of the Nagorny Karabakh region of the Azerbaijani 
Republic with resolutions 822 (1993), 853 (1993) and 874 (1993), and to ensure 
that the forces involved are not provided with the means to extend their military 
campaign further;
3.Welcomes the Declaration of 4 November 1993 of the nine members of the 
CSCE Minsk Group (S/26718) and commends the proposals contained therein for 
unilateral cease‑fire declarations;
4.Demands from the parties concerned the immediate cessation of armed 
hostilities and hostile acts, the unilateral withdrawal of occupying forces from the 
Zangelan district and the city of Goradiz, and the withdrawal of occupying forces 
from other recently occupied areas of the Azerbaijani Republic in accordance with 
the “Adjusted timetable of urgent steps to implement Security Council resolutions 
822 (1993) and 853 (1993)” (S/26522, appendix) as amended by the CSCE Minsk 
Group meeting in Vienna of 2 to 8 November 1993;
5.Strongly urges the parties concerned to resume promptly and to make effective 
and permanent the cease‑fire established as a result of the direct contacts undertaken 
with the assistance of the Government of the Russian Federation in support of the 
CSCE Minsk Group, and to continue to seek a negotiated settlement of the conflict 
within the context of the CSCE Minsk process and the “Adjusted timetable” as 
amended by the CSCE Minsk Group meeting in Vienna of 2 to 8 November 1993;
6.Urges again all States in the region to refrain from any hostile acts and from 
any interference or intervention, which would lead to the widening of the conflict 
and undermine peace and security in the region;
25www.avciya.az
7.Requests the Secretary-General and relevant international agencies to provide 
urgent humanitarian assistance to the affected civilian population, including that in 
the Zangelan district and the city of Goradiz and on Azerbaijan’s southern frontier, 
and to assist refugees and displaced persons to return to their homes in security and 
dignity;
8.Reiterates its request that the Secretary‑General, the Chairman‑in‑Office of 
the CSCE and the Chairman of the CSCE Minsk Conference continue to report to 
the Council on the progress of the Minsk process and on all aspects of the situation 
on the ground, in particular on the implementation of its relevant resolutions, and 
on present and future cooperation between the CSCE and the United Nations in this 
regard;
9.Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.
PACE RESOLUTION ON NAGORNO KARABAKH
Resolution 1416 (2005)41
The conflict over the Nagorno-Karabakh region dealt with by the OSCE Minsk 
Conference
1. The Parliamentary Assembly regrets that, more than a decade after the armed 
hostilities started, the conflict over the Nagorno-Karabakh region remains unsolved. 
Hundreds of thousands of people are still displaced and live in miserable conditions. 
Considerable parts of the territory of Azerbaijan are still occupied by Armenian 
forces, and separatist forces are still in control of the Nagorno-Karabakh region.
2. The Assembly expresses its concern that the military action, and the 
widespread ethnic hostilities which preceded it, led to large-scale ethnic expulsion 
and the creation of mono-ethnic areas which resemble the terrible concept of ethnic 
cleansing. The Assembly reaffirms that independence and secession of a regional 
territory from a state may only be achieved through a lawful and peaceful process 
based on the democratic support of the inhabitants of such territory and not in the 
wake of an armed conflict leading to ethnic expulsion and the de facto annexation of 
such territory to another state. The Assembly reiterates that the occupation of foreign 
territory by a member state constitutes a grave violation of that state’s obligations as 
a member of the Council of Europe and reaffirms the right of displaced persons from 
the area of conflict to return to their homes safely and with dignity.
3.The Assembly recalls Resolutions 822 (1993), 853 (1993), 874 (1993) and 
884 (1993) of the United Nations Security Council and urges the parties concerned 
to comply with them, in particular by refraining from any armed hostilities and by 
withdrawing military forces from any occupied territories. The Assembly also aligns 
26 www.avciya.az
itself with the demand expressed in Resolution 853 of the United Nations Security 
Council and thus urges all member states to refrain from the supply of any weapons 
and munitions which might lead to an intensification of the conflict or the continued 
occupation of territory.
4. The Assembly recalls that both Armenia and Azerbaijan committed themselves 
upon their accession to the Council of Europe in January 2001 to use only peaceful 
means for settling the conflict, by refraining from any threat of using force against 
their neighbours. At the same time, Armenia committed itself to use its considerable 
influence over Nagorno-Karabakh to foster a solution to the conflict. The Assembly 
urges both governments to comply with these commitments and refrain from using 
armed forces against each other and from propagating military action.
5. The Assembly recalls that the Council of Ministers of the Conference on 
Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) agreed in Helsinki in March 1992 
to hold a conference in Minsk in order to provide a forum for negotiations for a 
peaceful settlement of the conflict. Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, the former Czech 
and Slovak Federal Republic, France, Germany, Italy, the Russian Federation, 
Sweden, Turkey and the United States of America agreed at that time to participate 
in this conference. The Assembly calls on these states to step up their efforts to 
achieve the peaceful resolution of the conflict and invites their national delegations 
to the Assembly to report annually to the Assembly on the action of their government 
in this respect. For this purpose, the Assembly asks its Bureau to create an ad hoc 
committee comprising,inter alia, the heads of these national delegations.
6. The Assembly pays tribute to the tireless efforts of the co-chairs of the Minsk 
Group and the Personal Representative of the OSCE Chairman-in-Office, in particular 
for having achieved a ceasefire in May 1994 and having constantly monitored the 
observance of this ceasefire since then. The Assembly calls on the OSCE Minsk 
Group co-chairs to take immediate steps to conduct speedy negotiations for the 
conclusion of a political agreement on the cessation of the armed conflict. The 
implementation of this agreement will eliminate major consequences of the conflict 
for all parties and permit the convening of the Minsk Conference. The Assembly 
calls on Armenia and Azerbaijan to make use of the OSCE Minsk Process and to 
put forward to each other, via the Minsk Group, their constructive proposals for 
the peaceful settlement of the conflict in accordance with the relevant norms and 
principles of international law.
7. The Assembly recalls that Armenia and Azerbaijan are signatory parties to 
the Charter of the United Nations and, in accordance with Article 93, paragraph 1 
of the Charter,ipso factoparties to the statute of the International Court of Justice. 
27www.avciya.az
Therefore, the Assembly suggests that if the negotiations under the auspices of the 
co-chairs of the Minsk Group fail, Armenia and Azerbaijan should consider using 
the International Court of Justice in accordance with Article 36, paragraph 1 of its 
statute.
8. The Assembly calls on Armenia and Azerbaijan to foster political reconciliation 
among themselves by stepping up bilateral inter-parliamentary co-operation within 
the Assembly as well as in other forums such as the meetings of the speakers of 
the parliaments of the Caucasian Four. It recommends that both delegations 
should meet during each part-session of the Assembly to review progress on such 
reconciliation.
9. The Assembly calls on the Government of Azerbaijan to establish contact, 
without preconditions, with the political representatives of both communities from 
the Nagorno-Karabakh region regarding the future status of the region. It is prepared 
to provide facilities for such contacts in Strasbourg, recalling that it did so in the 
form of a hearing on previous occasions with Armenian participation.
10. Recalling its Recommendation 1570 (2002) on the situation of refugees 
and displaced persons in Armenia, Azerbaijan and Georgia, the Assembly calls on 
all member and Observer states to provide humanitarian aid and assistance to the 
hundreds of thousands of people displaced as a consequence of the armed hostilities 
and the expulsion of ethnic Armenians from Azerbaijan and ethnic Azerbaijanis 
from Armenia.
11. The Assembly condemns any expression of hatred portrayed in the media of 
Armenia and Azerbaijan. The Assembly calls on Armenia and Azerbaijan to foster 
reconciliation and to restore confidence and mutual understanding among their 
peoples through schools, universities and the media. Without such reconciliation, 
hatred and mistrust will prevent stability in the region and may lead to new 
violence. Any sustainable settlement must be preceded by and embedded in such a 
reconciliation process.
12. The Assembly calls on the Secretary General of the Council of Europe to 
draw up an action plan for support to Armenia and Azerbaijan targeted at mutual 
reconciliation processes, and to take this resolution into account in deciding on 
action concerning Armenia and Azerbaijan.
13. The Assembly calls on the Congress of Local and Regional Authorities 
of the Council of Europe to assist locally elected representatives of Armenia and 
Azerbaijan in establishing mutual contacts and interregional co-operation.
14. The Assembly resolves to analyse the conflict-settlement mechanisms 
existing within the Council of Europe, in particular the European Convention for the 
28 www.avciya.az
Peaceful Settlement of Disputes, in order to provide its member states with better 
mechanisms for the peaceful settlement of bilateral conflicts as well as internal 
disputes involving local or regional territorial communities or authorities which may 
endanger human rights, stability and peace.
15. The Assembly resolves to continue monitoring on a regular basis the evolution 
of this conflict towards its peaceful resolution and decides to reconsider this issue at 
its first part-session in 2006.
Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/62/L.42)]
62/243. The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes, principles and provisions of the Charter of the United-
Nations,
Recalling Security Council resolutions 822 (1993) of 30 April 1993, 853 (1993)
of 29 July 1993, 874 (1993) of 14 October 1993 and 884 (1993) of 12 Novem-
ber1993, as well as General Assembly resolutions 48/114 of 20 December 1993, 
entitled“Emergency international assistance to refugees and displaced persons in 
Azerbaijan”,and 60/285 of 7 September 2006, entitled “The situation in the occu-
pied territories ofAzerbaijan”,
Recalling also the report of the fact-finding mission of the Minsk Group of the 
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe to the occupied territories of 
Azerbaijan surrounding Nagorno-Karabakh and the letter on the fact-finding mis-
sion from the Co-Chairmen of the Minsk Group addressed to the Permanent Council 
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,42
Taking note of the report of the environmental assessment mission led by the 
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe to the fire-affected territories 
in and around the Nagorno-Karabakh region,43
Reaffirming the commitments of the parties to the conflict to abide scrupulously 
by the rules of international humanitarian law,
Seriously concerned that the armed conflict in and around the Nagorno-Kara-
bakh region of the Republic of Azerbaijan continues to endanger international peace 
and security, and mindful of its adverse implications for the humanitarian situation 
and development of the countries of the South Caucasus,
1. Reaffirms continued respect and support for the sovereignty and territorial in-
29www.avciya.az
tegrity of the Republic of Azerbaijan within its internationally recognized borders;
2. Demands the immediate, complete and unconditional withdrawal of all Arme-
nian forces from all the occupied territories of the Republic of Azerbaijan;
3. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the population expelled from the occupied 
territories of the Republic of Azerbaijan to return to their homes, and stresses the 
necessity of creating appropriate conditions for this return, including the compre-
hensive rehabilitation of the conflict-affected territories;
4. Recognizes the necessity of providing normal, secure and equal conditions of 
life for Armenian and Azerbaijani communities in the Nagorno-Karabakh region of 
the Republic of Azerbaijan, which will allow an effective democratic system of self-
governance to be built up in this region within the Republic of Azerbaijan;
5. Reaffirms that no State shall recognize as lawful the situation resulting from 
the occupation of the territories of the Republic of Azerbaijan, nor render aid or as-
sistance in maintaining this situation;
6. Expresses its support to the international mediation efforts, in particular those 
of the Co-Chairmen of the Minsk Group of the Organization for Security and Coop-
eration in Europe, aimed at peaceful settlement of the conflict in accordance with the 
norms and principles of international law, and recognizes the necessity of intensify-
ing these efforts with a view to achieving a lasting and durable peace in compliance 
with the provisions stipulated above;
7. Calls upon Member States and international and regional organizations and 
arrangements to effectively contribute, within their competence, to the process of 
settlement of the conflict;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-
third session a comprehensive report on the implementation of the present resolu-
tion;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-third session the item 
entitled “The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan”.
86th plenary meeting
14 March 2008
30 www.avciya.az
1. Journal “Russkaja Starina”, N 12, 1874
2. A.S.Griboyedov. Composition. Moscow. 1988, page 611
3. A.S.Griboyedov. Composition. Moscow. 1988, page 614
4. Айзек Азимов. Ближний Восток : история десяти тысячелетий. 2002. стр. 203, 213
5. B. Ishkhanyan. “The Peoples of the Caucasus”. Petroqrad, 1916, page.18 in Russian
6. the document on population registration in Russian Empire
7. current capital of Armenian Republic
8. Transcaucasia, Nationalism and Social change. Essays in the history of Armenia, Azerbai-
jan and Georgia. 1996. p. 77
9. Prof. Ronald Grigor Suny, “Looking towards Ararat”, 1993. p. 193
10. Samuel A.Weems.Secrets of a “christian” terrorist state Armenia, St. Jone Press 2002, 
page 154
11. Кариби (P.P. Goleishvili) . Красная книга. Тифлис, 1920, с. 49-50
12. Birlik newspaper November 29 2009
13. “Russian thought” newspaper  № 342, November 1907
14. Georges de Maleville. La Tragedie Armenienne de 1915. 1988; E. Feigl. The truth about 
terror. Armenian terrorism – origins and causes. 2000; edition Historama “ №16, 1985
15. Кариби (P.P. Goleishvili). Красная книга. 1920
16. В.Л. Величко. Кавказ. Русское дело и междуплеменные вопросы.1904 Центральный 
Госархив СССР, ф. 102, оп. 253, ед.хр. 252, л. 1-18
17. Русский вестник. № 6, 1903; В.Л. Величко. Кавказ. Русское дело и междуплеменные 
вопросы, 1904.
18. Lowry Heath. W. Nineteen and Twentieth Century Armenian terrorism: thereads of con-
tinuitc. 1984.
19. Журн. («Чехре нума», на фарсидском языке) №18, 1905; А. Лалаян. 
Контрревалюционный «Дашнакцутюн» и империалистическая война 1914-1918 гг. 
Исторические записки. 1936; Э. Файгл. Правда о терроре. Армянский терроризм- 
истоки и причины. 2000
20.Swietochowski. Russian Azerbaijan, 1905-1920. 1985; Т. Чаладзе. Сострадание. 1995; 
Дж. Либаридьян. Истоки политического насилия в современной армянской истории. В 
кн.: Armenian allegations: Myth and Reality. A Handbook of Facts and Documents. 1987
21.Swietochowski. Russian Azerbaijan, 1905-1920. 1985
22. Ibid
23. Ibid
24. Note: In 1903-1906 the Armenians committed such slaughters probably in all the territory 
of Azerbaijan and thousands of civilians were murdered
25. Центральный Госархив СССР, ф. 102, оп. 253, ед.хр. 252, л. 1-18.
26. С.Г. Шаумян. Избранные произведения. М., 1978, т.2., с. 249, 2850
27. Эрих Файгл. Резкий поворот! Армянская мифомания и правда. Документация
28. Current president of Armenia
29. http://news.bbc.co.uk/hi/russian/in_depth/newsid_4673000/4673953.stm
30. Н. Гаврилов. Военные ведомости. 1998; Ю. Помпеев. Кровавый омут Карабаха. 
31www.avciya.az
1992
31.  D. Hairiyan. Al-Kitakh al Ararat (The heroes of Ararat). 1998
32. Newsweek (November 29, 1993, p. 50)
33. The Sunday Times 1 March 1992
34. BBC Morning News at 07.37, Tuesday 3 March 1992
35. The Age, Melbourne, 6/3/9.2
36. The Washington Post 2/28/92
37. The Independent, 2/29/92
38. The Washington Times, 3/3/92
39. The Washington Post, 3/3/92
40. The Times, (London) 3/3/92
41.Assembly debateon 25 January 2005 (2nd Sitting) (seeDoc. 10364, report of the Political 
Affairs Committee, rapporteur: Mr Atkinson).Text adopted by the Assemblyon 25 January 
2005 (2nd Sitting).
42. See A/59/747-S/2005/187.
43. A/61/696, annex.
