Government in Line 
An approach to the Colombian 
State Policy and some insights
Hector Ivan Hurtatis Espinosa
2016
Introduction
Colombian Policy to have an open government 
with a Bottom Up Model
Incremental Approach to get further results
Policy Analysis over the implications, results and 
insights  
General Objective
● The Online Government Strategy contributes to build a more efficient, 
transparent and inclusive government; Better services and mainly, boost 
competitiveness to improve quality of life 
Government Online “Ecosystem”



The Explaining Key factors 
1. Ensuring a regional model
The elected City Mayors or Departament Governors (elected by democratic 
vote) must involve on their Governance Plans, budget and specific goals 
related to e-governance.
Joint efforts from all the State Institutions, where all agencies of public 
administration across the country are responsible for the implementation. 
All Territorial Departments (32) and municipalities (1110) must have a web 
page offering the services, with domaing   - .gov.co - 

2. Constant Advice to Public Entities
100% of the Local Municipalities 
already have their own web page 
since 2006; first Latin American 
country to reach this goal
3. Communicative Strategy for Citizen Appropriation
Objective: Generate a 
positive perception to the 
non-users
Key Message: Working 
for an easier 
relationship with the 
State
Objective: Generate 
satisfying experiences in 
general procedures
Key Message: Online 
Government works, 
check it!
Objective: Secure the 
bases for a citizen habit.
Key Message: Finde 
Something new every 
time at Government 
Online. 
Inspire Experience Habit
4. Integrated access point.
Linking almost 9.800 State Webs 
and information of 4.520 
procedures and services
2014: registered more than 3 
million visits.
        www.gobiernoenlinea.gov.
co
5. A Clear and periodic strategy
● Information: Public Info
● Interaction: Two way 
communication
● Transaction: obtaining 
online products and 
services
● Transformation: 
Organized services from 
the public needs
● Democracy: Collective 
building of policies and 
decision making.
Challenges!
Missing link between the two “last 
stages” ( Transformation and 
Democracy)
Specific Ones in the Colombian Case
Key Sectors without a proper strategy
Health
Justice
Agriculture
Balance between online security and simplicity (Main concern is that 
sometimes is difficult for a citizen to understand the process) 
Challenges in Open Government as a concept 
A broad concept for Political Sciences
1. Open Government: Is still a broad concept
a. Checklist?
b. Concept by itself? 
c. Framework?
d. Practices?
e. We treat technology as a  sort of independent variable able to transform societies
A way to prove this (Ha Joon Chang) 
Which new invention has changed the world most: The washing machine or 
the  Internet 
Recent progress in telecommunications technologies is not as revolutionary as 
what happened in the late nineteenth century – wired telegraphy – in relative 
terms. 
In terms of the consequent economic and social changes, internet has not 
been as important as the washing machine and other household appliances, 
which vastly reduced the amount of work and allowed women to enter the 
labour market.
2. Chicken or Hen Dilemma
What comes first? 
Open Government: Is it a consequence? 
Levels of Institutional Maturity (How to apply 
them in the Latin American Context and 
especially in Colombia?)
Pre- Requisites per citizen participation and 
control? 
More people talking about politics 
in Social Networks and using 
applications, does not means 
more democracy (Quantity vs 
Quality) 
3. Open Government and Democracy
Implementing  “open government” practices means more democracy? 
Indeed is very important, but not enough!!
Bottom Up models to build public policies
Are democracies interested in doing this? How can this work on the Latin 
American Government? (Schumpeterian critique to “direct” democracy or 
plebiscitary model)
4. Checks and balances
Worries that the process get captured by well organized groups (Lobbies)
How to extend the use of IT Communications to deepen on democracy?
Not just the mere citizenship control 
Confusion between electronic government and an open government
CONCLUSIONS
The Colombian case: exemplified real challenges  in  a missing link between 
the assumptions of open government, democracy and even public policies.
Change the focus: How politics transform and adequate them to its need
Rather than how new technologies transform politics
Open Government as a lighthouse or political ideal is perfectly fine
But as an analytical concept, mainly on Political Sciences, needs more 
clarity and definition (a task to do so)
Thank You
Email: ivanhurtatis@gmail.com
Twitter: hhurtatis
Hector Ivan Hurtatis Espinosa
Colombian Political Scientist 
Master in Global Public Policy
