 
Hamlet Isaxanli 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In Search of “Khazar” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The realities of events 
associated with the 
establishment and 
development of Khazar 
University have left 
indelible traces in my 
memory. I intend to pass 
these events to you in 
their entirety and in all 
sincerity. I hope I can 
relive together with you, 
readers, those days spent 
in ‘search of "Khazar". 
 
 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
3 
 
CHAPTER 1 
 
BETWEEN  HEAVEN  AND  EARTH 
 
For a number of years I was familiarizing myself 
with different universities all over the world, whilst 
gathering my thoughts on science and education in my 
own country, Azerbaijan. These ideas and comparisons 
were taking a distinctive shape in my imagination - the 
shape of a university.  
Novel ideas and thoughts seemingly appear 
unexpectedly, but in reality they are a result of long and 
intensive subconscious efforts. The information that we 
absorb, accept and keep in our minds is explored and 
analyzed in invisible and imperceptible ways. Accor-
ding to some hypotheses, this way is simply called a 
harmonization, putting thoughts into a correct and 
beautiful order. In this process, suddenly everything 
falls into place and an idea appears as a patch of light. 
The first place where I studied after Azerbaijan 
was Moscow State University. I spent long years there 
first studying and then researching mathematics. The 
university’s extremely high scientific potential and 
pleasant and creative atmosphere seemed to be a new 
world to me. Later I traveled more and came across 
more varied systems at universities in Canada and in 
Europe. I didn’t content myself solely with giving 
lectures, presenting papers at different conferences, 
workshops, and conducting new research. These 
universities themselves slowly became my object of 
study and investigation. Later I also started practicing 
"distance learning" of the world’s famous universities. 
With enthusiasm I studied histories of Harvard 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
4 
University and the Massachusetts Institute of Techno-
logy (I was unable to visit those at the time) in order to 
understand their distinct features. 
The crisis that has started in the higher education 
system in Azerbaijan was deepening further in the 
second part of the eighties. Historically, Azerbaijan has 
gained great successes in the art of music and other 
forms of art, and some fields of science had developed 
to the point that the foundations of certain scientific 
schools had been established. Meanwhile the moral 
values that the society was resting upon began to be 
reduced to dust, and the economic basis was about to be 
destroyed. These developments influenced every sphere 
of society including science and education. The habit of 
corruption, accepting bribes and falsifying the students’ 
grades was spreading day by day from one university to 
another and from one lecturer to another. There was no 
control over corruption and it was becoming accepted as 
common practice. The scientists and intellectuals that 
were trying to maintain their integrity and distance 
themselves from the surrounding world were slowly 
becoming mere observers. The level and intensity of 
scientific research was sharply decreasing. The political 
and economic crisis in the Soviet Union started having 
an impact on universities and research institutes. Many 
claimed that the pitiful lecturer earnings forced them to 
take bribes, and this number was gradually increasing. 
Lies and hypocrisy, dilettantism and protectionism were 
prospering.  
In July 1990 I was invited to Great Britain as one 
of the keynote speakers at the 11th International Dundee 
Conference on Ordinary and Partial Differential 
Equations. There I met my old friends and some new 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
5 
faces, and refreshed in my memory the interesting pages 
of the history of Scotland and England.  
On the return London to Moscow flight, as I 
habitually do, I was trying to make travel notes and 
write down some of my thoughts. I was thinking and 
comparing the East and the West. My thoughts were 
random. Strangely, I was feeling myself not on the 
plane but between the earth and sky, in a condition of 
weightlessness. For a moment I felt strange anxiety and 
excitement. "Would I be able to establish a small 
university?". This strange question was not leaving me, 
but was attracting my thoughts like a powerful magnet. I 
was really struggling with my mind trying to free it of 
this annoying question, to leave it unanswered, but all 
my efforts were futile. On one hand, my mind was busy 
drawing up plans for university. On the other hand, I 
was putting up a weak resistance, thinking that I am 
again taken away from the realities of the world by 
rebelling thoughts. 
  
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
6 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
7 
 
CHAPTER 2 
 
  IN  THE  BOTTOM  OF  THE  WELL 
 
 
Having returned to Baku I had a little rest and 
then went back to work. At the time I was working at 
the Baku branch of the Voznesensky Institute of 
Finance and Economics of Leningrad.1 This branch was 
established on the foundations of the Azerbaijan 
Institute of National Economy that lost its independent 
status because of serious flaws in its administration. 
Upon the decision of the Academic Council in 
Leningrad I had been elected the chairman of the 
department of mathematics of the branch. I had already 
been working there for two years.  
Rahib Guliyev, the newly appointed director of 
the branch was trying to bring about sweeping reforms 
by replacing the old staff. However the situation was not 
so simple and in order to make real changes it was 
essential to make gradual, well thought through steps. 
Since his reforms were very closely associated with job 
losses they were not very popular. He faced strong 
resistance and the result was formation of power 
cliques. Guliyev wanted too much to soon, and his 
intolerance and the influence of the ongoing power 
struggle in the Government (this institute was always 
strongly associated with the governments) made him too 
vulnerable and he was forced to leave his position.  
The newly appointed director, Fuad Alaskarov, 
was not a reformist, but rather a conformist. He brought 
back all those released by the previous director, tried to 
regain independence from Leningrad in order to lead a 
more calm and comfortable existence.  
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
8 
It seems that my independence and profile and 
the fact that I was staying out of all intrigues began to 
annoy Alaskarov. Although in our personal conversa-
tions he remained very respectful, various rumors 
starting spreading through the institute. One incident in 
particular served as a turning point from polite tension 
to badly hidden hostility. Only few days after I returned 
home from Scotland, voting for candidates into the 
Azerbaijani National Assembly (Parliament) was held at 
the Institute.2 The deans of the faculties and chairmen of 
the various departments had nominated Alaskarov for 
election and were making speeches in his honor one 
after another. Then unexpectedly, a group of faculty 
members and students proposed my nomination. I was 
told that those who supported my candidacy were 
severely attacked and one of them was even beaten by 
Alaskarov’s supporters. I went into the meeting hastily 
and thanked my supporters for giving me their support 
and confidence. At the same time I reminded them that I 
had no desire to be engaged in politics and I simply had 
too little time and withdrew my candidacy. After this 
incident the atmosphere around me became increasingly 
tense. Soon after I left for my summer holidays. 
 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
9 
 
CHAPTER 3 
 
 AN  ARTICLE  ON  EDUCATION 
 
I spent the summer of 1990 thinking continuously 
about education problems and the various new 
university models and I wrote an article entitled 
"Thoughts on Science and the Education System". I was 
intending to publish the article both in Azerbaijani and 
Russian to give everybody an opportunity to read it. 
Since I had serious doubts that this article would ever be 
published I gave the copy to some of my acquaintances 
and friends who knew about my activities and were 
expressing interest in my ideas. Among them was Saleh 
Mammadov, doctor of economics, who would become 
the Minister of Finance in the government of the 
Popular Front of Azerbaijan.3  
Six years have passed since then and from 
today’s point of view some facts and ideas in the article 
seem simplified, some vital problems have not even 
been touched upon.* But the main purpose of it was to 
draw the readers’, and I also hoped officials’, attention 
to the necessity of reforms in science and education. At 
that time I had but a slight hope of convincing them of 
the necessity and natural possibility of establishing new 
universities.  
After about three to four months the article was 
published in Russian in the "Bakinskiy Rabochiy"4 
                                                        
* The first time "In search of Khazar" has been published in "Khazar 
View" magazine (1996-1997, № 10-14, 19-27) in Azerbaijani and 
then in English in "Azerbaijani Studies" journal (1998, v.1, № 4). 
All facts refer to that time and changes have not been taken into 
account here. 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
10 
newspaper in an abbreviated and simplified form. The 
article was entitled "To reform Education" and 
published under the headline of "Scholar’s point of 
view" (January 25, 1991). The Azerbaijani version of 
the article was published in the newspaper 
"Communist"5 only in May 17, 1991 under the headline 
"Opinions, suggestions" entitled "Any education must 
be global". This belated version was also shortened but 
the expressions and sentences remained untouched. I 
have to mention with certain irony and pleasure that by 
the time the article was published in the newspaper 
"Communist", the university that I had been nurturing in 
my mind for a long time was about to become a reality. 
The Council of Ministers had already passed a decision 
to allow the setting up of the first private university and 
I had already begun working in this direction.  
Before returning to other events in the fall of 
1990 I’d like to introduce the article mentioned above in 
its entirety. Although the articles published in the 
newspapers "Communist" and "Bakinskiy Rabochiy" 
were not the same, the main messages were quite close. 
Since the style of the article published in "Communist" 
was more similar to my original manuscript, I present it 
to you with editorial abridgments distinguished by 
Italics. 
 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
11 
 
CHAPTER 4 
 
"THOUGHTS  ON  SCIENCE  AND  THE 
EDUCATION  SYSTEM" 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We live in difficult, responsible and anxious 
times. Distortions hidden in the shadow of our fight for 
political and economic independence, previously unseen 
scale and tension of struggle for power, corruption 
penetrated in the blood, soul and brain of the entire 
republic, incurable ecological problems, political and 
military counteraction6 with our neighboring nation, 
flabbiness of science, education and culture - are all 
different signs of our crisis. Incompetence, superficiality 
and indifference are everywhere. Pure ideals are smiled 
at in the best of circumstances. 
The future of our nation is determined by the 
cultural level of our society and the universal feature of 
our education and science. No rapid leap in the 
economy is possible without these two factors. When 
intellectual energy starts to weaken and global thinking 
becomes a rarity, intolerance of other’s opinions and 
pugnacious nepotism occur.  
Who could deny the obvious successes of our 
science, education and culture? At the same time it is 
crucial to consider the questions that trouble us. Why is 
the number of our world-renowned scholars next to 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
12 
nothing? Which of our scientific institutions are famous 
for their important works and glorious traditions? 
Which universities can offer diplomas that are able to 
compete with European and American ones?  
If today we do not think about the future of our 
science, education and culture, do not take serious 
measures, it is certain that our future will be bleak. It is 
in our nature to exaggerate and to be pleased with 
ourselves, thus stimulating our own and the public’s 
imagination about our "successes." 
Today when our international relations are 
becoming broader, the lack of highly skilled and 
competent specialists is even more obvious. The number 
of our compatriots familiar with the international world, 
modern science and economics, capable of dynamic and 
analytical thought and able to converse fluently in 
English (German, French...) with Western specialists 
can be easily counted on the fingers of one hand.  
Up to now, and at present, the structure of 
education, science and culture and the ways in which 
they are developing have been under a tight centralized 
control and personal and small groups initiatives have 
not been taken into consideration. Everything has been 
defined, planned and governed from "above." This way 
of governing could only bring local and temporary 
successes, but has not been able to form long lasting and 
firm traditions. One of the most serious and distressing 
results has been the separation of science and education 
from each other. The Academy of Science7 was 
responsible only for the development of scientific 
research, whereas the universities were there to train the 
specialists and give them higher education. The two had 
insignificant influence on each other.  
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
13 
On the other hand, there existed, and still exist, 
monotony and inertness in the administration of educa-
tion. Identical programs, methods and rules created si-
milar requirements and responsibilities, reduced compe-
titiveness and brought down the standards. Slack 
personnel selection policies caused especially heavy 
damage to our education, science and culture. There 
are many lecturers with completely out-of-date 
knowledge at our universities and nobody questions 
them.  
There is no thought given to competitiveness in 
education. As a result of all of these, interest and 
curiosity for science is reducing, education and culture 
are evidently loosing their role as indicators of our 
national esteem.  
For the sake of the dignity and future of our 
nation, it is our duty to devote maximum attention to the 
development and administration of education and 
culture. The time now is right to bring about 
fundamental changes.  
Is it possible to fundamentally renew the entire 
gigantic education system, science and culture? What, 
generally, is renovation in these complicated and 
diversified areas? It’s not even easy to comprehend all 
aspects of our backwardness in these areas. It is going 
to be a long and hard work to analyze all the political, 
economic and historical aspects of our problems. 
Scientific, technical, moral and material resources must 
be laid bare, gigantic expenses must be incurred and 
efforts spent. So what is to be done immediately, today?  
There are two possible roads leading to success. 
The first is to define a certain group of research and 
education centers and devote special attention to their 
all-round development, to try to reform them. As 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
14 
mentioned before, hard and all encompassing work will 
have to be done in this direction. The second way, I 
believe, needs a special discussion. It is a completely 
new way for us and it is very important and urgent for 
us to go in this direction. The way is based on learning 
and applying West European and American education 
and science models while taking into account our 
traditions and circumstances.  
If we long for a market economy and try to Wes- 
ternize our political system, will it be possible to not 
follow Western models in our education system and 
science? Is it possible to develop our science, education 
and culture to the standards of tomorrow whilst using 
yesterday’s methods? It is quite obvious that 
revolutionary changes in the economy demand the 
appropriate changes in science and education, make it 
inevitable to lay foundation of flexible and strong 
world-wide thought and train new breed of specialists. 
Fundamental developments of modern areas of science 
in developed countries of Europe, America and Asia, 
and a well-governed education system as its organic 
unity, are indisputable arguments of the vitality of 
Western models in these spheres.  
Though Western universities have similarities in 
the organizational principles of education, they differ 
from each other from the viewpoint of the importance of 
research or education, budgets, financing from state, and 
different level of requirements for achieving degrees. 
Private universities in the USA and some other 
countries are considered the most prestigious and 
influential science and education establishments. One of 
the most obvious examples of this is the famous 
Harvard University, USA, that has been an object of 
pride, amazement and imitation for over 360 years. 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
15 
Among its alumni are numerous specialists, scholars 
and statesmen of worldwide fame.  
Today we have to think about the main 
characteristics of a new type of higher education and 
scientific institutions and to conduct certain 
investigations. These institutions must develop 
specialists qualified in exact, social-political sciences 
and humanities and with good command of foreign 
languages (especially English). They have to contribute 
to the development of science and culture, and establish 
themselves in the international arena. In this case what 
principles must be taken as fundamental and why are 
these principles of great importance?  
If higher education is to be in conformity with 
modern standards it must consist of two stages. The 
initial stage is generally four years long, provides a 
general higher education in certain subjects and ends 
with the awarding of a baccalaureate degree. The 
second stage of higher education lasts approximately 
two years and usually ends with the narrow 
specialization and master’s degree, in some cases, upon 
the defense of a thesis. The need for such organization 
of higher education is not for the sake of fashion and 
artificial Westernizing, but it is in order to shape a 
‘form’ necessary to improve the quality, to give an 
effective push to our science and culture. We can make 
use and derive certain advantages from the programs 
and practices of the world-leading universities and from 
the knowledge and experience of visiting scholars. We 
will have a real chance to agree mutual recognition of 
academic achievements and diplomas and degrees with 
Western countries. Until now, an agreement on mutual 
recognition of diplomas has only been achieved with 
Finland from all the developed countries, and 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
16 
negotiations are currently being held with Austria.8 
Besides, if we have a higher education institution that 
awards bachelor and master’s degrees that are accepted 
in the developed countries, we would have greater 
opportunities to teach foreign students.  
It is very important to teach English and other 
foreign languages besides giving students a profession. 
Language should be taught not only as a means of 
interaction and an object of linguistics, but as a medium 
of instruction in a student’s chosen field. Some 
graduates can receive the diploma of foreign language 
interpreter as well as their main degree. Then our 
students will be able to successfully continue part of 
their education abroad (they will not be strangers to the 
Western ways of education and fluent in English). And 
our graduates will be able to work in any country in 
their chosen field. The children of Azeris living abroad 
can also be educated here and return to their countries 
with a bachelor and master’s degree.  
It makes sense if the education at the new type of 
institutions (or at least in some of them) should be fee 
paying. At the beginning of every year a student has to 
pay a fixed tuition fee depending on the major he or she 
chooses. Paid education can stimulate not only the 
student’s own responsible approach to education, but 
also help with funding successful research activities at 
the university. Of course, tuition fees can not only be 
paid by individuals but also by sponsor organizations 
that are, for example, in need of certain specialist skills.  
It is advisable that at the end of each term the stu-
dents are ranked according to their academic 
achievements and examination results, and the student 
is awarded a "success index." Every term the "success 
index" undergoes appropriate changes and upon 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
17 
completion of the education a final "success index" is 
calculated. The level achieved by graduates (based on 
the final success index) will not only serve for the 
purposes of moral satisfaction but can also help in job 
search.  
The unity of science and education and their 
mutual influence must be taken as a basis for education 
and be stimulated in every possible way. It is impossible 
to prepare highly qualified specialists at the universities 
where there is no respectable scientific research 
foundation. Top level universities function both as a 
source of education and as a research center. (There are 
not many examples of large bureaucratic and purely 
scientific research academies and institutions like ours 
in developed countries). Some dedicated funds, perhaps 
in the form of annual grants, will be defined for 
scientific work that is interesting and contemporary. 
Grants will be awarded on a competitive basis, thus 
encouraging research development. Attached to 
universities, special research centers and institutes can 
also function.  
Alongside the required courses, the students also 
can select a certain number of elective courses. This 
principle takes into account not only the student’s 
wishes and inclinations, but also encourages 
competitiveness and development of scientific research 
in chosen fields. Socio-political sciences must not be 
devoted to ideology anymore but to analyzing current 
situation, our past and worldwide outlook. English 
language and information technology must be given 
special attention as a vital part of higher education.  
It is essential that every subject has a specific 
"weight" attached to it (i.e. credit). Students will have to 
re-sit subjects for which they fail to obtain the necessary 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
18 
credit. Only those who obtain the defined number of 
credits from the required courses, and some courses of 
general knowledge can graduate from the University.  
Cooperation with leading universities and close 
contact with well known foreign scholars should be 
helpful in preparing curricula, the teaching of some 
subjects, raising the level of research, preparing the 
exact indicators of degree requirements, in organizing 
conferences and symposiums, and many other areas.  
It is essential to start educating specialists in 
those areas where there is a great demand. These can 
include management, marketing, law, commerce, inter-
national finance systems, computer and mathematical 
sciences, international relations and political sciences, 
environmental studies, and others.  
Pluralism of the political system and different 
forms of economic properties are making their way into 
our country and are becoming pat of everyday life. It is 
impossible to avoid these in higher education and 
science. Everyone would benefit from different types of 
universities functioning side by side. To give the 
freedom of choice to humans is one of the necessary 
factors of progress. 
 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
19 
 
CHAPTER 5 
 
 ON  THE  THRESHOLD  OF  THE  PALACE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It was September 1990. The academic year had 
already begun and everybody was greeting each other 
and exchanging news. Ever "essential" topics such as 
palace quarrels and difficulties of surviving were being 
discussed intensively. When the group numbers were 
down to two or three, money and love affairs would 
overcome other topics. When these hot topics were 
exhausted other issues were raised.  
My unpublished article "Thoughts on scholarship 
and education system" had reached a group of scholars 
and become a lively subject of discussion. Various 
people were approaching me with different questions, 
suggesting that I publish the article in this or that 
newspaper, and also giving some ideas and plans. I was 
giving short answers, in some cases with a smile and a 
joke. I was thinking: "I wrote the article to create an 
interest and to be discussed - and that is exactly what is 
happening. So the main work is done and all that is left 
is to make it a reality. This is the principal task now."  
One day Saleh Mammadov came to the 
department of mathematics, and told me that he had 
read my article attentively and enjoyed it. 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
20 
- You have touched upon serious problems. 
What’s next? - He addressed me with his usual slightly 
arrogant tone of voice. 
- What can happen? - I answered a question with 
question, - I will try to publish it both in Azeri and 
Russian, enable more people to read it, maybe 
somebody will find it helpful. 
 - That’s good. But there is another way. As you 
know I am a financial adviser to the Prime Minister 
Hasan Hasanov and as such I see him occasionally. I 
have to be at one of the meetings in his office soon and 
if you don’t mind I’ll give him the manuscript of your 
article. Most probably it will draw his attention. He is a 
man of progressive ideas and he is very attentive to new 
and unexpected ideas, especially if it’s related to an 
important problem.  
Prior to this conversation I’d met Hasan Hasanov 
only once. I took my friend from Canada, Yaghoub Sha-
fai, to see him. During one of my visits to Canada I 
lectured at Dalhousie University in Halifax, and became 
friends with two Azeri-scholars - a mathematician 
Heidar Rajavi, and a professor in management Yaghoub 
Shafai. From then our friendship went from strength to 
strength. My article "A scholar from Canada in his ho-
meland" published in the "Literature and Culture" (Ada-
biyyat va injasanat) newspaper was dedicated to Heidar 
Rajavi and our meetings with him. In April-May, 1990, 
Yagub Shafai visited Baku as well. After a TV program 
where Yagoub Shafai, Fuad Alaskarov and myself took 
part, Yagub-bey had become very popular. People 
would stop him on the streets of Baku, greet and 
communicate with him. Around that time I was told that 
the Prime Minister would like to meet Yagoub and we 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
21 
were invited to the Council of Ministers for an 
appointment. 
Hasan Hasanov met us in a very friendly manner. 
First, he asked Yagoub a lot of questions, then turned to 
me and said: 
- Aren’t you the same mathematician Hamlet who 
was talking about his visits to Canada on the TV show 
"Dalga?"9  
He didn’t try to hide his pleasure to see our 
surprised faces.  
The meeting lasted more than half an hour and 
was very interesting. We discussed Canada, Azerbaijan, 
Iran, Zanjan,10 economics, finance, management and 
other subjects and I think everybody enjoyed it.  
Up to this I had neither met a Prime Minister 
before nor any other minister or top government official 
face to face. For some reason I couldn’t take seriously a 
chat of two people living lives so different that we could 
have been living on different planets. I think for this 
reason our meeting remained in my memory as an 
exotic incident.  
I had to reply to Saleh’s suggestion of passing on 
the article, but frankly even if my article would reach 
the Prime Minister, I didn’t pin my hopes on his interest 
in the problem. The most appropriate, real and modest 
thing for me to do was to publish the article in a 
newspaper and thus draw attention to my ideas. But 
after some hesitation, I agreed with Saleh. 
 - So do you think that we’ll get what we want? 
Does the Prime Minister have nothing to do but read my 
scribbling? More probably he has already forgotten me. 
Oh well, life is unpredictable. Maybe this is the way. 
Let’s go!  
So, my letter was sent to the Palace. 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
22 
 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
23 
 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
24 
 
CHAPTER 6 
 
CHANGE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
When the Baku branch of the Leningrad Institute 
of Finance and Economics became independent again 
under the name of the Azerbaijan State Economic 
Institute, the program worked out by Leningrad 
specialists not only remained unrealized but disappeared 
completely. I have to remark here that this institute was 
famous for being the most corrupt among all higher 
learning institutions in Baku. Though there were still 
some respectable researchers and professors, as well as 
the hopeful youth, there wasn’t an encouraging working 
atmosphere and no new staff members were brought in. 
In this condition I could not do anything useful even at 
the department of mathematics where I was chairman. 
The new mathematics curriculum worked out by me for 
three semesters was followed only by a small group of 
instructors. There was a group of teachers who made 
various excuses in order not to follow the program, 
arguing that the simple mathematical models of 
economics would be too complicated for students to 
understand. They claimed that economic terms and 
problems in mathematics are unnecessary. Then there 
would be no difference between the mathematics for 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
25 
economics, finance and management, on the one hand, 
and mathematics for engineering, on the other.  
One day the assistant to the Prime Minister gave 
me a call. He told me that the Prime Minister would like 
to meet me and we arranged an appointment.  
One fine fall evening together with Saleh 
Mammadov I went to the Cabinet of Ministers. On the 
way we decided that I’d do most of the talking to save 
time and explain convincingly our aim. Of course, we 
could never guess how long our talk would last. We 
thought the discussion would be of general character, as 
some kind of probing exercise.  
Hasan Hasanov met us cheerfully and 
immediately went straight to the main point: 
- I have heard about your ideas. Briefly tell me, 
what is your intention, what are you going to do?  
I was not ready yet for such an open conversation 
without any introduction. That is why I did a quick, 
neutral move, as if playing speed chess, to give myself 
some time to think:  
- Frankly, I only wrote down some of my ideas on 
education with the aim to initiate a discussion. I’m very 
honored to be asked about it on such a high-level.  
- I have invited you to personally get information 
on what kind of university you are planning to establish 
- said the Prime Minister, and by making that move he 
increased the pressure. This question was very unexpec-
ted, but at the same time I felt that a perfect atmosphere 
was being created. It was impossible to continue in a 
vague manner, speaking the chess-players’ language, 
tactics came into action now. I decided on a sharp move.  
- Is it possible to establish a new university in 
Azerbaijan today? - Of course, I had revealed my 
surprise and suspicion with that question.  
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
26 
The Prime Minister smiled:  
- Well, I’ve invited you here today in this 
connection. I want to understand how serious your plans 
are.  
Suddenly, a wave of excitement raised inside of 
me. I realized how very important this meeting could 
be, and I felt a conviction that something beautiful is 
about to happen. This moment calmed me down, I felt 
that everything now depended on my faith in myself and 
on my ability to be convincing. I became encouraged in 
the way a chess-player who has an opportunity to 
demonstrate a good game would be. Of course, H. 
Hasanov’s high spirits that day, his well-wishing 
attitude and ability to see a problem quickly inspired 
me. I took the initiative in my hands and relaxed, like if 
I was talking to a colleague, and not to the Prime 
Minister: 
- A breath of fresh air, a new movement in the 
higher education system of Azerbaijan is as necessary as 
bread, as water. The deepening crisis of our education 
system is obvious, it doesn’t need any special 
explanation. No measures are being taken to improve 
the situation. Yet it will not be possible to make 
substantial changes in the entire education system. I 
think, one of the ways is to establish a new type of 
private colleges and universities.  
H. Hasanov stopped me:  
- What do you mean by a new type? And what is 
wrong with the Soviet education? 
I explained:  
- Nobody denies the achievements of Soviet 
science and the Soviet institutes of higher learning are 
not bad either. But it’s not the point. What I want to say 
is that the best times of our institutes are in the past, the 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
27 
level of education has descended and research has 
weakened. On one hand, it’s very much connected with 
the chaotic condition in society and government, on the 
other hand, it is the result of having no reforms and not 
feeling the pulse of the time. The education system must 
be taught and learnt just as any other kind of activity 
and as a subject, exposed to changes, be developed by 
making reforms. We do nothing in this direction. To 
establish a new and independent establishment for 
education does mean to make reforms in education...  
- OK, OK, we all see the lagging in education and 
science, it’s not your discovery. Look, what would be 
the main differences between the university you’re 
going to establish and the existing universities and 
institutes?  
I knew I found the right direction for the 
conversation and could foresee a favorable ending. But I 
could not forget that I was pressed for time to express 
my ideas. I tried to round off my thoughts: 
- It is a university, where the students will pay for 
the education they receive. The teachers will be selected 
very attentively, their outlook, their research activity, 
teaching ability and their intellect will be taken into 
account. The tuition fee will increase the student’s 
responsibility, and will enable us to increase the 
salaries, and the state expenses for education will be 
reduced. English language will be given a special 
importance. First it will be taught as a foreign language. 
Later, some courses and in future all courses, with a few 
exceptions, will be taught in English. In other words, a 
university with English as a medium of teaching will be 
established. One of the main characteristics of this 
university will be the application of education ideas 
tested in Europe and America, and all educational 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
28 
programs and curricula will be devised in order to meet 
today’s needs.  
H. Hasanov stopped me again. The Primer 
Minister often changed the direction of the conversation 
and didn’t allow chattering and monotony.  
- To choose English as the language of instruction 
is very important and interesting. How about the 
teachers? Are there Azerbaijani specialists able to teach 
different subjects in English?  
- We have no problem with this in sciences. As to 
social-political sciences and humanities, of course, we 
have very few specialists. Although it’s a small number, 
one can find scholars and teachers speaking English 
(even French) here. It should be sufficient to train a 
small group of students. On the other hand, if we don’t 
have enough English speaking specialists, we can use 
Azerbaijani and Russian for the beginning. One of the 
main tasks is to enable students to read books and 
scholarly articles in English. And this will be possible at 
the university we are discussing now. At the same time 
such a university must establish broad foreign relations. 
Eventually, the visiting foreign scholars can speed up 
the English language education process.  
- How will you manage to invite the foreign 
scholars? Do you have money? 
I smiled, and decided to pass on this question in 
order not to wander away from the main subject 
(naturally, I could answer the question, to mention 
receiving grants and other ways). I tried to demonstrate 
yet again a sense of self-confidence: 
 - There are ways of inviting a small group of 
teachers. We have friends too and their help will be of 
great importance. Some foreign scholars, our friends, 
want to come to Azerbaijan to help us. They are aware 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
29 
of our present conditions and they will partially provide 
for expenses.  
Hasanov said suddenly: 
 - I have recently organized a business congress, 
probably you’ve heard about it, we had a lot of foreign 
guests. Peculiarities of a market economy were being 
discussed. One could feel very strongly the 
insufficiency of English speaking specialists in our 
country. To teach subjects in English and to train 
specialists of different fields is a good idea, - and I 
immediately replied: 
 - Instruction in the English language will help us 
to integrate to the rest of the world, we can have visiting 
teachers and scholars and our students can successfully 
continue their education at the developed countries of 
America and Europe.  
Pushing his armchair back H. Hasanov stood up, 
and so did we (Saleh and I).  
Hasanov turned to me and said: 
-You know the idea of establishing the university 
is a reasonable one, but it’s only one side of the 
problem. What pleases me is that you have good 
workable plans. I have felt that you know what to do, 
you have turned this work over in your mind. Also I 
don’t think there is any necessity to set-up a university 
or institute resembling our existing ones in any way. 
Your knowledge on the European - American education 
system is very important for this work.  
- Thank you very much, - I replied. 
- Come to my office once again. We will try to 
specify the subjects that are necessary for the beginning 
and identify problems that need to be solved and 
prepare some official proposal, - H. Hasanov said, 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
30 
smiled, then set the next appointment with us and we 
left.  
Around the same time, my continued 
chairmanship of the mathematics department at 
Azerbaijan State Institute of Economics was getting 
more and more on the nerves of the institute’s 
managers. The department was one of the major ones, 
and they were eager to influence the entrance exam 
policies that I was in charge of. I began feeling more 
pressure and many conflicts were created in superficial 
ways. I started getting messages like "you have to leave 
your position or...", and there even were threats. The 
situation became such that this position no longer 
satisfied me as well.  
First of all, as I mentioned before, there was no 
opportunity to do anything useful. Secondly, I knew that 
the young teachers I invited to the department would 
support me in any event of discord, some other teachers 
would not act against me and I didn’t want them to be 
included on any "black list" because of me. Also, the 
gap between the image of university that I had 
conceived in my mind and the reality of my present job 
was so great that it led me to leave my position.  
One day I went to the vice-chancellor’s office and 
handed in my resignation. He immediately called the 
chancellor and told him about my resignation and 
everyone involved quickly agreed to accept it.  
Now I could dedicate myself fully to my idea. I 
was preparing for a new meeting with the Prime 
Minister. 
 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
31 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
32 
 
CHAPTER 7 
 
 LIGHT  AND  SHADOW 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I was preparing for the discussion of specific and 
essential problems and issues during our next meeting 
with the Prime Minister. Among general issues to be 
discussed I was planning to place prime importance 
upon two issues: the building required for the university 
and financial support from the state budget. Also, as the 
Prime Minister mentioned himself, major departments 
and subjects needed to be defined. It was very difficult 
to plan in advance the direction that conversation would 
take and the content of the official document produced 
as a result.  
I saw no problem in defining major subject areas 
and departments of the future university. I thought there 
was no need to explain to the Prime Minister the 
importance of training modern specialists in the field of 
management and economics. As a matter of fact he 
touched upon this problem himself during our last 
conversation. Law and social-political sciences could be 
considered as a second area of importance. Natural 
sciences could be represented by mathematics and 
computing. Setting up medical education would 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
33 
undoubtedly be a very difficult task, but it would be 
necessary to solve this problem as well.  
With all these thoughts I went to meet Hasanov 
again. I hurried but unfortunately when I arrived in his 
assistant’s office I was 5 minutes late. Saleh Mamma-
dov was waiting for me in the corridor. The assistant 
showed us through to Hasanov’s office.  
Hasanov looked displeased; he shook his head in 
response to our greeting and looked sourly at us: 
- Why are you late?  
I would normally never be late for a meeting, and 
I myself do not like those who are. The Prime 
Minister’s comment has increased even more my 
feeling of discontent with myself. When Saleh wanted 
to answer I interrupted him and said:  
- I’m so sorry, it’s my fault. The traffic was 
appalling. 
- When you are coming to the meeting with the 
Prime Minister everything must be taken into account. 
If you had left half an hour earlier you’d have never 
been late.  
He was right, but his second comment hurt me. A 
quick thought passed through my mind "that is what 
happens when someone who is destined to sit at home 
and prove theorems instead attends meetings with the 
Prime Minister." 
- All right, take your seats - Hasanov changed 
tone of his voice and smiled; - how are things getting 
on?  
- Thank you very much, quite well, - answered 
Saleh.  
I said nothing.  
Hasanov turned to me: 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
34 
- Where do you want to begin? You have 
probably prepared a plan about the departments and 
subjects.  
- Undoubtedly, economics and management are 
the first ones to come to mind. The market economy and 
appropriate management systems are among the fields 
that require a new way of thinking. The present 
management education leaves much to be desired.  
The Prime Minister asked:  
- There is the Institute of National Economy 
Management (INEM) affiliated with the Council of 
Ministers. Don’t they teach management?  
Saleh responded quickly:  
 - They are holding retraining courses for 
administrators, and the market economy is not taught 
here.  
I added:  
- Our main goal is to teach modern economics, 
organization and management of business to high 
school graduates. The next advanced stages would be to 
prepare specialists in more specific areas. And we’ll 
achieve it by learning from the American experience. 
Your Institute of National Economy Management is 
trying to "renew" the unwilling old school specialists in 
the shortest time. 
I have a habit of always using some humor in my 
conversation or even in scientific papers. This style was 
formed over the years. It didn’t always serve to my 
advantage - as an example, during the defense of my 
doctorate dissertation at the Steklov Institute of the 
Academy of Science of USSR in Moscow the main 
objection against my work brought by one of my 
opponents was "the language of the dissertation contains 
unacceptable level of emotion for the scientific work." 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
35 
- Lately we couldn’t find anyone to send to that 
institute for training courses anyway. There are some 
problems with the institute, - Hasanov said as if he had 
completely forgotten about our presence. 
I continued in a low voice:  
- Besides economics and management we’d like 
to prepare specialists in law and diplomacy. The need in 
well-educated diplomats will be increasing, and 
specialists in this area are currently not being trained in 
Azerbaijan. Also our jurisdiction will be changed soon 
to accommodate changing times. There will be a special 
need for international law experts…  
- It is also necessary to prepare well-educated 
politicians, - Hasanov declared his view of the problem 
and continued:  
- So, we are choosing two main areas- economics 
and management and political sciences, - he said as if 
concluding.  
- It would be useful if we teach international law 
side by side with political sciences, - I added carefully.  
- Well! - Prime Minister sounded uncertain, but it 
was obvious that he didn’t have strong objections.  
I continued:  
- Mathematics and computer sciences are also 
required.  
The Prime Minister objected immediately, 
unexpectedly for me:  
- Who needs mathematics? Who will want to 
dedicate themselves to mathematics and spend money 
on it?  
I was annoyed a little. In order to understand my 
feelings, imagine the effect of an unpleasant opinion 
about the girl who you love and decide to marry. 
Moreover, there was some truth in difficulty of finding 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
36 
someone wanting to spend money in order to study 
mathematics.  
Hasanov smiled:  
- Of course, I had forgotten that you’re a 
mathematician.  
I had to convince the Prime Minister:  
- We haven’t set ourselves the task to prepare 
specialists in modern mathematics, although it would be 
an important task in itself. Modern economics and 
management are so close to computer sciences and 
mathematics, that sometimes it’s impossible to 
distinguish them. From this viewpoint it’s not possible 
even to consider the fundamental economics and 
business education and research without teaching 
applied mathematics, statistics, and computer sciences.  
Saleh, as an economist and financier, also agreed 
with me:  
- One of the main reasons of our 
lagging behind Europe and America is 
the lack of computerization in our 
economy, finance, banking and mana-
gement.  
- Well, I have no objection to it, - said Hasanov 
resting his hand against the edge of the table, - We 
defined major subjects. Let’s discuss other issues.  
I still carried on:  
- It would be good to discuss the medical and 
biological sciences. Preparation of English-speaking 
medics and doctors will be of great importance in the 
near future if not today.  
Oh, no, - he said, - let’s leave this aside, it is an 
issue for the future. It seems you are not afraid of 
driving the State Institute of Medicine into a rage. 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
37 
Generally, don’t expect that all will "applaud" and say 
"thank you" to you for setting up a new university.  
I added in a low voice:  
- Who will object as long as you give your 
consent to it? And if it serves the interests of the whole 
nation, why would anyone try to be an obstacle in its 
way?  
Hasanov smiled and I thought that it is possible to 
interpret the expression of his face in two ways "You’re 
a naive man and unaware of most things", or "Yes, in 
any case, my consent is the most significant in this 
matter."  
- Well, tell me then, what will be the name of this 
university?" - asked Hasanov, - have you thought of a 
good name for it?  
I think it was the only thing that I had never 
thought of - the name of the institution that I wanted to 
establish.  
- Please allow us to think about it a little bit, - I 
wanted to gain more time, - In any case the name of this 
university will be connected to Azerbaijan, its nature, 
history or geography.  
- Why university? Why not institute or college? 
- There are at least two reasons why this higher 
education institution must be called a university. First, 
for the special attention that will be given to research, 
graduate studies, master and doctor programs. Second, 
we will not be limiting ourselves to only one or two 
areas of teaching and research. In general, we’re 
thinking of taking most elements of the US university 
model as a basis.  
- Well, what if we call it the "English Language 
Azerbaijan University", - said Hasanov, suddenly 
deciding solve the problem there and then, - It’s a very 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
38 
good name. We have both "Azerbaijan" and "English" 
in it [That is, Azerbaijan University with English as a 
medium of instruction – Ed.]. What is your opinion? 
This name seemed a little bit strange to me, more 
frankly I didn’t really like it. But I didn’t think it was 
appropriate to refuse the Prime Minister’s offer, besides 
he already said, "it’s a very good name."  
- Yes, it’s a very interesting name, - I said and set 
about to express my doubt in a ‘peaceful’ way, - But I 
have never heard of the university name that states the 
language of instruction in it.  
Hasanov put an end to the problem:  
- Let there be the name of the language in ours. 
And let the world see that there’s a university in 
Azerbaijan where the language of teaching is English. 
Let them understand that we are not fundamentalists.11 
We are not a remote province of the USSR, but a 
country, a nation turning its face to Europe and 
America. 
Then he continued jokingly:  
- So, isn’t it well thought through? None of you 
could think of it. OK, what’s left? Oh, do you have a 
building? Where will the classes be taught?  
These were still Soviet times. Though the Soviet 
Union had begun to collapse, there was inertness in the 
way of living, in thoughts. There was no private 
ownership. There were no people in Azerbaijan rich 
enough (at least, officially) who would care about 
education and science to an extent as to want to set up a 
university and spend money on its development. Those 
who knew about education and science and had new 
ideas could do something only with support of the 
government. For these reasons of course I could not 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
39 
have a building for a university and I thought it was a 
bit strange question to ask.  
I said:  
- We don’t have a building and to tell the truth, 
we have not done any ground work since we didn’t 
expect things to develop so fast. If for the beginning we 
could have with your help a small building or a part of 
any building and some financial support from the 
government we’ll have enough time to prepare for the 
future.  
- A building and money is not an easy thing to 
provide, in fact it is something we have a big shortage 
in, and not only for this exercise, - saying this Hasanov 
fell into thinking.  
We were silent. I was hoping very much that the 
Prime Minister would be able to provide a building for 
us. Obviously things do not always go smoothly. It 
seemed we were not to be lucky in this aspect.  
Hasanov suddenly said:  
- Do you know the rector of the Institute of 
National Economy Management, Rahim Rahimov? I’m 
talking about the institute affiliated to the Council of 
Ministers. It has been mentioned in our conversation a 
little while ago. 
We sat there, trying to understand which direction 
the problem was going to - better or worse.  
The Premier with the help of his assistant gave a 
call to R. Rahimov. He spoke very gently to him:  
- There is a very interesting idea. You’ll like it. 
Come over here now. I’m waiting for you.  
Then he told us in a satisfied voice:  
- It seems I’ll be able to solve your problem. I 
will reach an agreement with Rahimov and you will be 
placed at this institute. The rest will depend on you. 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
40 
We left the Premier’s cabinet and waited in the 
corridor for Rahimov to come.  
Saleh looked very concerned. I wasn’t in the 
highest of spirits either. It was only natural for us to 
want to work independently, without any obstacles since 
the success of any work mostly depends on 
independence.  
I happened to have met Rahimov before. When 
my friend from Canada Dr. J. Shafai, whom I mentioned 
previously, was in Baku, Rahimov had invited him to 
lecture at his institute and that is when our first 
acquaintance took place. He was a very resourceful and 
orderly person. His institute and its surroundings were 
neat and charming, not typical of Baku establishments. 
After that lecture he invited us to his birthday party. 
Since we had already planned to make a trip to Lanka-
ran,12 I promised to try to attend his party if at all 
possible. It happened that I kept my promise. For it he 
thanked me repeatedly: "Come to my institute if you 
have spare time, to have a chat, maybe discuss an idea 
or two", - saying this he didn’t hide his interest to 
cooperate with me on something.  
The number of participants was increasing...  
 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
41 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
42 
 
CHAPTER 8 
 
  A  TRIPLE  BARRIER...  
AND  A  RESOLUTION  OF  ESTABLISHMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Prime Minister’s haste to find an accommo-
dation for our university perplexed us and even 
confused our plans, however strange this may sound. 
We were thinking of leasing a small building or at least 
a part of it, which would enable us to set up an indepen-
dent establishment and think through its policies. But 
now we were about to establish close relationship of 
some kind with the Institute of National Economy Ma-
nagement, which was attached to the Council of Minis-
ters, and this was not an exciting prospect. 
Hasanov not only invited the rector of INEM, 
Rahim Rahimov, but also the Head of the Department of 
Science and Education in the Council of Ministers, 
S.Aliyev, to meet Saleh and myself. When there had 
been three of us at meetings, I did most of the talking, 
with Hasanov directing the conversation with his 
questions and suggestions. Naturally, when two more 
participants who were unaware of the course of previous 
discussions became involved in the conversation, my 
role naturally decreased. The Prime Minister explained 
the matter in several sentences and explained the 
necessity of this university.  
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
43 
Then he turned to Rahimov and said:  
- What do you think if we affiliate it to your 
Institute? Hamlet knows all about these things, he has 
planned what to do in the near future and then we’ll see 
what happens. If the venture is successful, we can 
consider further development and financing.  
- I don’t mind, it seems to be a very useful step 
and I know Hamlet well, he will manage this, - answe-
red Rahimov in a slightly hesitant manner. He was pro-
bably trying to understand what this all meant for him. 
Maybe he was trying to determine if there was any thre-
at in this sudden offer, - But we have only four classro-
oms. How will we accommodate both the university stu-
dents and those attending training courses? If we share 
the building, how will the relationship between these 
two institutions be regulated?  
The Prime Minister seemed to understand R. 
Rahimov very well:  
- This English-speaking university is just being 
set up, and for the time being it can function with a 
small group of students and remain attached to our 
institute. The number of those coming to training 
courses is decreasing day by day and you can use an 
alternating timetable - some classes could be in the first 
shift, others in the second shift. 
I think the words "attached to your institute" cal-
med R. Rahimov down. So at least his organization and 
post remained untouched. On the other hand this 
"attachment" issue upset Saleh and myself greatly. It 
seemed with every word said our scope of activity was 
becoming more limited. It was too late to say "we have 
troubled you enough, thank you, we will look for a 
building elsewhere." But I decided to try anyway:  
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
44 
- Wouldn’t it bring about some misunderstanding 
- to set up the university attached to the institute? What 
if we start to function at Rahim muallim’s building for 
the moment, without using the phrase "attached to", and 
as soon as we are on more firm ground we’ll find 
another accommodation?  
S. Aliyev looked at me with expression of an-
xiety, bordering with disapproval. The Prime Minister 
has already made up his mind:  
- To set up a new university attached to an estab-
lished institute can only be helpful. You will be provi-
ded with accommodation and classrooms, there is 
nothing required from you, except to work out programs 
and start your classes.  
Rahimov wanted to clear up one more question:  
- What about the financial issue? 
The Prime Minister answered immediately:  
- This education will be paid for by students, it is 
a self- financing university. 
I spoke again:  
- It is absolutely correct, the financing of educa-
tion will rely heavily on tuition fees paid by private in-
dividuals, but there is still a great need for financing 
from state budget. Paid education has not yet entered the 
public realm. People are not ready to accept it wholly, 
and the tuition fee probably will not be very high to start 
with. In general, the new private university will be in 
great need of state support. There are at least two ways 
of solving this problem - state can provide finance tak-
ing into account the number of students that are enrolled 
or a certain amount of finance can be given to the uni-
versity as a one-off payment.  
Rahimov agreed with me and also noted that the 
first option was more appropriate.  
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
45 
- It would be better if you wouldn’t ask for 
money, - the Prime Minister changed the direction of 
the conversation:  
- Some preparatory work should be completed 
before setting up the university. Let us prepare a 
resolution, and as to the subjects and departments, the 
number of the students and financial problems you will 
have to discuss these with the Minister of Education and 
the Minister of Finance yourselves. I think it would be 
reasonable to start with three groups of fifteen students 
in each. Our next meeting in my office will take place as 
soon as you get the necessary signatures for the draft 
resolution.  
We left the Prime Minister’s office. First I made 
an appointment with Rahimov since he wanted to talk to 
me about the issue in detail. Then S. Aliyev invited 
Saleh and me to his office and introduced us to his 
deputy, Qurban Amirov. We agreed that Qurban and I 
would prepare the draft resolution.  
The time had come to meet various officials, 
people of certain power and influence and let them 
know about the ideas and to ask for their approval and 
support. I had no choice but to resign myself to this 
process. The only thing I could do was to try to be 
convincing and sincere.  
My meeting with Rahim Rahimov was interesting 
and partially diplomatic. This man who knew intimately 
the Soviet bureaucratic machinery was not an ordinary 
person. He could grasp interesting ideas quickly, and he 
tried to bring people working with him to his own way 
of thinking.  
He asked me to tell him the main point of our 
talks with the Prime Minister. He looked satisfied and 
fell into thought. I was trying to read his mind: "If this 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
46 
idea of a university becomes a reality, and if my training 
courses become even less popular, what will happen to 
the National Economy Management Institute? Will the 
university swallow the institute?" I think the Prime 
Minister had the same reservations when he proposed to 
set up the university under this institute. And more 
probably he may have thought he was killing two birds 
with one stone. On one side he secured the fast 
formation of a new progressive higher institution, on the 
other he gave the aging institute a gasp of fresh air, stop 
it from being criticized. Arriving at this result in my 
inner analyses, I tried to explain to Rahim muallim in a 
diplomatic way that I had no intention to overtake his 
institute and his position, my only aim was to establish a 
small and modern university where the English 
language would be of great importance. I would always 
follow his advice and respect him. I never thought of 
fighting him for power, as it would be against my 
nature. I think he understood that I would never exhibit 
any control ambitions and start racing him for power 
whilst we were sharing the same building. In other 
words, I was here only for the sake of setting up the uni-
versity and one day I would be looking for other 
accommodation to secure my independence and the 
development of the university.  
I think we understood each other and agreed to 
work alongside with mutual respect and support. Later 
in the course of events some misunderstandings and 
different approaches to some issues did occur, but the 
rules of courtesy and good manners were always 
observed.  
Together with Qurban Amirov I prepared the 
draft resolution and submitted it for the Prime 
Minister’s approval (during the next months Qurban and 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
47 
I worked closely together on some more documents and 
it was a very successful cooperation and partnership). 
Four different persons at the Council of Ministers had to 
sign the draft resolution and the Department of Science 
and Education was taking care of this. Saleh’s and my 
duty was to get Rahimov, the rector of the Institute of 
National Economy Management, Feyzullayev, the 
Minister of Education, and Qarayev, the Minister of 
Finance, to sign the document. I should say that I did 
not meet Qarayev. Saleh took on the responsibility to 
get the Minister of Finance’s approval since they were 
colleagues. But for some reason the Minister did not 
want to talk to Saleh. He refused to meet him several 
times. Finally we had to solve the financial issue 
directly with the Council of Ministers and the Ministry 
of Education.  
On November 5th 1990 I met Rahimov and he 
signed the draft resolution. Now the only remaining 
problem was to meet Feyzullayev, because the Prime 
Minister demanded that we submit the list of majors and 
departments and all other education related issues to the 
Minister of Education for approval. Feyzullayev was the 
only person among all Azerbaijani ministers whom I 
knew before this affair. In fact, we were colleagues. 
When I graduated from Azerbaijan (now Baku) State 
University, my first appointment was at the Institute of 
Mathematics and Mechanics of the Academy of 
Sciences of Azerbaijan. At that time Feyzullayev was 
the academic secretary of this institute. He was a very 
lively, restless, fast spoken young man, a master of 
preparing all kinds of official documents very quickly 
and finding common language and understanding with 
those of high rank. He progressed very quickly 
changing his posts one after another. First he became 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
48 
the deputy director of this institute, then began moving 
forward in the party line (The Communist Party). 
Having worked a little at the Party Committee of the 
Academy of Sciences he was appointed a deputy 
minister of the Ministry of Education and finally he 
became the Minister.  
Feyzullayev met us in a very merry mood and 
embraced me warmly. He got acquainted with Saleh and 
began to talk. We discussed the world of mathematics, 
mathematicians, Moscow, our respective doctoral 
dissertations,13 and he spoke very highly of me to Saleh. 
Then I inquired after his work at the ministry and his 
personal affairs, and at last we came to the main point. 
He wanted me to give more information. He had already 
been given some details by Qurban Amirov over the 
telephone and his first and immediate objection was 
against the idea of setting up the university under the 
auspices of Institute of National Economy Management. 
I told him that I shared his view, but noted that it was 
the Prime Minister’s suggestion and was connected with 
our accommodation problems. I explained that it would 
be very difficult to take a step back now. He quickly 
said, "Let it be so." Then he added:  
- For the university to be under the Institute is not 
logical. It is necessary to establish it also under the aus-
pices of the Ministry of Education. If it is a university, it 
would be better to have a formal connection with our 
ministry; in this case its status would be higher. 
Of course, as I have mentioned many times 
before, to function independently was the main idea and 
main dream behind this university. But readers should 
understand that at that time there was no such notion as 
"private school" or ‘private education’ in our Law on 
Education.14 I was aiming to set up the university with 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
49 
its own constitution that would reflect the idea of 
private school. Now, we were offered to add yet one 
more "under" or "attached to" or "affiliated to" in 
addition to the previous one. In my opinion it was 
already enough to be affiliated to the Institute of 
National Economy Management that is in turn affiliated 
to the Council of Ministers.  
I replied smiling:  
- It seems I will have to overcome a triple barrier 
to be able to have a Private University and 
independence. "By" one organization and "under" two 
others, really is a parody of independence and Privacy.  
Feyzullayev answered quickly:  
- First of all, I support your idea to set up an 
independent university. Secondly, I repeat once again, 
that to be affiliated to the Ministry of Education will 
only be beneficial in solving your financial problems, 
and any other problems you might have.  
I had already understood that if I didn’t make 
certain concessions, things would become impossible. 
The political situation in the country was unstable; there 
was tension among the highest ranked officials, new 
political groupings were being formed that I didn’t have 
thorough information about. It was absolutely necessary 
to have all the resolutions and orders for setting up the 
university signed as fast as possible.  
I said:  
- I have nothing really to add, I agree with you. 
You are more experienced in these issues.  
Feyzullayev laughed:  
- My rector, I have no doubt that you’ll establish 
a wonderful university. I will always be here to help 
you.  
Then he hinted towards Saleh and said:  
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
50 
- Most probably Saleh will be... 
I immediately explained:  
- Saleh is my friend and colleague, we will work 
together.  
Feyzullayev immediately distributed all the posts 
of the future university:  
- And Saleh will be the deputy rector. My rector 
and deputy rector, what else there remains to be 
resolved? – Saying this he rubbed his hands together.  
I asked him to concentrate on defining of subjects 
and departments for the university. In the version of the 
draft resolution that I had in my hand "Economics and 
Management", "Computer Science, Statistics and Ma-
thematical Sciences" and "International Law and 
Political Sciences" were mentioned and I also wanted to 
add subjects related to Medicine or Ecology.  
Feyzullayev expressed his opinion promptly:  
- "International Law" is not needed. It will 
impede your work if you start competing with the 
Azerbaijan State University. "Muallim’s" attitude to this 
problem will be negative (By the word "muallim"15 he 
meant the rector of Azerbaijan State University, a well-
known mathematician Mirabbas Qasimov). Do you 
need to cause serious misunderstandings from the very 
beginning?  
I didn’t understand at the time why anyone would 
want to fight me. I did have a feeling that there would 
be a struggle but I couldn’t reconcile myself with this 
idea because I couldn’t see a logical explanation for it.  
- Then, let’s call it International Relations instead 
of International Law, - I wanted to demonstrate that I 
was not going to give up.  
- Well, I don’t mind, - he said, - but as far as I 
know the Azerbaijan State University is also going to 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
51 
offer this major. Anyway, let it be as you want. As for 
medicine, this is going to be very difficult. You do 
realize, the "Mafia" could swallow you alive. You had 
better not get involved with medicine. Instead, ecology 
sounds like a very good idea, it’s a new and exciting 
area, and it is a contemporary issue. 
After further discussions in the Council of 
Ministers and Ministry of Education we included in the 
paperwork that medicine and other additional subjects 
could be started in a year. So, as a result of more 
meetings, all the groundwork for setting up the 
university was completed and agreed by everyone 
involved and on December 20, 1990 the Prime Minister 
signed the draft resolution.16  
 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
52 
 
CHAPTER 9 
 
  THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  
AND  MORE  MEETINGS... 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The draft resolution of the Council of Ministers 
inspired me. I was beginning to live my dream. It could 
become reality any day. According to the staff of the 
Council of Ministers, "the main work was done - the 
draft resolution was signed" and now there were only 
two "simple" things remaining in order to obtain the 
final resolution: to actually set up the university and "to 
prepare a constitution and get it signed, and to meet and 
convince more people."  
I didn’t feel that all difficulties are now behind us: 
there were a lot of "draft resolutions" that never 
materialized. Particularly in such hard times - "the way 
forward is difficult, the world is dark", but I was not 
going "to remove my horse from the road!"17 I was ready 
to put up a fight - only political muddle could render me 
helpless.  
To produce the constitution of the university was 
not really difficult. I was taking my article "Thoughts on 
science and education system" as a basis, and trying to 
understand the rules of the game and the ways of 
avoiding complications. First of all I was trying to 
minimize our dependence on the Ministry of Education 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
53 
and the Institute of National Economy Management. 
This dependence is reflected only in two articles of the 
constitution: to create an annual report on the academic 
affairs and research, and to get consent of the Minister 
of Education and the Rector of INEM on solving the 
problems concerning financing from the state budget. I 
realized that receiving aid from the state budget would be 
an arduous and almost impossible task - from this 
viewpoint the dependence of the university on these two 
organizations was minimal. However life is 
unpredictable, so I still wanted just in case to try to 
include an article on financing coming from two sources 
in the final resolution.  
"Personnel are hired on contractual basis, and the 
university can set its salaries independently" - these 
articles in the resolution were indeed signs of 
independence in those days. The article "the University 
can create international relations independently" was 
suggested to be completed with the phrase "and also 
through the co-operation of the department of 
international relations of the ME."  
I also succeeded in including an article that 
showed the university’s independence from the INEM, 
which stated "The Baku City Executive Committee is to 
provide the university with accommodation by the end 
of 1991."18  
It was also very common at the time for all 
universities’ curricula to be set by the Ministry of 
Education. I had included an article that enabled the 
students to choose at least some of their courses and it 
reduced the role of the curricula sent down from 
"above."  
I also included an item about the Student’s Union 
(which I really wanted to be active), about receiving 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
54 
grants for research, and about the right for the university 
to have a university press, which I considered very 
important.  
The constitution that I worked out consisted of 
the following general 7 items: 
1. General regulations, aims and purposes 
2. University management 
3. Organization of Academic Activity 
4. Organization of Research Activity 
5. International relations 
6. Sources and Principles of financing 
7. Legal Status 
Later this constitution became the basis for the 
constitutions of a whole family of newly established 
universities (sometimes it was difficult to distinguish 
these constitutions from our original).  
The draft constitution had to be approved by the 
Department of Science and Education of the Council of 
Ministers. Only one article, which stated "The activity 
of political parties is forbidden at the University", was 
rejected entirely. My desire not to give an opportunity to 
the Communist Party to function at the university was 
met unenthusiastically. I tried to maneuver and say that 
"I’m speaking about any kind of parties" but it was 
useless. I was made to exclude this item and I was even 
told that "the personal relations between the first 
secretary of the Central Committee of Azerbaijan 
Communist Party and the Prime Minister are not very 
good. Adding such a sentence to the constitution is 
barefaced hostility". "Don’t try to include it in your 
constitution, in reality you can work as you wish" said 
Qurban Amirov trying to console me.  
Meanwhile, the whole "world was falling apart."19 
The Communist Party 20 was still functioning, but it was 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
55 
not as strong as it was before. The movement against 
the decision of the USSR Supreme Soviet announcing a 
state of emergency in Baku21 was strengthening. There 
was a great confusion in people’s minds - they couldn’t 
get rid of the old way completely, but couldn’t 
comprehend the changes, couldn’t see the future 
entirely. On January 4, (1991) the destruction of the 
Kirov’s22 grandiose monument in the park overlooking 
Baku had started. The official reason was subsidence in 
the upland areas in the Bayil region of Baku. In reality, 
the national day of mourning, January 20, was 
approaching. One year had passed since the Soviet 
Army had slaughtered part of the peaceful population in 
Baku. Kirov’s monument, symbolizing the Soviet 
regime, was overlooking graves of the innocent dead.  
My further meetings with the Minister of Educa-
tion R. Feyzullayev regarding the constitution were not 
as friendly as the first one. Hasanov and Mutallibov’s 
personal relationship was an issue, although Feyzul-
layev who was close to Mutallibov, was trying to ac-
commodate both sides. He could see that the situation 
was not stable and it would not be very wise to take 
sides. He would postpone our meetings on various pre-
texts as if trying to obtain more time for thinking it over 
and over again. Finally, I got Feyzullayev’s signature 
with the help of Hazrat Agabayli, Head of the Interna-
tional Relations office of the Ministry of Education.  
I didn’t have a lot of difficulties in obtaining 
signatures of the Baku city Executive Committee, State 
Planning Committee, Ministry of Finance, Ministries of 
Justice and Communication who all had to declare their 
agreement to the Resolution on the Formation of the 
University and its Constitution.  
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
56 
Now the Cabinet of Ministers had to issue a final 
resolution (the name of the Council of Ministers had 
been ‘desovietized’). 23 
  
 
CHAPTER 10 
 
  SOME  INTERNAL  AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I was working on the constitution from home. But 
I would often go to the Institute of National Economy, 
mainly to meet my acquaintances and fellows who 
heard about my activities and the university. They were 
finding it very difficult to believe and really wanted to 
understand more. A few people were very enthusiastic 
and were offering support.  
While discussing different parts of the 
constitution with the rector of INEM Rahimov, and 
exchanging views on different problems, we began to 
know each other very closely. He offered me to take 
part at the INEM’s Academic Council meetings and at 
the same time said that he had given the order to prepare 
an office for me with my name on the door. I thanked 
him for his attention and said that an office would be of 
great help. But I refused to "officialise" it and have my 
name on the door, since I was not yet an official person 
at this Institute and the resolution of the Cabinet of 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
57 
Ministers had yet to be issued. Taking this into 
consideration and also bringing my busyness as an 
excuse I asked him to postpone my participation at the 
Institute’s Academic Council meetings. He liked this 
tactful objection and saying "if any problems arise, 
please feel free to address them to me" - he patted me 
on the shoulder in a friendly manner.  
The majority of my time was now spent on trying 
to understand and identify the ways of teaching and set 
major guidelines for developing a curriculum for four 
subjects outlined in the Council of Minister’s draft reso-
lution. I was not thinking about mathematics, the 
teaching of this subject was quite clear to me. It was 
regarding other subjects that I felt a need to learn more. 
I was either looking through different textbooks and 
articles, or studying the catalogs of well-known 
universities. I had to work especially hard on the 
program for Ecology department. Although I was 
sufficiently knowledgeable in ecology as a popular 
modern way of thinking, I had to discover the 
environmental studies for myself as a systematized and 
integral science.  
From that time onwards I had to constantly study 
to be able to understand various areas of scholarship, 
their essence and various schools of thought closely, 
and project academic research into education. This 
pleasant duty was mobilizing my energy and refreshing 
my mind, keeping me "in a good shape" and as with my 
favorite speed chess, making me to come up with the 
quickest and most beneficial moves. 
It seems that the first internal tension began 
during this time that I was working on the constitution. 
Saleh was talking to Rahim Rahimov one day and had 
mentioned that one office wouldn’t be enough for us, to 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
58 
be able to function "normally" we needed at least two 
offices. He would not give up and became quite 
stubborn during the discussion. Rahimov took it badly 
and considered it an undue pressure upon himself and 
immodesty on Saleh’s side, and expressed his 
dissatisfaction. Saleh in his turn took Rahimov’s 
objection as an injustice and could not help himself 
arguing with him. They both told me their side of the 
story and expressed their reproaches with each other. I 
was in quite an unpleasant situation, between fire and 
water. I was trying to calm them, explaining that there 
was no need to dramatize the situation and asked both to 
forget the resentment. But it appeared not to be an easy 
task. 
I knew that if Saleh would go to Rahim muallim 
and apologize then we would be able to solve this 
conflict. But Saleh did not want reconciliation and was 
insisting that he never stepped beyond the boundaries of 
polite conversation. After this incident I noticed that 
Rahim muallim was colder in his relationship with me 
also. Perhaps he was thinking "one can expect anything 
from these people." Unfortunately, we never managed 
to erase this incident from our memories and hostility 
between Saleh and Rahim muallim persisted. Later it 
became a big obstacle in the way of the three of us 
working together. 
 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
59 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
60 
 
CHAPTER 11 
 
 A  SIGNATURE  ENTERED  HISTORY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I was told that I would be invited to the Cabinet 
of Ministers to have the next - and this time probably 
the last - discussion. However it was not specified when 
this discussion was likely to take place. I could only 
wait. I used it as an opportunity to read, study history, to 
play chess and to try to rest as much as possible. My 
situation reminded me that of a soldier who is in a 
defensive position, who knows he will not be attacked 
just yet and so is given a chance to have a short and 
maybe his last rest.  
The political situation in the country had 
descended into total uncertainty, there was a lot of 
anticipation in the air, everybody was waiting for, 
hoping for, expecting something very important to 
happen to the people and the country.  
Once I met Fuad Alaskarov (my former rector) by 
chance.  
- My congratulations to you, I was told that you 
are creating a new university - he said, sounding almost 
friendly.  
I was not very pleased that he knew about the 
university. We had had quite a few major misunderstan-
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
61 
dings, I knew he was close with Mutallibov, and the 
relationship between the Prime Minister Hasanov and 
Mutallibov was quite tense.   
- Oh, yes, I have been discussing this idea with a 
few people but it is still very much in my mind - saying 
this I wanted to cover up the issue as much as possible.  
As if understanding my concern, he just replied 
briefly:  
- If I can be of any help, feel free to let me know. 
I thanked him. 
Gorbachev was doing his best to preserve the 
Soviet Union. He announced a national referendum. The 
Heads of most of the Soviet Republics supported him. 
During 7 March 1991 session of the Azerbaijan 
Supreme Soviet a decision to take part in the national 
referendum was also made, although there were a lot of 
people who were against it. The Republic’s 
administration was inclined towards Russia, the Popular 
Front that was calling for an independent Azerbaijan 
(this organization was by no means free of 
contradictions either), was being prosecuted, Heydar 
Aliyev had reappeared again24 and the intelligentsia of 
the republic was in uncertainty. Society was shaken and 
was looking for a way forward.  
Hasan Hasanov invited me in. Together, we 
looked through the resolution and constitution texts, 
then he smiled at me: 
- How are you? 
- Thank you very much, not too bad. 
- I have no doubt you are not "too bad." There is a 
university being created from nowhere and you are 
going to head it. 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
62 
I knew Hasan Hasanov’s way of saying things in 
a synthesis of seriousness and humor, which was similar 
to my own. So, I answered quickly:  
- It’s not being created from nowhere. You know 
yourself - "no pain, no gain", without your approval and 
our efforts, we could not have even set up a kindergar-
ten, let alone university. 
The Prime Minister first raised his head and 
looked at me attentively, then he drew the paper nearer, 
set his glasses right and took the pen. He continued in a 
friendly manner: 
- All right, suppose I sign this now. You are go-
ing to make your life interesting by working on this pro-
ject, and what’s my gain in all this? 
I have not had an opportunity yet to express my 
gratitude to the Prime Minister for his sincerity and 
great help (I admit I am not very good at this).   
- Dear Prime Minister, I am sure that up to this 
day you have signed hundreds of different documents. 
There must have been very memorable ones among 
them, and perhaps some of them not quite so. I assure 
you that you are about to put your signature to some-
thing that has a big future. This is an historic signature.  
I don’t think Hasanov expected such an answer. 
But the surprised expression of his face was quickly 
replaced by a very pleased one: 
- That was very well said! - And he signed the 
resolution.25 
 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
63 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
64 
 
CHAPTER 12 
 
  THE  COMMUNIST  PARTY  AND  A  GAME OF  
RECTORSHIP 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The official announcement was made that a new 
higher education and research center named "The Eng-
lish Language Azerbaijan University" was established. 
But it was only an announcement, government permis-
sion, and the work was still ahead. 
This was quite unique work, as there was nobody 
experienced enough to help. Although some of the state 
organizations were named as responsible parties in the 
resolution, none of them were actually going to help. In 
general, times were changing, nothing new was being 
created, responsibilities were reducing, political move-
ment was strengthening and an atmosphere of anarchy 
was emerging. It was finally realized that the Nagorny 
Karabakh crisis will not be an easy one to solve, the 
influence of the center (Moscow) was weakening quite 
evidently. On March 17, a referendum on whether to 
preserve the USSR was held and in a week the results 
were announced. It was communicated that the citizens 
of the Azerbaijan Republic as well as others voted to 
preserve the USSR. As usual this so-called "democratic 
voting" represented interests of the ruling group, and not 
the desire of the entire nation.26 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
65 
Feyzullayev, Rahimov and I once met at the 
Ministry of Education and had a brief talk. The meeting 
was held in quite a sluggish mood and the main topic of 
discussion was how to go about appointing me Rector. 
The discussion was along the lines whose letterhead 
paper should be used for the appointment order, what 
the wording should be etc. A simple decision was taken 
- the order should be issued on ordinary blank paper, 
sealed and signed by both Feyzullayev and Rahimov 
(Minister of Education and Rector of the Institute of 
National Economy Management). 
At the same time the news leaked to media. There 
was a brief information piece on the front page of the 
Bakinskiy Rabochiy ("Baku worker") newspaper. It 
briefly stated that a new university was set up in Baku, 
some of its characteristics were listed and it was also re-
ported that I was the originator of idea of the university. 
I was pleased that the news about the university 
would now reach wider audiences. I did not think that 
the mentioning of my name would create any negative 
feelings. Surprisingly after this article was published I 
felt a cold reaction from the "above."  
Rahimov was studying my biography 
very carefully. He was very surprised 
having seen the phrase "not a member 
of the Party":  
- I can not understand it. You 
are a doctor of science, a professor, 
have visited foreign countries, even 
capitalist countries, but you are not 
a member of the Party, how could it 
be possible? 
He was speaking about the Communist Party and 
it made me recollect certain events of my life.  
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
66 
... While I was at school, then university, then 
working and teaching, I was never interested and never 
involved in such compulsory ideological activities as 
"social work" and various levels of "party school" such 
as comsomol27 and professional and trade unions. I was 
studying and working hard, and in my spare time took 
much more pleasure in football, chess and arts, music, 
theatre, literature and history than ideological activities. 
I never even thought of becoming a member of the 
Communist Party, besides antitotalitarian spirits had 
always prevailed in my family history.28 It served as an 
obstacle for my foreign trips for several years: despite 
having interesting contacts with foreign scientists and 
receiving numerous invitations to attend conferences 
and seminars, it was almost impossible for me to go 
abroad. Not being a member of the Party was closing all 
the doors in front of me. In Moscow and in other big 
scientific centers of Russia the Communist Party was 
less strict with scientists, but in the "provinces" such as 
Azerbaijan, non-membership of the Party was brought 
as an excuse to reject promotion, foreign trips and many 
other matters. It was made obvious to me that all my 
efforts to conduct joint research with foreign specialists 
would be wasted unless I became party member. It is 
worth mentioning that in the second half of 70s and 
early 80s I was intensively investigating the so-called 
"multiparameter spectral theory", and the well known 
specialists in this area were mainly working at the 
universities of US, Canada, UK and Federal Republic of 
Germany, and I was dreaming of working together with 
them. Because of this I joined the Communist Party in 
1986, but then with great pleasure and very conven-
iently forgot the "Mother" Party the next day and con-
tinued my scientific work. 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
67 
The Soviet military troops` terrible and 
unthinkable savagery in Baku in 1990, January 20 was 
met with wide spread protest in Azerbaijan. One of the 
ways to express the protest publicly was to quit the 
Communist Party membership. I was chairing a meeting 
in January 23 at the Institute of National economy, just 
3 days after the tragedy, and people were ripping their 
Party membership cards in pieces demonstratively. I 
was one of those who quit my Party membership.  
Unfortunately, shortly after, the majority of those who 
threw their membership cards away, went back with 
apologies and re-instated themselves as the Party 
members. Without Party membership I was feeling quite 
relieved, so despite of the advice from various well-
wishers, rumors, even threats, I bade farewell to the 
Party forever.  
Grief and anger in the country gave a new direc-
tion, and new impetus to the political movement. Eve-
rybody, even those who never before engaged in poli-
tics, wanted to speak out and to be heard, to define his 
or her position in the society. We had long heated de-
bates among friends, fellows and acquaintances and 
these discussions naturally led to thoughts about a new 
political party. I went along to two meetings of politi-
cians and people interested in politics at the House of 
Political Enlightenment.29 These meetings had quite the 
opposite effect on me from the intended - I decided not 
to ever enter politics. It just made me realize once more 
that I am a researcher, my vocation is science and edu-
cation and it is more in my nature to keep as far from 
political activity as possible and live a creative life.  
I was much more inclined to turn thoughts into 
motion from the scientific viewpoint. However, since I 
had been gathering thoughts on events happening in 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
68 
Azerbaijan, I decided not to waste them and worked on 
an article entitled "Thoughts on National Liberation 
Movements." The analyses made in the article were 
comparable to the current state of affairs in Azerbaijan 
from the historical-geographical point of view. For the 
sake of publication of the article I did not use the word 
Azerbaijan anywhere, nevertheless due to censorship 
this article came out very late. Its shortened version was 
published in the magazine "Ganjlik", and almost six 
months later in the magazine "Ulduz" with some abrid-
gments)… 
When I told Rahim muallim that I left the Party 
because of January 20 events, he was very upset: 
- What have you done! What a dangerous thing to 
do! I thought you were quiet person and have nothing to 
do with politics! What are we going to do now?  
- Rahim muallim, this is not politics, this is a very 
natural form of protest. And I cannot see what kind of 
effect it can have on my situation? I’m not going to take 
an official government post, and I have no intention to 
be involved in politics. My life is devoted to reading, 
writing and education and I want to continue doing this 
and benefit others. There is no harm in the fact that I am 
not Communist.  
Rahimov said with a concerned look: 
- Don’t you know that someone who is not a 
member of the Party can not be appointed to the high 
post? The post of a rector is one of the most prestigious 
and respectful posts in a country. There are not a lot of 
universities in Azerbaijan, are there? If you want to be 
rector you have to be approved from the Central 
Committee (of the Communist Party).  
I did not lose my spirit:  
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
69 
- Rahim muallim, surely, times have changed. 
Now the Party is not what it used to be, it can not cont-
rol everything. Soon, there will be many new parties, 
everything is leading to that. When a multiparty system 
is in place, I am sure that no political organization will 
be interfering in appointment of rectors.  
It seems I did not convince him. Rahimov seemed 
troubled about this problem. I realized that he was 
looking for some ways to avoid it: 
- Well, I think we should appoint you the 
prorector (vice-rector) and you will still do all the work. 
You can be an acting rector. 
I smiled: 
- Rahim muallim, why is it possible to be a pro-
rector without a party membership and not a rector? 
Besides, how can the university with no rector have a 
prorector?  
Rahimov gave a call to the Minister of Education 
and went immediately to the point: 
- Do you know that Hamlet quit the Communist 
Party because of January 20th events? What can we do 
now, will you take on the responsibility of appointing 
him a rector?  
The way he put the question was already imply-
ing a negative answer. I can not say that I was enjoying 
the way he was orchestrating the events but I refrained 
from commenting. Feyzullayev was talking on the other 
end of the line and after a while Rahim muallim said 
"just a minute" and turned to me: 
- If we help you, will you take back your Party 
membership? 
- Never. 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
70 
- No, he is obstinate, he does not want to, - and 
Rahimov carried on talking. Then he put the phone re-
ceiver back and said: 
- The Central Committee gave instructions to the 
Regional Committees to seriously watch those who 
have given up their Party membership. You do not 
know what these people are like, you should have been 
more careful. 
I decided to finally speak out: 
- Rahim muallim, if you want you can nominate 
another person for the position... Or you can nominate 
yourself if you wish. I am ready take care all of all the 
educational aspects including curricula, academic pro-
grams, personnel issues and international relations. For 
me the main purpose is not to get a high position for 
myself but to give a life to this new university. I will do 
anything to make this happen. We will see what 
happens later. 
I wanted to remind him of an anecdote by Mullah 
Nasraddin30, but stopped myself in time. 
I think Rahim muallim understood my meaning: 
- What are you talking about? You are the only 
person who knows this work, who started it all and you 
will have to continue it. Nobody can prevent you from 
doing this! Let us appoint you a prorector both for re-
search and educational affairs. It means that you will be 
completely independent in what you do, there will be no 
interference.  
Rahim muallim had a look on his face like he had 
found the optimal solution and reached the best possible 
outcome for everybody involved. 
My concern was not whether I was prorector or 
rector. I was more concerned that from its very first 
days the university would be taken over part by part. 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
71 
There was a danger that if I was appointed a prorector 
of the English Language Azerbaijan University and it 
was in direct jurisdiction of the rector of INEM, we 
would eventually turn into a division of the INEM. As a 
result the implementation of any new ideas would be-
come increasingly complicated. But it seems that the 
"glorious" Communist Party did not find me appropriate 
material for the Rector’s position, but found the position 
of prorector more suitable (at least this was an 
impression I have been given).  
On April 18 1991 the Ministry of Education and 
Institute of National Economy Management issued their 
joint resolution and I officially started work.31 
The following day, on April 19, 
the prohibition hour and the state of 
emergency that had reigned in Baku 
over a year were lifted. On the same 
day there was an article published in 
Moscow in the "Rabochaya Tribuna" 
newspaper about newly set up new 
style university - our university.  
Beautiful spring days had started in Baku. 
    
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
72 
 
CHAPTER 13 
 
 VOLUNTEERS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
So, beginning from mid April 1991, an 
establishment with a very grand name and dwarf-like in 
size, The English Language Azerbaijan University 
affiliated with the Institute of National Economy 
Management of the Cabinet of Ministers and with the 
Ministry of Education, started its useful life. As 
prorector for research and educational affairs I was 
responsible for all the organizational work and I was 
also the acting rector. The uncertainties between the 
rector of INEM and the head of English Language 
Azerbaijan University existed from the first day. 
According to the constitution there were no common 
areas between us, but the reality was very different. The 
words "affiliated" and "attached to", my being 
"prorector" and not "rector", our co-location under the 
same roof, my being younger than Rahim muallim and 
my weak contacts among government officials were the 
factors for our increasing dependence upon INEM. 
Our new address was Lenin avenue32 66, Baku, 
Azerbaijan Republic, USSR, P/O number 370007. We 
occupied one room at the INEM, but a little later were 
given a second one. 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
73 
As a matter of urgency I wanted to find a good 
English lecturer for the university. I liked Baylar Haji-
yev’s style of teaching whom I knew from the State In-
stitute of Economics. He used to teach English-speaking 
economists wishing to improve their language skills. He 
accepted my invitation without any hesitation (nowa-
days he is the head of the department of International 
Students and Scholars). 
Rahimov offered me use of the services of his ac-
counting and personnel departments but I politely de-
clined and so I had to hire three more people for ac-
counting, personnel and registration offices. 
Some of my old acquaintances and some enthu-
siastic young specialists started gathering around me, 
and volunteers continued arriving. My former Ph.D. stu-
dents Afgan Aslanov and Tofig Guliyev met our initial 
need for mathematics lecturers (nowadays Afgan is the 
dean of the School of Economics and Management and 
Tofig lives in the USA). Shortly after these two, a com-
puter specialist Bahtiyar Sirajov also joined us (he left 
Azerbaijan few years ago and if I am not mistaken, is in 
Austria now).  
Two historians with Ph.D., namely, Eldar Nama-
zov (currently an advisor of the President of the 
Azerbaijan Republic on Political Affairs) and Rosa 
Arazova (she is currently a chairperson of the 
Department of History at the University) were 
representing history and international relations faculty. 
Three specialists were teaching biology, biophysics, 
ecology and geography: Ismat Ahmadov (now the 
Chairman of the Biological Sciences Department), Asaf 
Asadov (later he became the Chairman of the Bio-
medical Physics Department and Vice-chancellor, now 
he is an advisor to the Minister of Agriculture) and 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
74 
Shahin Panahov (later he became the Dean at the School 
of Law and Social Sciences and currently he is a 
Chairman of the Department of Geography and 
Environmental Studies). Two persons were responsible 
for Economics and Management Department - Saleh 
Mammadov and Samir Valiyev with Ph.D. in 
Economics (he is now a Head of Department at the Mi-
nistry of Foreign Economic Relations). 
Shortly after with Baylar Hajiyev’s recommenda-
tion Husseinaga Rzayev became a member of our En-
glish specialists groups (later he headed the English 
Department, and was the Vice-chancellor and the Dean 
of the School of Humanities). 
Our discussions usually would go in two topics. 
First of all, I used to encourage discussion about orga-
nizational structure of our university and about our fu-
ture. I would talk a lot about the history and present 
days of the leading universities of Europe and America. 
I would get emotional and not restrain my feelings. I 
never concealed any plans, as I wanted to make 
everybody believe in our future. These discussions used 
to inspire and motivate us, we were all burning with 
desire to make our dreams to come true. There were 
some pessimists among us, for example Tofig Guliyev 
was in doubts about our future, and there were those 
who were still unsure and hesitating. But most of the 
team was excited and happy. I understood a very 
important truth - we had to painstakingly work on the 
realization of our dreams, and we had to try to achieve 
our ideals step by step. If we would take it slowly and 
considerately we would have time to test and try all 
these new methods and learn by our mistakes. I knew 
my colleagues would only start to have complete faith 
in our future after we became more established (and that 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
75 
was still a long way ahead). My freethinking, intelligent 
"fellow travelers" still had a lot to learn. If I would only 
have an opportunity to send these talented people to 
Western Europe, USA, Canada or Japan beforehand, it 
would have helped immensely and would give us some 
points of comparison. Unfortunately, it was not yet 
possible. Still, although we did not have enough 
ammunition and our armor was not very new and shiny, 
we were firmly on our way to conquer distant heights.  
Secondly, on a more practical side, we had to 
prepare curricula for our first four majors. We did not 
have much time to do it so we had to work out a 
process. I would describe and define the main 
characteristics of the subject, and try to identify various 
educational and scientific approaches. I would attempt 
to view objectively the strong and weak sides of Soviet 
educational model in a specific subject and compare 
them with the universities of other countries. Within a 
week the specialists would present me with a first draft 
of the curriculum and after prolonged discussions we 
would choose the final version. We would remark that 
work is never final and a lot of development work 
would still need to be done, and move on to the next 
curriculum. We were trying to be creative, never 
complacent, and would attempt by all possible means to 
exclude monotony from our work.  
I made a presentation to the Academic Council of 
INEM about the main purpose of the English Language 
Azerbaijan University, the initial organizational 
structures for the first academic year, staffing issues, 
curricula and their detailed composition.  
Rahimov insisted that I had to send our new 
curricula to different universities for references. There 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
76 
was absolutely no necessity to do so, but we agreed to 
it.  
The garden of the INEM, created by great efforts 
Rahim Rahimov himself, was full of beautiful plants 
and roses. It was the end of May and birds singing in the 
garden could be heard through widely open windows. 
The little birds had to build their nests on time before 
winds and rains begin. We had to build up the university 
before autumn as well. I was lovingly observing birds 
from my office window and wishing them every luck. 
For the first time we celebrated the Day of 
Independence on May 28 – the day that was never 
mentioned adequately in the Soviet history books.33 
Our world was changing. 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
77 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
78 
 
CHAPTER 14 
 
THE  WEATHER  IS  CONSTANTLY CHANGING 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
One more article was published about our 
university - this time in the "Bakinskiy Rabochiy" on 30 
May 1991. The article was entitled "Attention to every 
detail" and gave information about the new university. 
The correspondent was talking to me from the very 
early days and knew all along that I was the originator 
of the idea and was heading the affair. For some reason 
he introduced me as a Rector in this article - perhaps he 
got confused with the messy titles or simply did not pay 
attention to it.  
Rahim muallim was very angry. He did not tell 
me the reason of his irritation but he mentioned that the 
minister Feyzullayev was also very offended.  
I pretended to be naive:  
- Rahim muallim, do you think that the people at 
the ministry were offended by me being introduced as a 
rector and not as a prorector?  
- Of course, the Minister could not have liked that 
it is being mentioned over and over again that it is your 
idea, moreover you are also a rector of the 
establishment! How about all others involved in it? - He 
launched a real attack on me. 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
79 
I answered: 
- Rahim muallim, tell the minister for me that as a 
prorector for academic and research affairs of the En-
glish Speaking Azerbaijan University I am ready to 
bring my most sincere apologies to the rector of this 
university. If it’s not possible now, I promise, I will 
apologize to him when he is appointed for a sin I have 
committed once and by aiming at his job while I was 
only an acting rector. What else can I do, who else shall 
I apologize to, is there someone else that was offended 
by this? 
Rahim muallim expressed his attitude to my 
words by simply shaking his head.  
The rectors of other universities started 
expressing interest in our work. It did not seem to me 
that this sudden interest occurred out of their feeling of 
benevolence or curiosity. On the contrary, I could tell 
that we were guaranteed to have cold relationships with 
four major institutions - Baku State University, 
Azerbaijan State Economic Institute, Institute of 
Foreign Languages and Azerbaijan State Institute of 
Medicine. 
The main topic of my meeting with the then 
rector of Baku State University, the well-known 
mathematician Mirabbas Qasimov, was the perspectives 
of the new university and what we had on offer in our 
international relations department. I was answering 
Qasimov’s questions thoroughly, trying to explain 
ideology behind the university, explaining how we 
would be going about establishing wide scope of 
international relations, marking the special role of 
English and other foreign languages. Mirabbas muallim 
seemed affected by this conversation to an extent that he 
offered our university to become part of the Baku State 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
80 
University and function as one of its schools. "This 
work needs to be independent and flexible and it would 
also be very difficult to substantiate it legally" - I said 
trying to avoid this sudden suggestion.  
Shortly after this meeting I got acquainted with 
Turan Yazgan from Istanbul University, who had come 
to Baku to organize management courses at INEM. 
Yazgan was a chairman of "The Turkish World 
Research Foundation." He had a very sharp personality. 
"Poor Azeri Turks, once they were obliged to study 
Russian, and now you are inciting them to study 
English" - he told me disapprovingly. I was quite upset 
by this remark. My purpose was misunderstood and 
wrongly interpreted. English and other foreign langua-
ges, to my mind, were a means of getting closer to the 
rest of the world. The knowledge of foreign languages 
would give a massive advantage for research and study. 
On the other hand the foreign languages would enable 
us to introduce our own culture to the world. 
The other reason for my being upset was that my 
patriotism was hurt. My love for Azerbaijan, its culture, 
literature and music is endless. I have always strongly 
opposed various movements that were directed at weak-
ening the Azerbaijani identity and language. I did 
realize that education received in English might cause 
certain coldness to our own language and culture. Even 
without endorsement of the English language, the inva-
sion of the western culture in Azerbaijan was evident. 
One of the things that occupied my mind at that point in 
time was to teach and research Azerbaijani language, li-
terature, history and culture at our university in a very 
intensive manner. 
I was told that the rector of Azerbaijan State Insti-
tute of Medicine Dr. Yagub Mammadov (who later be-
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
81 
came the head of Parliament and acting President of the 
country) would like to meet me.  
I was at Mammadov’s reception right on time. He 
was obviously waiting for me and started asking 
questions immediately: 
- I was told that you have started a university. 
Tell me what it is all about?      
One could feel from the tone of his voice that he 
was very much in the attacking spirit. Instead of 
answering his question I waited for the respectful rector 
to calm down first. 
Yagub muallim slowed down a bit: 
- Would you please explain to me what does this 
English Language University mean? 
I gave him a brief description of the university as 
a whole, and spoke in some detail about the Economics 
and Management department, the methods of teaching, 
and talked about importance of new approach to this 
subject. 
Yagub muallim replied: 
- Well, I also have departments of political 
economy and foreign languages, which includes English 
as well. Couldn’t I organize such a structure within my 
institute by simply uniting these departments? 
I gave him more detailed information, talked 
about educational programs and curricula, explained to 
him the purpose of such approach and some 
peculiarities of it. Yagub muallim seemed more patient 
now. He asked me about my own education, when and 
where I got my doctorate degree and about the countries 
I had traveled to. 
Just as our conversation was taking a peaceful 
turn, he suddenly changed its direction again: 
- What is this medical-biological department that 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
82 
you are setting up? Medicine? - He declared not only his 
surprise but also his objection.  
I did not wish the situation to become further 
complicated and reminded him of the great need we 
have in specialists in ecology. I reminded him that our 
medical-biological department would only deal with this 
area for the time being. Yagub muallim did not agree 
with me:  
- Who signed the resolution on establishment of 
this university? What rights did this person have? 
I answered calmly: 
- This is the resolution of the Cabinet of Ministers 
and it was signed by the Prime Minister after the 
approval of certain Ministries and State Departments.  
Yagub muallim continued in an angry but ever so 
slightly compromising tone of voice: 
- What ecology is it that you want to teach?  
I began to talk about ecology, its relations with 
biology, medicine, engineering, about mathematical mo-
dels used in ecology etc. Yagub muallim gradually cal-
med down, a bit later he even became friendly and I 
thought that the conflict had been solved. 
When I was leaving he told me that he would 
support me should an opportunity arise.  Indeed later he 
had a chance to prove that he was a man of his word. 
The weather was constantly changing, sky was 
covered with black and gray clouds and the direction of 
the wind would often change.  
...This tightly tied knot of our affairs would be 
entangled one day. "The clouds full of rain will soon be-
come empty, this is the law of nature."34 The nature was 
not capricious, it was simply demonstrating its many co-
lors, and teaching us that everything is obeying its laws.  
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
83 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
84 
 
CHAPTER 15 
 
  EARTHQUAKE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We were preparing for the first entrance exams to 
the university. All the documentation required was put 
in order and the examination questions were prepared. 
We were also intending to organize pre-examination 
consultation sessions and meetings with the potential 
students and their parents. At the beginning of June, we 
decided to take some steps to secure positive public 
opinion. I have mentioned above some articles in the 
newspapers informing the public about features and 
advantages of our university. Next, we placed 
advertisements about the rules of enrollment, necessary 
documentation and entrance exams.  
The strongest medium to reach a wide public, to 
address the youth and their parents, to encourage them 
and to answer confidently the questions they were 
interested in was television. The program we appeared 
on was broadcast at a very suitable time of the day. The 
commentator introduced us and asked me to give some 
information about the university. All my previous tele-
vision appearances were about mathematics, distant 
lands, visits and interesting events. This was another 
type, perhaps, the most responsible of my television 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
85 
appearances. We (Husseinaga Rzayev, Baylar Hajiyev 
and I) had to communicate with the audience in a very 
convincing and sincere manner, to present our univer-
sity as a necessity for our present and future. I started 
talking in this direction, about the main values of our 
university and our plans for the near future. The 
conversation was flowing so freely and naturally that I 
even forgot about the presence of the journalist and 
myself involved Husseinaga muallim and Baylar mual-
lim. Husseinaga muallim spoke about teaching English 
generally and for specific purposes and Baylar talked 
about main subjects and entrance exams. The commen-
tator wished every success to this "very important and 
very timely university" at the end of the program. A 
group of people working on this program - journalists, 
producer, and cameramen - gathered around us after the 
program: "That was excellent", "we are all applauding 
you."  
In matter of days we started receiving numerous 
telephone calls from Baku and different regions of 
Azerbaijan. They were all interested in the enrollment 
procedure for the university. The commentator from the 
TV program gave us a call and informed us that "We 
have had no peace from all the telephone calls we are 
receiving, the viewers are asking to repeat the program."  
All this publicity we were doing created an 
enormous amount of interest and excitement. But as 
they say, "Man proposes, God disposes." A human 
being relaxing under a green tree and listening to the 
sounds of wind does not think that earthquake will soon 
take place and turn his world upside down. The blissful 
days we were having could not prepare me for the 
disaster that was about to strike. 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
86 
The journalist of the television program came to 
see us few days later. He told us that he could sense that 
the program was met "with dissatisfaction and 
disapproval by some high rank officials." He told us that 
the number of requests to repeat the program is so high 
that the decision was made to repeat it at certain time an 
date. On that day we sat in front of our television sets 
but the program was not repeated. The journalist came 
to apologize and informed us that the videotape with our 
program had mysteriously disappeared. "I really can not 
understand what harm could the university bring to 
anyone..." - he sounded very embarrassed. 
In a few days I was visited by a young 
acquaintance of mine who had a close relationship with 
the Minister of Education Feyzullayev. He took 
enormous pleasure in gossiping and carrying various 
rumors around. He came to see me with news: 
- Feyzullayev ordered his employees "to keep 
away from Hamlet." It seems there are strong forces 
acting against you. It seems to me, the Minister has been 
given an ultimatum from the Baku State University and 
some other institutes. They are demanding that you need 
to be taught a good lesson. 
 I took no notice of it. I did not see a great danger. 
I had doubts that there was any big and serious danger, 
and if there was a small danger there must be ways of 
defying it. The threat was so indefinite and uncertain 
that I did not want to analyze how I would be taught "a 
good lesson." As it is said in The Koran: (XVII, 36).  
"And pursue not that  
Of which thou hast 
No knowledge; for 
Surely the hearing  
The sight, the heart 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
87 
All of those shall be questioned of" 35 
It would be fair to say that one of the weaknesses 
of my character is to be really uninterested in the face of 
unpleasant rumors, gossips and news, instead of trying 
to investigate them and establish their source and 
validity. I assume that I will be able to react when the 
danger is right beside me. When the danger is close the 
possibility of hitting the target is greater, but time is 
short and danger is much greater. In chess in similar 
situations the neutral move needs to be made on time. 
Of course it can lead to losing the tempo, but that was 
not the main reason behind my complacency. In order to 
investigate the danger I would have to go to meetings 
with various unpleasant people, and I think my 
subconscious was putting up a strong resistance to that.  
One day Rahim muallim invited me to his office. 
He looked very thoughtful: 
- There was a call from the Ministry of 
Education, you have to be here today, they have set up a 
special commission to inspect your work. 
- What work? - I said impatiently and let him 
know how irritated I was, but I also wanted to receive 
more information. 
- They are coming now, let us see what happens. 
No good will come of it. 
Rahim muallim’s reply did not sound very 
encouraging. I got an impression he did not know 
himself why this commission was coming. 
The delegation of the Ministry of Education was 
headed by the first deputy Minister Fikrat Babayev. 
"How is business going?" - he asked me. I gave them 
some brief information on the current state of affairs and 
answered some of their insignificant questions. I could 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
88 
easily sense that my enthusiastic replies and the glorious 
state of affairs were not what they came to hear. 
Fikrat muallim put two pages of paper with 
something printed on them onto the table and said 
without looking at me: 
- It was decided at the ministry that you are not 
ready for student admission this year. Taking this into 
consideration we decided to stop your work. 
A cold shiver passed through my entire body. I 
was furious: 
- What do you mean we are not ready? Just a 
minute ago I have answered all your questions and 
demonstrated our complete readiness. Who is that at the 
ministry that can see from such a distance with 
telescope whether we are ready or not? 
The other member of the delegation Khanki-
shiyev tried to calm me: 
- Hamlet muallim, the ministry has not come to 
this decision for no reason. Consultations were held and 
a resolution was prepared as a result, here it is. I think 
you have to get acquainted with this document first. 
They began to read the statement and I felt myself 
to be a condemned man listening to the unjust but final 
decision of the court. 36 
When they finished reading the statement, at least 
two issues became very clear to me: 
First, it was obvious, that this statement was full 
of contradictions and had been worked out hastily, it 
was not objective and was a formal administrative docu-
ment. The second issue was more terrifying - a terrible 
ending was awaiting us. An order has been issued to kill 
a newborn baby in its cradle, and it was unavoidable. 
Later it was confirmed in conversations that under the 
premises of our non-readiness to conduct the entrance 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
89 
exams they wanted to put an end to the entire venture.  
The most ridiculous aspect of it all was my being 
one of the authors of this statement - my signature was 
demanded under this death sentence. The other 
noticeable point was the distortion of the date of the 
statement. The statement was backdated and the date 
indicated was before any of our advertisements about 
entrance exams. It had to be demonstrated that they had 
taken all necessary steps on time. Indeed, this murder 
was thoroughly planned. 
The statement was presented to us already signed 
by three representatives of the ministry. Fikrat muallim 
tried to show us that it is all done and dusted:  
- You know yourself, and God is a witness, these 
kind of matters are not solved on my or your level. We 
have signed it, you should also sign it, one copy is for us 
and you have to keep the second one. 
Rahim muallim also signed the document. Then it 
was handed over to me. "Farewell, my dream 
university." I had already pulled myself together after 
the initial shock and my anxiety has disappeared. My 
head started operating soberly again. 
I took the document and stood thoughtfully with 
it in my hands. I was handed over a pen, but I refused to 
take it: 
- It would be better to sign this document with my 
own pen. I do not have a pen with me at the moment, let 
me keep this document until tomorrow. 
I do not think they could understand whether I 
was joking or being serious. Probably, they thought that 
I was shaken or did not want to be humiliated in 
presence of everybody. They let me keep the document 
but did not hide their dissatisfaction: 
- Never mind, let it be tomorrow, sign it and send 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
90 
it to us, or we can come and collect it ourselves. 
I came up to Fikrat muallim when he was about 
to leave the room: 
- Fikrat muallim, tell me the truth, what is going 
on here? What happened all of a sudden? 
- Hamlet muallim, your so called friends and non-
friends are attacking. The matter has already been 
agreed on, we are simply the messengers. Do not 
trouble yourself, it will not help. 
I returned back to Rahim muallim. I wanted to 
know his personal opinion. It was obvious that he was 
upset about it. He had much more experience with high 
rank officials than me, and he accepted everything 
without question: 
- Hamlet, son, if there was a slight opportunity to 
change the situation I would sense it and would have 
told you about it. You hurt those people’s feelings 
without any reason. This statement would have never 
been issued if it had not been agreed on highest possible 
level. Did you see I had to sign it too? It’s useless to 
isolate yourself; nobody will benefit from it, including 
yourself. Life will go on, you will still do a lot of things. 
Sign the paper and send it tomorrow. You should 
understand that they could easily solve this matter 
without your signature. 
I said good-bye to Rahim muallim and decided to 
go home. But first I went for a walk at the shore of 
Khazar (Caspian Sea). I wanted to recover. When I am 
in high spirits I am strongly attracted to high mountain 
peaks covered in snow. In my despair I was longing for 
the sea. The sea is very mysterious. Every time I look at 
it, it brings out different feelings in me. Sometimes it is 
tranquil, its waves are kissing one another, its shades are 
emerald and blue, the sun rays and the moon light dance 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
91 
smoothly in its waters and give rise to the most beautiful 
dreams. Sometimes it is dark and unattainable, angry 
and inconsistent and it makes me drunk with sadness 
and nostalgia, makes me feel powerless. Sometimes all 
these feelings unite and create a feeling close to anxiety. 
I spent a few hours looking at the sea. I left all my 
confused feelings, fears and dreams at the seaside and 
returned home. 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
92 
 
CHAPTER 16 
 
REVOLT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June proved to be a very hot month for us. All our 
meaningful and exciting days full of newspaper and 
television advertisements, student and parent appeals 
suddenly were replaced by the order of the joint 
commission of the Ministry of Education and Institute 
of the National Economy Management to stop our 
activities. "After long consultations" it was decided to 
include five people into the commission: three officials 
from the Ministry of Education, the rector of the 
Institute of National Economy Management and myself, 
the head of the new university.  
Four of those that had signed the document had 
no doubts that I would sign it too. The Soviet ways of 
believing that everybody always has the same opinion 
was applied in this situation. The Soviet society did not 
forgive those "who opposed the society." 
But I was not going to give up my work or leave 
it incomplete. For some reason I had a firm belief in the 
future of this university. It was my vocation and my du-
ty to make this idea become a reality. I could not leave 
it, it was in my blood and soul. There was only one way 
left - to rebel. 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
93 
The revolt was inevitable. I would never sign this 
statement, no matter what the consequences were likely 
to be. I would not be satisfied with this situation and I 
would attack. A great politician said "to be always in 
defense will sooner or later bring you to defeat."37 I had 
to be ready for anything. I spent the whole night 
thinking about it and putting some of my thoughts onto 
paper.  
... I have hated lies and hypocrisy since my 
childhood. And now a false statement was prepared and 
I was asked to sign it and to hypocritically condemn my 
own work.  
The decision of this commission would never be 
considered valid if I did not put my signature on it. If 
they set up a new commission without including me, it 
would be very difficult to work out another statement 
similar to the first one, and it would probably contradict 
the order of the Cabinet of Ministers. This judicial 
vacuum would enable me to continue my revolt. 
Any kind of sensation caused would bring no 
gain to the officials. They would never want to 
demonstrate that they were opposing something that is 
right, modern and useful. 
I was also convinced that those people who are in 
this commission must have some inner feeling of 
unease. They were committing wrong and they knew 
about it. Perhaps if the situation changed, they would be 
quite pleased and will have chance to wash away their 
sin (the longer my night long analysis lasted, the more I 
was getting into the psychological motivation of the 
people involved in this situation). 
The Prime Minister must have been informed 
about all this. I knew that he had more important things 
on his mind rather than the destiny of the new 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
94 
university. Political tension and palace intrigues were 
deepening. If his political opponents and their allies that 
happened to be heads of the various educational 
establishments could not accept the new university, the 
Prime Minister was not going to object to the removal 
of the "problem" by means of a single resolution. 
The commission members would not make a step 
back, their self-esteem and importance would not allow 
it to happen. As a last resort I must offer at least one 
concession that would be acceptable for both sides. 
Assuming that my opponents and the officials were 
concerned with being able to settle the conflict 
peacefully, my alternative suggestion could be useful. It 
might even be accepted with some gratitude. The only 
sensible alternative I could come up with was to replace 
the enrollment that we had already announced by the 
enrollment of students for preparatory courses. To the 
government officials this could mean that they had 
achieved what they wanted with an insignificant 
concession and for us it would mean that although we 
had been thrown back, our activities were carrying on. 
I had a clear plan of action. I would refuse to sign 
the statement prepared by the Ministry of Education. I 
would prepare a document that would demonstrate that I 
categorically disagree with this statement. If anyone 
would put together these two documents, one that is pre-
pared by a person who knows the ins and outs of the 
problem and another one prepared by government 
officials, he or she would immediately see that the 
government statement is ill-intentioned. 
I came to see Rahim muallim and said without 
any introduction: 
- Rahim muallim, on no account I am going to 
sign this statement. It is based on injustice and false 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
95 
information. If there exists a commission that can make 
a decision about the university and if I am a member of 
it, I have right to express my opinion. Here is my 
opinion. I have prepared a supplement to this statement. 
I would like you to read it before I send it to the 
Ministry of Education.38  
Rahim Muallim read the document 
in silence. He did not utter a word 
after finishing it, just picked up a 
phone and called the Ministry of 
Education, the members of the 
commission came and picked up "the 
supplement to the statement."  
I do not know what went on behind 
the closed doors. But I think I fired 
a very successful shot. The answer 
was unpredictable; it could even be 
an explosion of great strength. 
 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
96 
 
CHAPTER 17 
 
 "THE  TAMING  OF  THE  SHREW"  OR  
"WE  LIVE  AGAIN  IN  THIS  WORLD" 39 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
My written objection to the statement of 
annulment prepared by the Ministry of Education could 
not have been left without response. Minister 
Feyzullayev was very prudent person. He would never 
give an official opinion on anything that could be 
potentially sensational or risky. He did not like to leave 
his traces anywhere. His name was not even mentioned 
in the statement of abolition.  
The Minister’s next step was to try to ensure that 
he had an official confirmation that the opinion of the 
great majority of people was that "the preparatory work 
was unsatisfactory and insufficient". It was necessary to 
isolate the capricious man to tame him. The 
Administrative and Academic Council of INEM was 
invited to discuss the matter. There was no doubt that 
the Council would agree with the principal points of 
"the act of abolition."  
They also made sure that they defeated me 
morally. I received an anonymous call from the 
Ministry of Education. An authoritative voice ordered 
me to acknowledge my mistakes during the meeting of 
the Administrative and Academic Council and to accept 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
97 
the resolution of the commission. I was also told to 
admit that my response was written in a moment of 
weakness and that I was to take it back. Before I had 
any chance to reply, the caller hung up.  
I only knew two or three members of the INEM 
Council. I had a good working relationship with the pro-
rector of the institute, Doctor Vahid Akhundov. I was 
very keen to find a specialist who would be able to 
teach an Introduction to Economics course based on Sa-
muelson’s book, which was quite contrary to the way 
economics was taught in the Soviet universities.40 
Akhundov had offered his services and was looking 
forward to teaching the course. He had gained a lot of 
respect for his intellect and modesty (now he is the advi-
ser to the President of Azerbaijan on Economic Affairs). 
When Akhundov found out the agenda of the 
Council’s session, he wanted to hear my side of the 
story. After a brief exchange of opinions he told me that 
he was supporting me fully. 
Before the meeting Rahim muallim invited me to 
his office and warned me: "You will have to make a 
speech. Try to be reasonable and calm. Let us not make 
enemies with the Ministry." 
The meeting began. After a brief discussion of 
some current issues Rahim muallim said: "The 
commission organized by the Ministry of Education, of 
which Hamlet and myself are members, have conducted 
an investigation on the preparedness of the university to 
enroll students. Now Hamlet will tell you about the 
decision at which we arrived." 
I objected to the work of the commission in my 
speech and described our state of complete readiness to 
enroll students for the forthcoming educational year. 
Vahid Akhundov spoke after me and described how 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
98 
important this university was and that it was opening a 
new era in our educational system. He also said that the 
work conducted by us was sufficient to be able to enroll 
students.  
Rahim muallim addressed the members of the 
council in a discontented way: "Who else has an 
opinion?" Jafar Valiyev (now the Chairman of the 
Central Electoral Commission) said that he did not 
know enough about the university to be able to judge, 
but on the other hand he had little faith in the work of 
the commission. Then people started speaking from 
their seats interrupting each other: "It’s a new and 
interesting work", "they are doing exciting things, 
working day and night", "nobody is willing to help 
them, let us at least try not to build obstacles in their 
way." Quite frankly, I did not expect such a positive 
reaction from the members of the Council. At least it 
was clear that the act prepared by the commission 
would not be approved and I jumped at the chance to 
receive official support: 
- Rahim muallim, I think we should ask Council 
to make an official statement by voting. 
Rahim muallim looked very embarrassed. The 
council that he headed did not obey him. He was also ve-
ry angry with me. If by sending the "supplement to the 
statement" to the Ministry of Education I expressed my 
objection and disrespect to the officials from "above", my 
victory here would be considered by some as a direct 
challenge to him and his prestige (although it was never 
my intention). Rahim muallim suddenly said: "That is 
enough, we have finished" and closed the meeting.  
It was evident that the discussion was entirely in 
my favor, but I had a strong feeling of disappointment. 
It was obvious that there was no way for truce anymore 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
99 
and undoubtedly new measures would be taken to 
suppress my revolt. I could not even think what other 
actions they are going to undertake in order to teach me 
a lesson. Let Allah help us. 
For a few days nothing happened. Then Rahimov 
told me that we were going to see the Prime Minister 
the next day. Since the resolution on the establishment 
of the university was issued I had not seen the Prime 
Minister. I had stopped meeting Feyzullayev too. The 
Minister was discussing all the university problems with 
Rahimov. 
I was expecting that the next exchange of 
opinions would take place at the Ministry of Education. 
For some reason I was looking forward to the battle 
with Feyzullayev. But Feyzullayev seemed reluctant to 
have one. I suppose it was because he did not like the 
idea of two former rather friendly colleagues standing 
face to face in conflict. My ‘supplement to the 
statement’ was based on facts, he knew my nature quite 
well, and he also knew that I was going to stand my 
ground in the issue. I suppose all of these made him 
more reluctant to meet me. 
On the eve of our meeting with Prime Minister 
Hasanov I was feeling restless. Somehow I knew that I 
would not be given a "hearty welcome".  
Hasanov’s assistant invited us into his office. As 
we were walking to the door, Rahimov suddenly said: 
"You wait here for a moment" - and entered Hasanov’s 
office and shut the door after himself! I was confused 
and embarrassed. I had no doubt that the situation would 
be definitely against me now. I was trying to amuse 
myself by moving my fingers on my knees as if playing 
piano and my eyes were watching the arrows on my 
watch. Twenty-five minutes passed. Rahim muallim 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
100 
came out at last and asked me to go in. He himself 
remained seated in the waiting room. 
I wanted to hope that the Premier wished to see 
me because he had already received the official version 
of the story and now he wanted to listen to my side of 
the story. When I saw the expression on his face I knew 
that the situation was much darker and more unpleasant. 
He showered me with his anger:  
- What is going on here? Why have you created 
havoc? You respect neither government, nor those who 
are elder than you. You can not find a common 
language with anyone and you never listen to any 
advice. Is this some kind of anarchy for you? I must 
have really mistaken when I thought I knew you. 
I did not expect such a sharp condemnation and 
could not accept it. 
- Let me... 
- What else do you want? Everything is perfectly 
clear to me. You quit the Party, you do not get on with 
the Ministry, and you have offended and quarreled with 
Rahim muallim.  
I realized that it was absolutely useless to wait for 
him to finish. The Prime Minister wanted to prove that I 
was unjust and a troublemaker. And he was using words 
and expressions that I could not possibly accept. 
- Excuse me, but the situation is quite different 
from the way you describe it. Let me... 
- Do you mean now that I am wrong too? 
According to you everybody is wrong! Couldn’t you 
just concentrate on your own business? You should have 
told me in advance that you are not capable of getting 
on with people and this situation would have never 
occurred. 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
101 
I became furious. The Prime Minister went on 
accusing me of all possible sins and would not allow me 
to utter a word. This was complete injustice. I did not 
want to listen to this anymore, one who is already wet is 
not afraid of rain. I stood up and said: 
- Respectable Prime Minister, why have you 
invited me here if you do not want to listen to me? You 
obviously believe everything you are told about me, but 
for some reason you do not want to hear what I have to 
say. May be what I will say is more believable and 
reasonable. Four or five months ago you considered me 
capable and resourceful, you signed the resolution and 
entrusted me with this work. And since then I have done 
all that I could in order to put your resolution into 
practice. Since then you have never expressed any 
interest in my work, in any problems that I had, and 
have believed all biased information you received about 
me. You can think what you want, but I can not accept 
these charges. Either give me opportunity to work or 
annul the resolution that you created, and let me get on 
with my life. 
I think my words had some effect on Hasanov 
and he said in much calmer voice: 
- Fine, we can listen to you too. I got a little 
angry, and so did you. Let us have a quiet conversation. 
So can you tell me about this agitation that you have 
caused? 
I tried to describe him the situation briefly, 
covering only important facts. At times he asked me 
quick questions. At some point he asked me why I left 
the Party and then just waved his hand and said "never 
mind." Then he called his assistant and said:  
- Bring here the statement of the Commission and 
Hamlet’s answer to it. 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
102 
My supplement to the statement was brought in 
but they could not find the statement itself. I have a 
feeling it was not accidental - putting these two 
documents side by side would not be in favor of the 
authors of the statement.  
I had brought both of the documents with me. I 
showed them to Hasanov. He said as though he was 
trying me (or may be that what he was really thinking):  
- If all these people have signed it, it means that 
this was meant to be.  
I said: 
- If there is a Resolution of the Cabinet of 
Ministers, if must be carried out. If I am charged with 
the task to fulfill it and if I am successful in 
implementing it, how can I possibly accept the 
statement that denies it? By signing it I would announce 
myself guilty. They will say that he had given him a 
task, and he had to admit his inability and had to walk 
away from it with shame. On the other hand, if indeed it 
is too early and we are not ready to set up such a 
university, then let the Cabinet of Ministers pass a new 
resolution in order to annul the university that was 
considered to be so important just three months ago! 
I tried to direct the conversation from discussion 
of my personal ‘inability to get on with people’ to the 
main problem - the university. I think that those few 
monologues I managed to have in between our dialogu-
es yielded some results. Hasanov had calmed down and 
the beginning of this story, our first conversations and 
enthusiasm were revived in his memory and the 
misinformation fed to him by my opponents started to 
lose its effect. He admitted after some debate and 
exchange of views that the statement prepared by the 
special commission was groundless. But it was obvious 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
103 
that there were some powerful forces behind this act of 
abolition. Although the Prime Minister did not 
specifically talk about these forces, it was obvious from 
his demeanor. He was deliberating while responding to 
my suggestions and for me his hesitation meant that he 
was having to mentally consider others’ opinions. 
Hasanov felt particularly strongly about one issue 
and he mentioned it to me a few times: 
- Why do not you get along with Rahim muallim? 
He is a wise, experienced man, he can be really helpful 
to you, why are you so impatient with him? 
- I have a feeling of great respect towards Rahim 
muallim and I have never showed him or his age any 
disrespect. I simply want to be able to work 
independently... 
The Prime Minister again flew into a rage: 
- What freedom, what independence are you 
talking about? Do you know for example who I am? 
Yes, I am the Prime Minister, and I can not appoint a 
single Minister or the deputy Minister by myself. 
I said: 
- And do you really think, dear Premier, that this 
is right? Of course, not, it can not be right. Wouldn’t it 
be so much better if everybody could take independent 
decision within the frameworks of their duty? 
I think Hasanov’s opinion of me as an 
excessively ambitious man only increased after my last 
words and he decided to show me that I was only an 
actor playing a supporting role in all this. 
- You should understand that you are neither 
Gorbachev nor Pavlov 41 in this particular work...  
I did not even want to ask him who are then 
Gorbachev and Pavlov of this work. I just said: 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
104 
- Probably my role in this corresponds to that of 
Yavlinsky. 42 
- Exactly, you are absolutely right. You have 
given the ideas, you are looking for ways of realizing 
them, but you are by no means first in administering 
them, although you have been given a sufficiently 
responsible position. 
This statement did not satisfy or flatter me but I 
was quite excited by the strange game of comparisons 
we were playing: 
- Maybe one of the reasons of perestroyka not 
becoming a success is that people like Yavlinsky, who 
prepared the programs on economic reforms, were kept 
as far away as possible from administering them? 
Believe me, dear Premier, I am not power mad and I am 
far from a careerist. But with your blessing we have 
started a very good work and my only aim is to take this 
work further. I am convinced that we are at the 
beginning of a very interesting, meaningful and distinct 
road. 
After we said all we wanted to say to each other 
Hasanov invited Rahim muallim in and said that his 
recommendation would be that the university should 
begin its activity with the preparatory courses. He said it 
would be sufficient to agree this at the INEM Council 
meeting and pass appropriate resolution without 
referring the matter to the Ministry of Education.  
So that is how the problem was solved. Even 
when it seemed that all possible routes to go forward 
were closed in front of us, we found a narrow alley to 
follow. I did not feel triumphant nor did I feel defeated. 
Whatever happens, "we were standing on our both feet 
again."43 
  
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
105 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
106 
 
CHAPTER 18 
 
 MY  TRIPS  TO  TURKEY  AND  OUR  FIRST 
STUDENTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June was a month woven of patchy ornamental 
patterns of delight and sorrow, attack, defense and truce. 
In the last meeting with the Prime Minister "a minimal 
disturbance" option was chosen - to continue our activi-
ty by enrolling 15-20 students for the preparatory cour-
ses. (That was my last meeting with Hasan Hasanov as a 
Prime Minister, when the government of the Popular 
Front came into power he was appointed the UN’s 
official representative from the Azerbaijan Republic, 
and later the Minister of Foreign Affairs).  
I was resembling a man that barely had survived 
an earthquake, but was nevertheless happy to be able to 
live again. The following months from the university’s 
viewpoint were months of quiet thoughts and the 
beginning of the "quiet" activity of our preparatory 
courses. In terms of politics, these months will forever 
stay in our memories as times of the greatest turbulence 
and change. 
On June 4, I went to Turkey for two weeks on the 
invitation of Istanbul University. During the Soviet 
regime it was difficult for Azerbaijani citizens to visit 
Turkey and Iran. These countries are so close to 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
107 
Azerbaijan from the viewpoint of language, history and 
culture that we were kept away from them by means of 
iron curtains. However this sense of mental proximity 
was maintained mainly through literature of these 
countries that we were able to read occasionally. It 
created a strange nostalgia for these countries in our 
souls, and this endless, deep and mysterious desire was 
making us travel to these countries mentally. Now the 
changes occurring in our country were so evident that 
there was no reason to dream anymore: the dream could 
become a reality.  
After some interesting meetings at the Istanbul 
and Marmara Universities I went to Ankara. There I got 
closely acquainted with fellow mathematicians working 
at Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi (Middle East 
Technical University) and met descendants of my 
family’s relatives who were forced to leave Soviet 
Union for Turkey in 1930s. 
My second trip to Turkey took place when I was 
invited to participate at the first Azerbaijan - Turkey 
conference in mathematics held on 12 September 1991 
at Bogazichi University in Istanbul. During this trip my 
very pleasant relationships with the leadership of 
Marmara University developed further.  
Between 19th and 21st of August a group of 
conservatives seized power in Moscow. They named 
themselves the "State Committee for Extraordinary 
Situation" and their aim was to keep the Soviet Union as 
an entity. I was in Quba44 when these extraordinary 
developments were taking place and all I could do was 
listen to the radio and watch television. Society was 
trying to renovate itself - the probability of success of 
this attempt to stop the natural progression of society 
was low. Nevertheless some statesmen did not read the 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
108 
situation correctly, "perhaps the Soviet Union can be 
returned after all", and supported this Committee. The 
leader of Azerbaijan at the time, Ayaz Mutallibov, was 
among them. The rebellion was ultimately unsuccessful 
and it opened the way to independence for the Soviet 
Republics.  
During the last week in August Baku was boiling 
hot. "Lenin Square" was renamed "The Square of 
Freedom" and Lenin’s monument in front of the 
Building of Government was dismantled.  The crowded 
rallies and demonstrations had become an inseparable 
part of the country’s political life. The state of 
emergency that was declared in Baku by Moscow’s 
decree issued in January 19, 1990 was annulled by a 
decree issued in Baku on August 30, 1991. Moscow’s 
direct and unlimited control had come to an end.  
The Popular Front was gathering momentum and 
then... they stepped back unexpectedly during the 
presidential elections of the Azerbaijan Republic. Ayaz 
Mutallibov won the election easily with no competition 
present. But the political tension carried on.  
We formed an examination commission 
consisting of eight people invited from various 
universities and the Academy of Science to hold the 
entrance exams for our preparatory courses. The 
worrying thing was whether people were going to 
believe in our advertisements since the Ministry of 
Education annulled those that we published in June.  
We were prepared to admit 15-20 students to our 
preparatory courses. Within a few days 51 boys and 
girls submitted their documents to take part in the 
exams. We had sixteen submissions to study Economics 
and Management, and the same number for Internatio-
nal Relations, ten wanted to study mathematics and 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
109 
computer sciences, nine - medical ecology. Twenty-
three of them had graduated from schools in Baku and 
twenty-eight were from various parts of the country 
(from 23 different regions). One of them graduated from 
school with a gold medal (highest possible result achie-
ved), two with the silver medals (second best), five of 
them had never studied English at school. Everybody was 
examined on English, and all but those that were 
enrolling for international relations sat an examination in 
mathematics. Additionally, an exam on geography was 
organized for the future students of economics and ma-
nagement, on history – for the future students of 
international relations, and on biology – for medical 
ecology.  
The entrance exams ended on October 17; and by 
decree of the examination commission twenty students 
were admitted to our preparatory courses. We have 
expelled one of them very soon afterwards for 
unsatisfactory attendance.  
The majority of these first 19 students have now 
graduated from the university (6 of them with honors) 
while some of them continued their education in the 
USA and Europe on student exchange programs. At pre-
sent leading companies in Azerbaijan and outside are 
employing them, and some of them are continuing their 
education as master students. 
A day later, on October 18 two important events 
took place - one on a national scale, the other on the 
University level. The Supreme Soviet of the Azerbaijan 
Republic adopted a constitutional statement on the 
"State Independence of the Azerbaijan Republic". Azer-
baijani people declared their will to establish an 
independent State. At the same time I decided to set up 
an Academic-Administrative Council to govern the 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
110 
University. I issued an order that "the Academic-
Administrative Council with its present members will 
function from October 18, 1991 till September 10, 1992 
with the purpose of making decisions on academic and 
administrative issues of the University, and also 
preparing for the 1992/93 academic year." Our 
University with its small number of students and 
teachers and its Academic-Administrative Council 
started making its first steps into the real life. 
Around the same time we received our first 
foreign guests - a scholar from the University of 
California in Los Angeles, Naireh Tohidi, and the 
Rector of Marmara University Orhan Oguz.  
Orhan Oguz had played a special role in the 
development of the Turkish education system (he was 
formerly a Rector of Anadolu University and the 
Minister of Education of Turkey). He came to Baku on 
my invitation and addressed our first students during the 
official opening ceremony of our university (October 
29, 1991). 
Orhan Oguz was a very wise and intelligent 
person and an excellent administrator (he is now the 
head of the Turkish State Radio and Television 
Company). Our acquaintance was turning into close 
friendship. He was greatly interested in the University 
and our plans, and would strongly disagree with my 
half-joking, half-serious phrase "our toy university." He 
would bring a lot of examples about the famous 
universities that began their lives just like us. His first 
advice to me was: "Try to separate yourself from the 
Institute of the National Economy Management as soon 
as possible, find a place for yourself and teach your 
students there." His other advice was to accept his 
invitation and even, if for a very short period of time, to 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
111 
go to work with him at Marmara University. This 
attentive man could see my despair, he could see that I 
did not have any serious business to attend to in Baku 
for the next couple of months. He also understood our 
financial difficulties very well. Orhan Oguz was trying 
to convince me that it would be more useful for me to 
be in Istanbul during next 4 months than in Baku. 
Indeed I had taken on six lecturers, specialists in 
different subjects, to teach our 19 students and the 
classes began and were conducted in very disciplined 
manner. I signed an order increasing the salaries of our 
teachers from November the 1st. They were now paid 
40% more than lecturers were at the state institutes. 
Then I left Baku with Orhan Oguz.                          
 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
112 
 
CHAPTER 19 
 
  BETWEEN  MARMARA  AND  KHAZAR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The colorful days I spent in Turkey could make a 
good story line for a separate article. After making 
acquaintances with the leadership of the Marmara 
University I started teaching Calculus at the School of 
Economics and Management and Operations Research 
for graduate students at the School of Engineering. I 
would spend my days with the deans, heads of 
departments and faculty members, trying to understand 
the inner world of the Turkish University. My 
conversations with Professor Sami Ercan, Head of the 
Department of Industrial Engineering were very 
interesting and informative. He had worked in the USA 
for a long time and we would exchange our views on 
relationships between West and East, Turkey and 
Azerbaijan, science and education and it would enrich 
our knowledge. 
On November 9 the Turkish Government passed 
a decision to officially recognize Azerbaijan as an 
independent state. Both Turkey and Azerbaijan were 
rejoicing at this news. The Azerbaijani people were 
longing to express their love and gratitude to Turkey 
and its people, being the first to recognize Azerbaijan’s 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
113 
independence. A lot of sheep were sacrificed, taxi 
drivers in Baku were not taking money from Turks, 
people were trying to invite any Turk that they would 
meet on the street to their houses for a celebration meal. 
Orhan Oguz and Sami Ercan and some other new 
acquaintances were taking my concerns about our new 
university in Baku very seriously. They told me that 
they would try to help and support us. One of the things 
I succeeded in was obtaining a lot of Turkish textbooks 
for our library. Rectors of various universities and my 
friends at Anadolu University (in Eskishehir) were very 
helpful in this work. Meanwhile I was trying to buy 
books in English whenever possible. The transportation 
of the collected books to Baku could have been an issue 
but "Azerbaijan Hava Yollari" (Azerbaijan Airlines) 
kindly transported the books from Istanbul to Baku.  
During this period some new punitive measures 
were taken against me in Baku. On November 19 the 
Rector of the Institute of National Economy and 
Management Rahim Rahimov appointed himself the 
rector of the English Language Azerbaijan University 
[that is, our University – Ed.]. He announced his own 
appointment and noted that he acted according with "the 
recommendations of the Cabinet of Ministers of the 
Azerbaijan Republic." Baylar gave me a very worried 
phone call from Baku: "There is talk around that Hamlet 
is not fit to be a rector, he has run away and left all his 
work incomplete, he has gone to Turkey to have some 
fun and will never come back. What shall we do? What 
is your advice? We must find a way out of this situation, 
and some kind of prompt action must be taken."  
I took this news quite cold-bloodedly, indeed I 
saw no reason to be overly concerned. I advised Baylar 
to be patient: "Get on with your work, teach your clas-
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
114 
ses with enthusiasm. Do not get pessimistic. Just let the 
university live and function, nobody can take it away 
from us. Start looking for another place, look for 
anything, let it be very small, far from the city center, 
old, semi-destroyed - it makes no difference. I will take 
care of the rest, just wait for me to come back.  
Thoughts about our university were the air and 
water of my everyday life. Sometimes I had some 
inconceivable ideas. I held on to reality with one hand 
and with the other one I wanted "to rip stars from the 
sky." That is when a word came to my mind - "Khazar." 
The name of our university will be "Khazar" (Caspian)! 
There are universities in Turkey named after various 
seas - "Kara Deniz", "Ak Deniz"45, there are Agean and 
Marmara Universities, why not name our university 
Khazar. My Khazar University will live "in my 
magnificent Baku on the Caspian Sea."46 My Khazar 
University will be as beautiful as the mysterious Khazar 
created by nature - the Caspian Sea. 
In December the Soviet Union had completed its 
life after 69 years. The agreement about the formation 
of the USSR signed on December 30, 1922 became 
obsolete on December 8, 1991. The New World set 
about revising its material and moral values, and the 
independent Azerbaijan Republic took its first 
stumbling steps. On December 25, a resolution was 
adopted in Azerbaijan to return to the Latin alphabet.47 
Indeed, this New Year was bringing us a completely 
new and distinct life. 
Sami Ercan mentioned that there was a possibility 
for Azerbaijani students to do graduate studies at the 
school of Engineering at Marmara University, and he 
suggested that I could look into this opportunity. I 
discussed it with the Dean Ahmed Serpil and Rector 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
115 
Orhan Oguz and the decision was taken to allocate all 
existing five vacancies to Azerbaijani students. It was 
decided that the Azerbaijani students would study for 
free at Marmara University and they would pay their 
tuition fee in Baku to our University. It would definitely 
help our financial situation. 
Generally speaking I lead a very active life in 
Turkey. On the request of the School of Education I 
began to teach one more mathematics course. At the 
same time I reached an agreement with the chancellors 
of Marmara and Anadolu Universities and gave lectures 
on "The Essentials of Functional Analyses" for advan-
ced undergraduates, graduate students and faculty 
members once a week in Eskishehir. I taught in English 
at Marmara University and in Turkish at Eskishehir. I 
made a lot of contacts and attended various meetings 
and conferences at different universities in Istanbul – 
Bogazichi (Bosphorus), Istanbul and Yildiz – also, 
Bilkent University in Ankara, and Agean University in 
Izmir. I also had a very close relationship with the 
Middle East Technical University in Ankara. 
But one of the most interesting and useful things 
was my observation of Orhan Oguz’s activity as a 
rector. He never failed to invite me along to all the 
meetings connected with university administration and 
educational issues, even when the meetings carried a 
very private character.  
 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
116 
 
CHAPTER 20 
 
  ON  THE  WAY  TO  THE  NEW  HOME 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In January 9, 1992 I returned to Baku and went to 
my office the next day. My meeting with Rahim 
Rahimov was very quiet and careful. He did not 
mention that he had appointed himself the rector of the 
English Language Azerbaijan University. Perhaps he 
was waiting for me to mention it first, to accept the 
situation as natural development, reconcile myself to it 
and get on with my work under his leadership. He told 
me: "I will not keep you for any longer, get back to your 
work, everything around here missed you." By this he 
somehow tried both to confirm my importance to the 
University, and maintain the status quo about the ‘first 
violin’. And of course I went back to my work that I 
missed so much and called two subsequent meetings of 
the University Council. During the first meeting I 
analyzed the current situation at the University, 
portrayed our aims, emphasized that independence was 
the most vital question for us. I offered my colleagues to 
take two urgent measures: by taking the constitution of 
the University as a legal foundation to elect the rector 
for the University by voting and to move to a new 
building as soon as possible to begin a new life. 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
117 
My colleagues were very inspired by my return 
and my desire to solve our problems rapidly. My 
absence caused some doubts and disbelief in the future 
of the University. My suggestions were met with great 
enthusiasm and during the second session of the Council 
on January 27, as a result of unanimous opinion of the 
14 members of the council I was elected the rector of 
the University. My colleagues were very happy that we 
had cut the "Gordian knot"48 and were expressing their 
delight. 
No doubt that Rahim muallim was told about this 
election.  At the beginning of our next meeting we sat 
there watching each other carefully. It was a very 
strange situation - a university had two rectors at the 
same time; one was appointed by "the recommendation 
of high rank officials" and by issuing his own order, the 
other one was elected following the University 
Constitution confirmed by the Cabinet of Ministers and 
relying on his own moral rights. 
There is no question that Rahim muallim had 
turned over this situation in his mind many times, and felt 
that the moment had come to take a final decision about 
the entire situation. His relationship with Istanbul 
University and Turan Yazgan had branched out, his 
aspiration to organize a joint higher education for 
management was about to become a reality. Meanwhile 
the English Language University like a hedgehog was 
rolling into a ball and not allowing him to touch it. Was it 
really worth trying to keep this University under control?  
I broke the silence: "Rahim muallim, we are 
looking for a new place for ourselves, we will soon 
relieve you of all these troubles." He listened to me 
calmly. He did not carry on the conversation and just 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
118 
said, "it is your business." The Rectorship game was 
over.  
Around the same time I met Baylar`s elder bro-
ther Tofig Hajiyev. He was a construction engineer and 
he aided our University a lot and not only in his direct 
capacity. He has turned into a true friend of our 
University. He told me that Nana Kalantarova, the head 
of the education authority of the Khatayi region of 
Baku, could be able to help with our accommodation 
problem and introduced me to her. Nana khanum and I 
found a common language very quickly. She said: "I 
understand your problem. How about the Kindergarten 
№240, will it do?" Saying this she examined me from 
head to toe as if trying to define whether I was suited for 
the kindergarten or not. Then I went for a short meeting 
with the Executive Head of the same region Elmir 
Sharifov and that went well too: "You are doing a very 
important job, I will do my best to help you not only in 
this matter but in the future as well." Then we went 
together with Elmir muallim to examine the 
kindergarten and discussed the plans of "transition from 
kindergarten to university."  
So we slowly started moving to our new home. 
My duty was to ask the Minister of Education Rafig 
Feyzullayev for his consent on this matter. I was not 
very easy because for some reason he did not want to 
see me. I took an "effective" measure and asked the 
Deputy Minister Abdulla Mehrabov to tell the Minister 
to either answer my letter or I would use my legal right 
to seek a meeting with him and we would have to have a 
very serious conversation." 
Soon we arranged a long-term lease of the half of 
Kindergarten №240 in the Ahmadli district. Six lectu-
rers, nineteen students and some other employees mo-
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
119 
ved to the new location. Around this time Husseinaga 
Rzayev went back to the State Institute of Foreign 
Languages and Firangiz Nasirova took his place. This 
very lively lady very quickly became one of the most 
favorite teachers at the University.  
Independence often starts with poverty. Our new 
building was almost derelict and quite inappropriate. 
We had everything necessary for teaching at our 
previous location in the building of the Institute of 
National Economy Management - well equipped 
classrooms, all kind of educational equipment. Here we 
had to start from scratch.  
With all its shortcomings this half of the kinder-
garten building had two very important advantages - we 
were independent, and there was enough room to 
accommodate the student intake for the forthcoming 
academic year. We were trying hard to clean the buil-
ding, to make it appropriate for educational purposes 
and to equip all the classrooms.  
This was not our only success in February. Forty-
eight students applied for the post-graduate studies in 
Istanbul. Five young Azerbaijani men showed the best 
results in competitive exams in mathematics and 
English and face-to-face interviews. They paid us their 
tuition fees and went to Turkey. 
An historian Farruh Bilici, Turk by origin but 
living in France for most of his life, whom I met at 
Marmara University, visited us. He read series of 
lectures on "French political and economic trends in 
relation to the Moslem East" for both our students and 
lecturers. The number of visitors from the USA and 
some European countries began to increase and it was 
very exciting for our preparatory students.  
The life in our new home was slowly improving.   
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
120 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 21 
 
THOUGHTS  ON  ADMINISTRATION  AND 
CREATIVITY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
If from the mid 1990 Khazar was an ephemeral 
dream, a desire, a distant aim, towards the end of the 
year it looked like the dream could become a reality. In 
the spring of 1991 the university was created on the 
paper. At the same time our life was "spiced up" with 
deception, jealousy and all sorts of obstacles. In the fall 
of 1991 we began teaching the preparatory courses with 
the "blessing" of the Ministry of Education and the 
Institute of National Economy Management. In mid 
February 1992 we moved to a new building – kinder-
garten № 240 at the Ahmadli district. Khazar University 
spent its infant years, its innocent days in this building. 
We lived moments of laughter and joy here. 
Later Khazar University would move to various 
other locations, for some years it turned into a mobile 
university. But the most pleasant memories would be 
forever associated with this kindergarten university.  
We accepted with great joy having to repair this 
half destroyed building, located far from downtown and 
designated for children. Enjoying our independence we 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
121 
were working days and nights with enthusiasm. Like 
Karamov49 after crawling for the first six months, we 
firmly stood on our feet and walked, we even planned to 
run and then to fly. In September 1992 approximately 
200 students from different countries started their 
education at the university. The glorious inauguration of 
the University held at the National Opera and Ballet 
Theatre would let everybody know about our glorious 
existence and glorious ambitions. 
Meanwhile I was looking for the answers to some 
important questions that were perhaps directed to the 
distant future. First of all, it was very important to fight 
by all possible means the wide spread system of 
"requests", "favors" and bribing deeply rooted in all our 
higher education institutions. We must veto any activity 
of this kind at Khazar, to declare bribes and cheating in 
the exams a punishable offense. We had to talk 
seriously from the very beginning to the teachers and 
students, and at the first opportunity to the parents to 
convince them of our seriousness in this matter, to warn 
them that nobody caught would be forgiven. We had to 
imprint in their brains that the entire existence of our 
university is about morals and purity.  
Everybody who has intimate knowledge of 
Azerbaijan (or any other similar country) will know that 
the "knowledge is the only criterion" statement is not 
valid at the higher education institutions. Indeed it is 
beyond doubt that some parents (especially those who 
occupy high posts, or those who are rich) will try to get 
a higher education diploma for their children by all 
possible means. These parents are prepared to bribe, beg 
and even threaten in order to obtain satisfactory marks 
for their children who would not study and did not wish 
to learn. Would it be possible to stick to our principles 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
122 
and firmly say "no", "I can not do this" and ignore all 
requests, presents and threats? It is not a naive question 
and the answer is not trivial. The bribery and corruption 
are penetrated in the backbone of the society and the 
relative poverty (and very badly paid teachers) is an 
obvious fact. There are significant changes going on in 
our economic and political life, but human minds still 
remain obsolete. There are no steps taken yet to 
radically reform the educational system. All of these 
together means that a university offering higher 
education without bribes is bound to be seen as a unique 
phenomenon. 
In my opinion the most important thing for us is 
to start our lives honestly, to lay an honest foundation to 
our future work. All we need is to choose our students 
on the basis of competition, attract the best scholars and 
researchers, establish a productive, flexible and 
enriching work atmosphere. Later intelligent students 
and their parents and a naturally formed positive public 
opinion will be our main distinction. Opinions such as 
"Khazar is the best place to get a real, serious and high 
class education; the education it gives is comparable 
with that of the leading world universities" will be our 
best success indicators. 
We were also searching for the appropriate model 
of education to be able to achieve our aims. The first 
very important step would be to intensify the system of 
testing knowledge. The students would be tested on all 
the subjects that they were taught, the subjects would 
not be divided into three categories as was done 
traditionally - subjects that lead to a graded exam, 
subjects for which only pass or fail mark is awarded and 
subjects in which students do not sit exams at all. 
Besides we would not be satisfied by just examining the 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
123 
students once, at the end of the term. There would be 
two or more examinations during each term. The exams 
would be mainly based on writing essays and 
occasionally multiple choice testing. Later we would be 
able to consider as a part of the assessment process a 
student’s interaction levels throughout the course and 
the lecturer’s opinion.  
The next step would be to alter significantly a 
student’s transfer process from one year to another. The 
awkward system making the students who failed one or 
two courses to stay in the same year and study all the 
courses over again (even the courses he or she had 
previously passed) will be changed as it is a barely 
motivational approach. The number of credits earned 
would determine the level or the year of each student. 
This would save the student and parent from the 
psychological burden of having to re-sit a whole year. 
The flexible and fair method of allowing students to 
take new courses and register again for the courses they 
had failed would be applied. At the same time it would 
not create an incentive for concessions to be made to the 
students who are scared of having "failed the whole 
year." This regime must make lazy students (including 
some students sent to us by the State Student Admission 
Commission)50 to understand that "without knowledge 
there will be no diploma." 
It would be our best achievement to demonstrate 
that "weak students can not get a degree from Khazar 
University." We must do our best to deserve comments 
like "If he/she has got Khazar’s degree, he/she must be a 
good specialist", "Khazar University graduates are 
offered the best jobs" and work hard to make these 
opinions to live long. 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
124 
When I started putting into practice the principles 
of education and science at our University, I once again 
tried to analyze and compare specific features of the 
European Universities - Oxford, Cambridge, Moscow 
State University, Sorbonne University and others, and 
also the legacy of the historically very mighty German 
Universities (Berlin, Göttingen, etc.). I was studying the 
special role that German Universities played in 
influencing the American higher education system. It 
was very interesting not only from the historical point of 
view, but was also helpful in trying to adopt the modern 
educational models in Azerbaijan.  
I particularly loved American universities with 
their continuous competition and search for innovation. 
Among my favorite subjects of study were Harvard, 
Stanford, Yale, Cornell, Columbia, Princeton, 
Michigan, Berkley and Los-Angeles California 
Universities, and the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology. On the other hand I did not want my brain 
to work under the influence of any of them. But the 
more I learned about their history and present eminence, 
the more difficult it was not to fall under their influence. 
One thing was certain - the realities of our existence and 
everyday problems, and the transitional period from the 
existing education system to a new one would keep me 
quite safe from being influenced by American 
universities. Even if an American University was 
organized in Baku (the university practicing education 
principles created for them in the USA) and most of the 
faculty members came from the US, I still have some 
doubts that it would become a leading higher education 
institute with deep research potential. 
I strongly believe that the Khazar University type 
of higher education institute is more suitable to derive 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
125 
full benefits of local research traditions and scientific 
potential, to profit from the strong national culture and 
in its own turn to enrich it, to become a wonderful 
synthesis of international outlook and national values. 
The above can be easily proved by comparing American 
universities spread all over the world with the best 
national universities of those countries.  
I had a plan to set up a university that would give 
a priority to research. I understood very well the 
financial and organizational difficulties this could cause. 
I knew that it was necessary to invite the best scholars 
to the university, but would all colleagues around me 
approve and follow this advice unanimously? Would 
they be not be afraid of competition and rivalry, would 
they want to invite the scholars like them and perhaps 
better than them, or would they rather make themselves 
"comfortable" in their positions and recruit only those 
who would be of no threat? 
It is only in competition that a human being 
demonstrates its full potential. Even socialism 
understood the importance of competition and rivalry, 
but they dressed it in a socialist terminology. 
Expressions such as "the socialistic competition" and 
"the healthy rivalry" were common. But there was a 
problem somewhere and there was no real rivalry 
permitted.  Maybe because the word "socialistic" always 
prevailed over "competition", and word "healthy" over 
"rivalry." Perhaps the system of administration that did 
not allow for real competition was one of the main 
reasons that led to the breakdown of the Soviet Union 
and communist bloc.  
To ensure rivalry, to give way to initiative, to 
make the education environment more interesting and 
colorful, I sincerely wished for private sector in 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
126 
education to be widespread and for many new 
universities to be set up. Of course, theoretically, any 
kind of new universities could have been set up - those 
that set low standards of education or took bribes. I 
naively believed at the time that this was an honorable 
way and those who could join it would be capable, 
enthusiastic and honest, and that every new university 
would be a big step forward. Life would soon prove me 
wrong, and I would have to observe with regret the new 
universities carrying on in old and embarrassing ways. 
Unfortunately some private universities did all they 
could to damage the reputation of private higher 
education. But in any case there must be a green light 
for private universities and colleges. 
From time to time I would convey messages 
about education systems of the world and various expe-
riences via newspapers, magazines, television and radio, 
at conferences, in order to help the public to understand 
private education and to weaken the resistance of 
authorities. Then I was included in the group preparing 
the new Law on Education and tried to make private 
education to be officially accepted. 
The occupation of Azerbaijani territories by 
Armenia was still continuing. Nagorny Karabakh was 
lost completely with the fall of towns Khojali and 
Shusha, later Lachin, Kalbajar and other territories 
neighboring with Nagorny Karabakh were seized by 
Armenians. During two years we saw various Presidents 
and governments come and go, and there was constant 
tension and instability in the country. At this tragic time, 
however strange it may sound, new higher education 
institutions were being created and the private education 
was achieving its first successes. The state education 
institutions were trying to avoid competing with the 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
127 
private sector and were demonstrating their anxiety. 
This "non-healthy" competition caused the biggest 
damage to our medical department that was going from 
strength to strength with every passing day.  
I was not forgetting about issues that seemed to 
be so distant and unrealistic that I could easily be 
compared to Don Quixote. Ever since autumn 1991 I 
had an idea on my mind that would not leave me - 
Khazar University must have a territory for its own 
campus. I would address the government many times on 
this issue, I would even hire architects to prepare plans 
for the future campus in order to prove the seriousness 
of my intentions and speed up the solution of the 
problem. In the US many years ago the so-called "land 
grant" movement51 gave a great impetus to the 
development of the universities, so why could not our 
government do it? 
From the very first days of our activity I 
discovered my weakest point - how can we charge 
students tuition fees? The government does not help the 
student, the people are generally poor, and it is 
embarrassing to ask them for money. Of course being 
brought up in socialism did not help - we all believe that 
it is not appropriate to ask money for services that you 
provide. I would much prefer to establish a foundation 
that would help students to pay their tuition fees and 
award grants for research. Another weakness of mine 
would constantly manifest itself - my inability to 
practice or understand the principle "if a problem can be 
solved by means of money then it is not a problem." 
There is also the need for constant networking and 
maintaining relationships with government officials - 
something that I am not very keen at. Perhaps I am 
bound to always be in trouble because of it. And is it 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
128 
really enough just to try to do the quality work and rely 
on public opinion in order to succeed? 
There are an infinite number of problems 
awaiting their solutions. On our way forward we are 
encountering new problems every day and often it is 
impossible to move on without resolving them. It 
reminds me of the way scientific research is conducted 
– "if you try to resolve a complex problem, even if you 
are not able to complete it, the results you arrive at will 
still be useful". This approach seems to be very 
appropriate for the development of the university.  
It is quite natural and essential to try to foresee 
the events and approach the development of the 
university as a highly creative work. Little by little I am 
increasingly pressed for time to do my mathematical 
research and I have to try to compensate this nostalgia 
by creativity in my new vocation - education. Just as in 
mathematics, in this work one can not avoid tackling the 
problem. It has to be analyzed, and if familiar and 
existing methods can not be applied to resolve it then 
new ones need to be invented. It is a pain, isn’t it? But is 
creation possible without pain? Henri Poincare once 
wrote: "to try to have no pain is a negative ideal, this 
can only be achieved if the world come to an end."52 
And, is the pain of creation a real suffering or hidden 
pleasure?  
Will the days, months and years I spend in search 
of the perfect "Khazar" lead to the creation of a 
university "whose name will be known to nations, and 
the news of its fame passed from country to country?"53 
We will live and see. 
 Inshallah!54  
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
129 
 The traveler is on his way 
again. 
 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
130 
 
 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
131 
 
 
NOTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.  St. Petersburg was named Leningrad during the 
Soviet Period.  
2.  At that time candidates to the Supreme Soviet 
(National Assembly or Parliament) used to be 
nominated at special meetings by "people." 
3.  Popular Front of Azerbaijan played an important 
role in developing and heading national liberation 
movement in Azerbaijan when the Soviet Union 
was about to collapse. Later due to inner 
contradictions it was divided into several parties. In 
July 1992 it came into power and after a year 
resigned. Nowadays it is functioning under the 
name of Azerbaijan Popular Front Party (headed by 
Abulfaz Elchibay). 
4.  Bakinskiy Rabochiy ("Baku Worker") was a 
leading daily Russian newspaper published in 
Baku, Azerbaijan. 
5.  "Communist" - was a leading daily newspaper in 
Azerbaijani. 
6.  The military conflict between Armenia and 
Azerbaijan on Azerbaijan’s territory called Dagliq 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
132 
(Nagorny – in Russian, Mountainous – in English) 
Karabakh is referred to here. 
7.  In the former Soviet Union and Azerbaijan as well, 
the Academy of Science was an Institution with a 
lot of research Institutes and a Presidium. 
8.  The agreements were signed by the former Soviet 
Union with other countries. 
9.  "Dalga" ("Wave") – was one of the most 
interesting and popular information and 
entertainment programs of Azerbaijan TV. 
10.  Yagub Shafai was born in Iranian Azerbaijan. 
Hasan Hasanov said in this meeting that his 
grandparents were also natives of Zanjan, Iran. 
11.  So called Islamic fundamentalism is referred to 
here (approximately 90% Azerbaijan citizens are 
Moslems). We consider Azerbaijan a cosmopolitan 
country, which is far from the extremism named 
Islam fundamentalism. 
12.  Lankaran – a town situated on the coast of the 
Caspian Sea, near the borderline of Azerbaijan 
Republic with Iran. The sea, mountains, forests and 
subtropical climate make this area very beautiful.  
13. According to the Former Soviet Union system of 
education and scientific (research) degrees, the 
preliminary (undergraduate) university education 
would take five years. In the last, fifth year, usually 
a diploma (thesis) should be defended. Then to take 
the degree further, one has to continue studying at 
an Aspirantura (graduate studies) for three years. 
Those who completed their studies successfully 
and published the results of their research in 
scientific journals obtained a chance to get a 
scientific degree of candidate of sciences. In order 
to get this Candidate of Science degree 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
133 
corresponding to the US-type Ph.D. degree (Doctor 
of Philosophy in special fields) in most cases one 
had to work on dissertation for four, five, even 
more years, instead of three. The highest scientific 
(research) degree "Doctor of Science" that doesn’t 
correspond to any degree in the US was not often 
achieved. At that time Doctor of Sciences degree in 
some fields (for example mathematics) could only 
be attained at bigger scientific centers in central 
cities of the Soviet Union. 
14. The possibility of establishing private universities 
and their legal status were stated in the Azerbaijan 
Republic Education Law worked out and adopted 
in 1992. 
15. "Müallim" is of Arabic origin, it means "teacher." In 
Azerbaijan it is used both in its direct meaning and 
as a form of polite address, following the first 
name. Normally an educated literate man would be 
referred to as Müallim. For example: "Hasan 
müallim" both indicates a person whose profession 
is teacher and is a form of address to a person 
whose name is Hasan. (Compare: Mister, 
Monsieur). 
 
 
16. The following is the complete text of this document: 
    
Azerbaijan SSR, Council of Ministers 
 
RESOLUTION № 286 
 
December 20, 1990                         
Baku 
 
On the preparatory works for the establishment of 
English Language Azerbaijan University 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
134 
 
During the business congress held in Azerbaijan 
SSR it became evident that we do not have sufficient 
number of specialists for developing a market economy. 
The insufficiency of qualified specialists proficient in 
foreign languages, including English was particularly 
distinctly felt. On the other hand, the Congress 
necessitates that Azerbaijani specialists obtain diplomas 
approved at international level, to enable both foreign 
and Azerbaijani citizens obtain world class education in 
our Republic.  
Taking this into consideration:  
10. It is expedient to establish a many-profiled 
English Language Azerbaijan University under the 
Institute of National Economy Management by the 
Council of Ministers of Azerbaijan SSR and the 
Ministry of Education of Azerbaijan SSR. The 
education system in this University will be based on two 
level system* according to international standards.  
20. It is intended to organize the first enrollment to 
the University in the 1991-1992 academic year in four 
groups consisting of 15-20 students in each of the 
following areas: 
 a) Economics and Management  
 b) Computer, Statistics and Mathematical Sciences 
 c) International Relations and Political Science 
 d) Ecology. 
 It is advisable to train specialists in Medicine, 
Biology and other fields at the University in the future.  
                                                        
* Bachelor’s and master’s degrees are meant here. The Ph.D. 
programs were deemed not to be necessary for the newly established 
university. 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
135 
30. To finance the University mainly from two 
sources: private tuition and the state budget providing 
average expenditure amount for each student.  
In order to enable the University to begin 
functioning in time: 
a) In a month to prepare and to present to the 
Council of Ministers constitution of the University 
enlisting the Ministry of Education of Azerbaijan SSR 
(comrade R.B. Feyzullayev) and the Institute of Natio-
nal Economy Management at the Council of Ministers 
of Azerbaijan SSR (comrade R.K. Rahimov), Doctor of 
Physical-Mathematical Sciences, Prof. H.A. Isayev** 
and Doctor of Economics S.M. Mammadov. 
b) In a month the Ministry of Education of 
Azerbaijan SSR and Ministry of Finance of Azerbaijan 
SSR will consider the possibilities of financing the 
University from the state budget and present it to the 
Council of Ministers. 
c) The Institute of National Economy Management 
at the Council of Ministers will solve the problems of 
accommodation, providing auditoriums and all the 
appropriate equipment and needs. 
d) The Ministry of Education of Azerbaijan SSR is 
to render necessary assistance to the University in its 
establishment and functioning. 
 
H. Hasanov 
                                                        
** My official (passport) surname was Isayev. 
All my research pa-pers on mathematics were 
published under the surname Isayev. But all my 
papers, articles and other works, devoted to 
other fields (as Education, History, Political 
Science, Language Studies) were published 
under the surname Isaxanli (pronounced as 
Issakhanly).   
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
136 
Chairman of the Council of  
Ministers of Azerbaijan SSR. 
 
 
17.  This rhyme is taken from the ghazal (a kind of 
eastern poem) by Nizami (1191-1209), the great 
Eastern thinker and poet, who was born in Ganja, 
Azerbaijan. 
18.  This article of the resolution (as well as the 
majority of all the articles) was never implemented 
by the appropriate organizations. 
19.  This phrase is a free translation of the name of the 
novel "Dunya Qopur" (The world is falling apart) 
by A.Abulhasan, an Azerbaijani writer in the XX 
century. 
20.  At that time the First Secretary of Azerbaijan Com-
munist Party Central Committee was Ayaz 
Mutallibov. 
21.  On January 19 Mikhail Gorbachov signed the 
decree of the President of Supreme Soviet of the 
USSR declaring a state of emergency in Baku 
beginning January 20. During the night from 
January 19 to January 20 the armed forces of the 
USSR Defense Ministry, KGB and USSR Ministry 
of Internal Affairs entered Baku, inflicted reprisals 
on the peaceful population, killed about 200 
people, wounded hundreds of people with many 
still missing. Gorbachov’s decree was announced 
on radio in the morning of January 20 at 
approximately 6-7 a.m. (after the action had taken 
place). 
22. S.M. Kirov (1886-1936) was one of the political 
leaders of the USSR, in 1921-1926 he headed 
Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic (being the 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
137 
First Secretary of the Central Committee of the 
Communist Party). 
23. "The Council of Ministers" (The Soviet of 
Ministers) was replaced by "The Cabinet of 
Ministers." Everybody everywhere was getting rid 
of the word "Soviet."  
24. He was a well-known statesman of the USSR. Now 
he is the President of the Azerbaijan Republic. 
25.                        
Cabinet of Ministers of the Azerbaijan Republic 
 
RESOLUTION № 41           
 
March 18, 1991                                         
Baku 
 
On the Establishment of  
English Language Azerbaijan University 
 
Taking into consideration the great need in the 
Republic of Azerbaijan for highly qualified, multiple-
disciplined English speaking specialists, to carry the 
independent foreign economic relations and to transfer 
to the market economy, the Cabinet of Ministers of the 
Republic of Azerbaijan resolves: 
10. To establish a multiple-disciplined English Lan-
guage Azerbaijan University affiliated to the Institute of 
National Economy Management at the Council of 
Ministers of the Azerbaijan Republic and the Ministry 
of Education. The education system in this University 
will be based on two levels according to the world 
standards, where the graduates alongside with the 
Bachelor and Master’s degrees will be given the 
diploma of an interpreter. 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
138 
20. To approve the Constitution of the English 
Language Azerbaijan University prepared by the 
Ministry of Education of the Azerbaijan Republic and by 
the Institute of National Economy Management at the 
Cabinet of Ministers of the Azerbaijan Republic 
(enclosed). The English Language Azerbaijan University 
is a juridical entity functioning in accordance with its 
own constitution. 
30. The English Language Azerbaijan University 
belongs to higher learning institutions of the first 
category.* To finance the University mainly from two 
sources: private tuition and the state budget providing 
average expenditure amount for each student. To give 
preferences in salaries to those faculty members who 
speak English.** 
40. To organize the first enrollment to the University 
in 1991 in four groups consisting of 15-20 students each 
in following subjects: 
"Economics and Management", "International 
Relations and Political Science", "Computer, Statistics 
and Mathematical Sciences" and "Ecology." 
It is advisable to train specialists in biology, medicine 
and other professions at the University in the future. 
50. The Institute of National Economy Management 
at the Cabinet of Ministers of the Azerbaijan Republic 
and the Ministry of Education are to solve the problems 
of equipment, library, laboratory of oral speech and 
publishing. To accommodate the English Language 
                                                        
* Some elements of the constitution (e.g. high salaries) made it a top 
education Institute according to rankings of the Ministry of           
Education. 
** The regulations that guaranteed high salaries for English speaking 
employees in some organizations are implied here. 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
139 
Azerbaijan University at the building of the Institute of 
National Economy Management. 
60. State Planning Committee of the Azerbaijan 
Republic and the Ministry of Finance to solve all the 
problems of financing the University, buying furniture, 
all type of equipment and transportation. 
70. The Ministry of Communication to provide the 
English Language Azerbaijan University with a 
governmental phone*** and other phones. 
80. Head Construction Company of Baku to make 
operational the hotel type hostel of the Institute of 
National Economy Management in 1992 for the English 
Language Azerbaijan University. 
90. City Executive Committee of Baku to solve the 
issue of the University building and provide five 
apartments for visiting teachers, until the end of 1991. 
100. Department of Science and Education of the 
Cabinet of Ministers of the Azerbaijan Republic to take 
control of carrying out of this Resolution. 
 
The Prime Minister: H. Hasanov 
Deputy business-manager: I. Hajiyev 
 
 
26. Falsification of the election results is implied here. 
27. Comsomol was the name of the youth organization 
supporting the Communist Party. It was made up 
from the phrase "Communisticheskiy Soyuz 
Molodyoji" (Union of Young Communists) - com-
so-mol.  
                                                        
*** Automatic telephone station providing special and direct 
communication with high rank officials and offices is meant here. 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
140 
28. The author’s grandfather - Isaxan Hacibayramli hea-
ded the uprising against the collectivization in the 
Central Transcaucasia. He caused serious losses in 
the Red Army and Soviet Militia. He died a heroic 
death in the fall of 1930 at the age of 33. His fami-
ly and close friends were sent to exile to Kazakstan 
and Kirgizstan, some of his brothers-in-arms, 
including cousins were forced to leave for Turkey. 
29. It’s a building near the walls of Ichari Shahar (Old 
Town) in Baku. Now the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs is located in this building. 
30. Mullah Nasreddin is very popular in some Eastern 
Countries (Azerbaijan, Turkey, Iran, Middle Asia 
Republics and others) with his anecdotes. He is 
also known by name Khoja Nasreddin in some 
countries. The anecdote that is being implied here 
is the following one:  
Once Khan [ruler of the region – Ed.] gave Mullah 
a donkey and told him to teach donkey how to 
speak. Mullah was offered a great amount of 
money for this work. Mullah of course agreed with 
Khan and asked to be given 5 years to teach the 
donkey. When Mullah's wife heard about this 
impossible work she cried and begged him to 
explain why he had committed such a stupid 
action. His answer was: "My dear wife, God is 
merciful. In five years, either Khan or donkey will 
die. Both of them are guests in this world." 
 
 
31.                          Ministry of Education 
Institute of the National EconomyManagement  
by the Cabinet of 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
141 
Ministers of the Azerbaijan Republic 
 
RESOLUTION № 261/25 
 
April 18, 1991                                                          Baku 
 
On the establishment of the English 
Language Azerbaijan University 
 
We confirm the resolution of the Cabinet of 
Ministers issued on March 18, 1991, №41 on the 
Establishment of the English Language Azerbaijan 
University (the complete text of the resolution is given 
above, see note 25...). 
For the implementation of the above resolution we 
order: 
1. To appoint Doctor of Physical and Mathematical 
Sciences Professor Isayev Hamlet Abdulla oglu the 
Prorector for academic and research affairs of the 
English Language Azerbaijan University affiliated to 
the Institute of National Economy Management from 
April 15, 1991 with corresponding salary. 
2. Prorector of the English Language Azerbaijan 
University H.A. Isayev is obliged: 
2.1. To present the draft structures and staff plans of 
the English Language Azerbaijan University before 
May 1, 1991 to obtain confirmation. 
2.2. Within two weeks to present plans of activities 
of the University affiliated with INEM pointed out in 
the resolution of the Cabinet of Ministers. 
2.3. Within a month to present to the Ministry of 
Education the curricula for all majors to be looked 
through and get confirmed. Provide with the programs 
and academic documents of the education process. 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
142 
2.4. According to the "Rules for the admission to the 
higher education institutions in the USSR" and 
instructions of the Ministry of Education of Azerbaijan 
to prepare and implement the plan of activity for student 
enrollment for the period of 1991/1992 academic year. 
To prepare the student enrollment plan defined in the 
resolution of the Cabinet of Ministers.  
3. Planning-Economy department of the Ministry of 
Education of the Azerbaijan Republic (comrade 
Khankishiyev B.A.), together with State Planning 
Committee of the Azerbaijan Republic and Ministry of 
Finance to solve the financial problems of the English 
Language Azerbaijan University in accordance with the 
resolution of the Cabinet of Ministers. 
4. Rector of Azerbaijan State Pedagogical Institute 
of Foreign Languages Prof. Verdiyeva Z.N. - to render 
assistance to the English Language University with 
technical equipment and organization of education 
processes using the audio center of the Institute. 
5. Departments of the Ministry of Education of the 
Azerbaijan Republic and Rector and related divisions of 
the INEM by the Cabinet of Ministers are to assist in 
every way to the new university.  
6. Prof. F.K. Babayev, first deputy minister of the 
Ministry of Education and M.A. Akhundov, prorector 
for academic affairs of the INEM are to control 
implementation of this resolution. 
 
Minister of Education  Prof. R.B. Feyzullayev 
Rector of the Institute of  
National Economy Management       Prof. R.K. 
Rahimov 
 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
143 
 
32.  "Lenin" avenue is now named "Azadlig" (Liberty) 
avenue. 
33.  After the October Revolution, 1917 in Russia, 
Azerbaijan Democratic Republic was established 
on May 28, 1918. This Republic was recognized by 
some governments, but fell on April 28, 1920 after 
Soviet occupation. 
34.  It is taken from a well-known Azerbaijani poet 
Samed Vurgun’s poem "A Negro’s wish." 
35.  "The Meaning of The Glorious 
Koran", Translated by Marmaduke 
Pickthall.  
 Or see: (O man), follow not that where of thou hast 
no knowledge. Lo! The hearing and the sight and 
the heart – of each of these it will be asked" (The 
Holy Qur’an, Revised and Edited by the Presidency 
of Islamic Researches, IFTA). 
 
36. 
STATEMENT 
 
On the accomplishment of the joint resolution dated 
April 18, 1991, № 261/25 of the Ministry of Education 
and Institute of National Economy Management by 
the Cabinet of Ministers of the Azerbaijan Republic 
 
June 14, 1991                                                           Baku 
      
We, Prof. R.Rahimov, Rector of the Institute of 
National Economy Management,  
F.R. Babayev, First Deputy Minister of Education,  
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
144 
Prof. H.A. Isayev, Prorector of the English 
Language Azerbaijan University,  
Prof. M.Y.Mardanov, Head of the Department of 
Higher Education at the Ministry of Education,  
Assoc. Prof. B.A.Khankishiyev, Head of the 
Department of Planning and Economics, at the Ministry 
of Education determined the following:  
1. Curricula and syllabus and other educational-
methodical documents for the different subjects listed in 
the aforementioned joint resolution have not been 
prepared and affirmed correctly. 
2. The members of the University Admission 
Commission have not been appointed yet. 
3. Though the amount for the tuition fee was stated 
in the media, it has not been confirmed in accordance 
with existing rules. 
4. The academic load for 1991/92 academic year 
has not been determined yet, and so the staffing issues, 
expenses estimate and the payment of wages and many 
other issues have not been resolved. 
5. Student admission advertisements in the news-
papers have not been submitted to the corresponding 
departments for approval. 
6. Until today the University have not presented its 
proposals on the enrollment plans for different subjects 
to the Ministry of Education and therefore there is no 
affirmed admission plans.  
7. Under the exemplary enrollment regulations 
affirmed by the USSR State Education Committee in 
1991 the applications to the higher learning institutions 
must be submitted between June 25 and beginning of 
July, and the entrance exams must be held before 
August 5. 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
145 
Taking into account the above mentioned we 
defined that English Language Azerbaijan University is 
not ready for 1991/92 academic year and so it is not 
possible to conduct the entrance exams at this Institute. 
 
 
37.  This statement belongs to Vladimir Lenin. 
 
 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
146 
38. 
   REPORT  
 
On the fulfillment of the Joint Resolution of Ministry 
of Education and Institute of National Economy 
Management by the Cabinet of Ministers 
dated April 18, 1991, by № 261/25 and  
Supplement to the Statement dated June 14, 1991,  
on the fulfillment of this resolution 
 
In this Resolution № 261/25 I as a Prorector of the 
English Language Azerbaijan University was employed 
to fulfill four following tasks: 
1. To present the structure and staffing plans. These 
documents were presented twice (the first and the 
rewritten second versions).  
2. To prepare the plans of activities of the Rector’s 
office. This plan was worked out, discussed at the 
Academic Council of the Institute of National Economy 
Management and rewritten accordingly. 
3. To work out the curricula and syllabus. 
The original curricula for all majors were worked 
out. The practice of leading Western Universities, 
Soviet and Azerbaijan higher schools, research institutes 
and others was creatively taken into account in 
preparing these documents. The valuable ideas of the 
talented scholars of Azerbaijan, outstanding Soviet 
specialists, also the point of views of Western scholars 
were considered as well. Taking into consideration the 
importance and originality of these curricula more than 
once the round-table meetings with our scholars were 
organized and thorough discussions took place. We 
have recently got some positive reviews on our curricula 
and this process is continuing. 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
147 
4. To organize the 1991/1992 academic year student 
enrollment at the English Language Azerbaijan 
University.  
Advertisements in different newspapers in Russian 
and Azerbaijani were published in a standard format. 
Tests and writing materials for exams were prepared, 20 
different blanks and documents were printed (most of 
them 500-1000-2000 copies). All works planned have 
been completed in order to receive the high school gra-
duates’ documents, the condition of classrooms and 
radio-TV systems has been re-checked. The schedules 
for entrance exams, pre-exam consultations have been 
prepared. It has been decided to invite examinators for 
different subjects from other universities and research 
institutes for entrance exams. It was expedient to form 
the enrollment commission consistent of three people - a 
representative from the English Language Azerbaijan 
University, Ministry of Education and Institute of Natio-
nal Economy Management. 
This information on the fulfillment of the resolution 
dated 18 April 1991, by № 261/25 confirms that we are 
completely ready to hold entrance exams and have 
worked out our educational process. 
In the notes above I provided answers to the most of 
the items of the statement dated June 14, 1991. The 
appropriate answers to other items could be found in the 
official documents. For example, it is mentioned in the 
Constitution of the English Language Azerbaijan 
University that the salaries for staff members are 
defined on the basis of contract, these contracts are 
supposed to be prepared in August. As to the enrollment 
plans on different specialties it is needless to wait for 
the suggestions from the English Language Azerbaijan 
University. The enrollment plan is defined in the 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
148 
resolution of the Council of Ministers of the Azerbaijan 
Republic dated March 18, 1991, by № 41 and it was 
repeated again in the joint resolution № 261/25.  
All of above brings us to a fair conclusion: 
There are no real reasons to hold student enrollment 
at the English Language Azerbaijan University in 
1991/92 academic year. No doubt, there might still be 
some shortages, but all of them are easily rectifiable. On 
the other hand in the 5th article of the joint resolution № 
261/25 it’s noted that various institutions and 
organizations have to render all necessary assistance to 
the university. Probably rendering us this promised help 
will enable us to overcome the difficulties.  
It is necessary to talk about other issues as well. 
Whenever we hold the enrollment - this year or some 
years later, the first year students will still have the 
same classes in accordance with the standard program 
(intensive teaching of English and introductory courses 
on different subjects in their native language). 
After the resolution of the Council of Ministers of 
the Azerbaijan SSR dated December 20, by №286 p. we 
succeeded in gathering the English Speaking scholars 
and mobilized all their offerings for successful 
education. If the opening of the university is postponed 
it will bring about a lot of dissatisfaction and de-
motivate this able group of people. 
If some changes are required then certain 
concessions can be made. For example, we could hold 
the entrance exams now and begin classes on 1 October 
instead of 1 September, or to hold entrance exams at the 
end of July. The other option is to enroll students to the 
preparatory course and begin degree study a year later.  
Taking into account the above information I feel ob-
liged to mention once again that it is expedient to hold 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
149 
the student enrollment at the English Language 
Azerbaijan University this year and begin its activity. 
 
 
39.  W. Shakespeare’s play "The Taming of the Shrew" 
is refered to here. Second phrase is from Samed 
Vurgun’s (1906-1956) poem "The Standard-bearer 
of the Time." 
40. A well-known economist, Nobel Prize winner P. 
Samuelson is being implied. 
41.  The then Chairman of the Council of Ministers of 
the USSR Boris Pavlov. 
42.  Grigoriy Yavlinskiy at that time was known as an 
economist reformer and he was the author of a 
program considered by the government for 
implementation. 
43.  A quotation from Samed Vurgun’s poem "The 
Standard-bearer of the Time." 
44.  A town situated 165 km away from Baku (it is also 
a center of the region with the same name).  
45. Gara Daniz = The Black Sea, Ak Deniz = The 
Mediterranean, Khazar = The Caspian.  
46.  This phrase is from the Khazar 
University hymn entitled "My 
Khazar University" (lyrics by 
Hamlet Isaxanli, music by well-
known Azerbaijani composers Ramiz 
Mustafayev and Vasif Adi-gozalov). 
47.  In 1924 Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic 
issued a decree to transfer from Arabic alphabet to 
Latin and the new alphabet was effective until 1939 
(it should be noted that the Latin alphabet in 
Turkey today was adopted in 1928 and was very 
close to Latin-based Azerbaijani alphabet). From 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
150 
1939 to 1991 Cyrillic alphabet was used in 
Azerbaijan. Nowadays, both Cyrillic and Latin 
alphabets are used. There was an official resolution 
to transfer to Latin alphabet, but it will happen 
stage by stage. More than 20 million Azeris living 
in Iranian Azerbaijan use Arabic alphabet. 
48.  The belt of the legendary ruler Gordy was tied in a 
tight knot. A legend said that he who succeeded in 
untying this tight knot would conquer Asia. 
Alexander III of Macedonia (Alexander the Great) 
(BC 334/333) cut the knot with his sword and put 
an end to this matter. 
49.  Karamov is a personage from the musical comedy 
"Toy" ("Wedding Party") by Azerbaijani writer Sa-
bit Rahman (1910-1970). Karamov is a liar. He in-
sists that he was walking when he was six months 
old. When nobody believed his lie he was per-
sistent: "Karamov can walk." 
50. The secondary school graduates in the Azerbaijan 
Republic have to fill in the application forms and 
present them to the State Student Admission 
Commission. They have to indicate the subject they 
want to study and the university where they want to 
study at. The students are sent to different 
universities according to the results of the entrance 
exams.  
51.  Morril Act signed in 1862 by Abraham Lincoln is 
being implied.  
52. The scientific-philosophical treaties ("Science and 
Hypothesis", "The Value of Science", "Science and 
Method", "The Last View Points") by a well-
known French mathematician and philosopher 
Henri Poincare (1854-1912) are implied here. 
In Search of "Khazar" 
 
151 
53.  This phrase is taken from the hymn of Khazar 
University entitled "My Khazar University" (Lyrics 
by Hamlet Isaxanli, music by Ramiz Mustafayev 
and Vasif Adigozalov). 
54.  Inshallah – a word of Arabic origin used in all 
Moslem languages. It means "if God pleases." 
 
  
Translated from the Azeri 
 
By  
 
Aygun Isayeva/Gardnier   
and 
Afgan Abdullayev 
  
 
 
