1 
 
Rovshan Novruzoglu 
Yunus Oguz 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From the series of international terrorism. Armenian terror 
 
 
 
 
 
 
KARABAKH: 
UNCONTROLLED ZONE… 
 
In the occupied Azerbaijani territory 
- Terrorism 
- Transit and Production of narcotics 
- Burning nuclear wastes 
- Trade centers of children and women captives 
- From the ecological to spiritual terror 
- Training camps of terrorists 
- Transit ways of mass destruction weapons 
- Bacteriological and chemical research centers specified for military 
purposes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Baku – 2002 
2 
 
 
Rovshan Novruzoglu, Yunus Oguz. 
Karabakh: uncontrolled zone... Baku, "Ozan", 2002, 252 p. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This book is on the Azerbaijani region of Karabakh, which has been 
subjected to Armenian terrorism and fallen victim to their aggressive policy. Facts, 
documents and reseach materials collected in the book show Armenian terrorism, 
which maintains close contacts with international terrorism, and their supporters in 
their true colors. The book will be an important historical document for diplomats, 
politicians, military experts, political scientists and empioyees of security services 
researching into "the Karabakh khot" and into the roots of terrorism. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N 4702060200  
047-02 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© "Ozan", 2002 
3 
 
The occupied territories of Azerbaijan in 1988-1994 (Totally: 13.210 km2) 
 
Former Karabagh (Shusha, Khankendi, Khojali, Askeran, Khojavand, 
Agdara) : The Occupation date -1988-1994 (square: 4400 sq.km) 
 
Lachin (May 18, 1992) - 1835 sq.km  
Kalbajar (April 3-4, 1993) -1936 sq.km  
Agdam (July 23, 1993) - 1094 sq.km  
Jabrail (August 23,1993) -1050 sq.km  
Fizuli (August 23, 1993) - 1386 sq.km 
Gubadli(August 31, 1993) - 802 sq.km 
Zangilan (October 30, 1993)- 707 sq.km 
 
So not 20% as it is said, but approximately 80% of Azerbaijan territory is 
under the military-political occupation. 
4 
 
KARABAKH ON TARGET OF 
ARMENIAN TERROR 
 
Instead of Prologue 
 
In front of you is the book "Karabakh: Uncontrolled zone" which reflects 
Armenian brutalities, Armenian terror since 1988 up to now. Armenian separatists 
who likely crusade against Azerbaijan and Turkey for decades, perpetrate terror 
acts, lust for blood of turks, expand their territories on the account of neighbours 
and establish their policy on occupation, could establish a special rejim together 
with their supporters in untornable part of Azerbaijan, in Karabakh. Since 
Armenian' sundeclared war against Azerbaijan, our country had immence losses: 
20% of our lands are under the occupation, more than one million of our 
countrymen are refugees. It goes without saying that the damage to our country is 
immeasureable as the war is in the territory of Azerbaijan and our lands are under 
occupation. But Armenians insidious aim does not only consist of it. Those who 
fancy to create "Great Armenia" resort to sickening deeds. In the book "Karabakh: 
Uncontrolled zone" of politologist Rovshan Novruzoglu and conflictologist Yunis 
Oguz, the real face of Armenian terror and brutalities are revealed in detail. That is 
why this publication is of great importance. The authors prove with pertinent and 
serious facts that Armenians and their supporters perpetrate not only brutalities 
against Azerbaijan un-declared war, but also are engaged in things that outlawed 
by the international organizations. These are mainly consist of growing and transit 
of narcotics in the occupied areas, buring nuclear wastes in Karabakh, creating 
terror camps in these areas, trade on children and women. These facts are stated in 
the book more vividly and precisely. 
Yunus Oguz worked out the theoretical problems in the book, but 
researches have been done by Rovshan Novruzoglu. Before the book "Karabakh 
Uncontrolled zone" both outhors had been known with many theses, monography 
and books. The main burden in the preparation of the book was on the politologist 
Rovshan Novruzoglu. He is the author of researches on the international terrorism, 
mass destruction weapons, trends of religious extremism, global political, econom-
ic, spiritual and psychological ones in connection with islam and non-islam 
fundamentalist centers, and "Azerbaijan: oil strategy and security problems." 
Rovshan Novruzoglu making researches in Pakistan, Syria, Lebanon, Livia, Iran, 
Irag, Turkey and other countries is one of the first politologists investigating the 
diversion plans of terrorists in the occupied areas of Azerbaijan, the nuclear plans 
of Iran, Irag, Armenia, Russia including the international tranzit ways in 
connection with contraband of narcotics. 
5 
 
The book "Karabakh: Uncontrolled zone" is not the product of a day, a 
month or a year, This valuable work is the result of investigations carried out for a 
long time. Rovshan Novruzoglu while preparing the articles in the book used 
history Archives, local and foreign newspapers, magazines, books, the report of 
Secret Service Organs. One of the interesting moments that draws attention in the 
book is the indication of the sources used. For instance, the politologist could get 
the "Secret information" of V.Salayev, the colonel of Russian moto infantry regi-
ment N=366 which directly participated in Khojali genoside. 
Brutalities of Armenian and Russian military detachment, "ASALA", 
"Chekagron" etc, Armenian terror organizations in Khojali are obviously reflected 
in the document. In this document which the politologists managed to get with 
great difficulties the names of Russian officers, direct participants of this tragedy 
are revealed. Referring to the Archaive document of US-11 of February 26, 1992 
of the RF General Headquarter Service, the politologists gave the list of helicopter 
squardian participated in Khojali genoside,. These are the followings: 
 Helicopter N=39 Pilot: Galagchiyan Romb Arutunovich. Lebanon 
Armenian. He was a builder on speciality. 
 Helicopter N=29 Pilot: Zahid Al-Mahammad (Lebanese muslim 
"Hamas" organization) 
 Helicopter N=17 Pilot: Ararat Qrekovich Sarajyan (Yerevan: military 
man) 
 Helicopter N=45 Pilot: Pirimyan Suren Alekseyevich (Yerevan, 
militia/polis). 
 Helicopter N=40: Pilot: Razdan Alekseyevich Minoyan (Syrian 
Armenian. Engineer by speciality) 
 Helicopter N=45: Pilot: Pirimyan Suren Alekseyevich (Yerevan. 
Militaryman). 
From the investigations of Rovshan Novruzoglu, it also asertained that 
chemical weapons were used in Khojali massacre (Germany. Newspaper 
"Bundesver" May 7, 1992. Russia newspaper "Izvestiya" May 13, 1992). The 
colonel Savelyev in his secret information describes in detail Khojali people's 
being burned alive, brutally killed and tortured. 
A special place was alloted in the book "Karabakh: Uncontrolled zone" to 
the Armenians' growing narcotics in Karabakh and tranziting it. According to the 
investigations of Rovshan Novruzoglu, Armenian and Iran dealers are engaged in 
narcobusiness in the occupied Azerbaijan territories. Generally, the transportation 
mechanisms of drugs brought to Azerbaijan territory is of many branch. According 
to the investigations of the politologist, the transportation of narcotics along the 
6 
 
frontier stripes in our occupied lands, is established in planned way. This large 
territory covers Mehri (Armenia)- Minjivan (occupied Azerbaijan territory)- 
Soltanli (Jabrail territory)- Horadiz (Fizuli)- Shahsevan (Beylegan)- etc. R. 
Novruzoglu investigating "Evkrapa" terror group's activity in Karabakh, came to 
conclusion that this group has joined to Astana (Kazakhistan) group of narcobusi-
ness. Because the Kazakhistan net of narcibusiness is larger. So that, 93% of heroin 
85% of poppy (for laboratory), 78% of hash transferred to Russian Federation pass 
through Kazakhistan. According to the investigations of R. Novruzoglu "Evkrapa" 
has been reflected in the documents of USA central Intellegence Office, as one of 
the coordinnators between Middle Asia and Caucasus narcomafia. 
Terrorism is the state policy of Armenia. Because of it, thes country, the 
policy of which is established on terrorism attempts to nuclear cooperation. This 
problem is also broadly given in the book "Karabakh: Uncontrolled zone". 
According to the investigations of Rovshan Novruzoglu, Armenia is expanding 
nuclear cooperation with Iran, Russia, Irag and other states. The investigations of 
politologists show that some companies of Armenia have engaged in this work. 
One of the companies organizing illegally the sale of nuclear technoilogy to the 
third world countries from the territory of Armenia, is considered to be 
"Razdanmash". A group created within this industial enterprise in 1999 and which 
is earring out illegal deals under the name of "Razdan-NOF" group, since 
November 20 of that year, signed a treaty with "Moavenate Bazargane" company 
of Iran. According to the documents and contracts, the work of the companies 
should have been the sale of technical equipments (mainly in agricultural field) to 
each other. 
But from the investigations of the politologists, it turned out that "Razdan- 
NOF" group carried out the role of customer of "INOR" ETM functioning in 
Korolyev town of Moscow, for the third world countries. It should also be noted 
that in May 2002 USA State Department put a sanction to 8companies of Armenia 
for nuclear cooperation with Irag and Iran. Undoubtedly, the facts in the 
investigation of R.Novruzoglu were considered in making these decisions. 
In the book "Karabakh: Uncontrolled zone" detailed information about the 
operations of Armenians on military and civil captives, secret chemical-biological 
storehouses and laboratories in Karabakh was given. According to R. Novruzoglu's 
investigations, only in 2001, 6 scientific-research laboratories were built in 
Armenia and occupied areas of Azerbaijan. For instance, on March 4, 2001 
physiological and ecological researches were carried out in the laboratory built in 
Khankendi. The scientific group headed by professor Adamas Danislovich 
Grigoryan research the genes, differential influences, genetical change of posterity, 
at the Institute of biotechnical and molecular Biology, in Shusha. And this serves 
7 
 
to the work of making preparations for the army, for protection of the organism 
from toxic substances on the license "21504-A-US-04" of Armenian MD. 
Armenians made these experiments on Azerbaijani captives and hostages, children 
and women. 
Te cooperation of "Al-Kaida", Armenian and Kurdish terrorists, their setting 
terror camps in the occupied areas of Azerbaijan, operation of "Haydad", 
"Chekagron", "ASALA," Armenian terror organization "Sevan Meeting" of PKK 
leader Abdullah Ojalan with Kocharyan, the leader of separatist regime in 
Karabakh, O.Arkadi Gukasyan's, as well as the president Robert Kocharyan's being 
the "ASALA" member are dealt with in this book. 
Agression has long been made to Azerbaijan on information field, obstacles 
were created in informing the world community about Azerbaijan truth. But time is 
changing. The international organizatios are informed timely about the Azerbaijan 
truth, especially invader and terrorist policy of Armenian separatists, that could be 
misfortune for the world. The speech of Ilham Aliyev, the deputy, the leader of the 
deputy deliegation of Azerbaijan in Parlimentary Assembly of Europian Council, 
on Armenians' growing and tranziting narcotics in the occupied areas of 
Azerbaijan, buring the nuclear wastes in Karabakh was a kind of foundation for 
exposing the lies of invador state from this high tribune. 
Undoubtedly, it will not be the last case. The book "Karabakh: Uncontrolled 
zone" of Rovshan Novruzoglu and Yunus Oguz published in Enhlish is one of the 
historical works that reveals the real face of Armenian. Together with being a 
serious warning to the supports, protectors of the Armenian terrorists this book is 
also an alert which is ever heard and never ceases. This book is a great source in 
making the Azerbaijan truth, Armenian vandalism known to the world. 
Adalat Aliyev  
Conflictologist, analytic 
8 
 
9 
 
Parliamentary Assembly-Report of debates: Tuesday 24 April at 3 p.m 
 
Mr Ilham ALIYEV (Azerbaijan).- Dear Mr. Chairman. Ladies and 
gentlmen. 
One of the main reasons for the emergence of organised crime is the lack of 
control or complete absence of control over public order by governmental 
structures. Azerbaijan is extremely worried that one of the centres of organised 
crime in Europe is in our territory - so-called Nagorno-Karabakh republic. Not 
only the Azerbaijan authorities but the international institutions responsible for the 
fight against criminality have absolutely no control over Nagorno-Karabakh. 
The occupation of 20% of the territory of Azerbaijan by Armenian armed 
forces left 1 million Azerbaijani refugees homeless and caused enormous 
destruction to our cities, villages, cultural heritage and the graves of our ancestors, 
in one word the whole infrastructure in the occupied territories was destroyed by 
Armenian aggressors, which created the right conditions for flourishing of 
organised crime in the territory occupied by Armenia. 
I should like to draw the Assembly's attention to a few facts that show how 
dangerous the situation is. 
1. The territory of the so-called Nagorno-Karabakh republic is used to 
grow and to transport narcotic substances. That tact is stated in the US State 
Department report on the international drug control strategy, which was 
published in March 2000. Various drug dealers and drug traffickers feel 
themselves very safe and comfortable there. They get support from so-called 
leaders of Nagorno-Karabakh, who use their drug money to increase their 
fortunes, to pay the mercenaries and to continue to occupy land. 
2. It is well known that the former leaders of Russia gave permission to 
sell illegally arms to Armenia worth $1 billion. Most of those arms were located in 
Nagorno-Karabakh and other occupied Azerbaijani territories. I have a question, 
where did Armenia and Nagorno-Karabakh find this $1 billion to buy those arms? 
Everyone who knows the situation in the region is aware that the economic 
situation of Armenia is critical. Armenia lives mostly on foreign aid. Hundreds of 
thousands of people have left Armenia because of the constant economic crisis. 
The answer is obvious. Either they got those arms free of charge, which is less 
likely, or they bought them with their drug money. 
3. As a result of illegal economic activities in Nagorno-Karabakh, this so-
called republic has become famous for money laundering. 
4. In the territory of Nagorno-Karabakh, the armenians hold the 
training for the military formations that are absolutely uncontrolled under 
international conventions on the fight against terrorism. 
10 
 
We ask that all European structures take serious practical measures to force 
the Armenian aggressors to free our land, and to force Armenian occupants to stop 
violating the human rights of 1 million Azerbaijani refugees and to stop using our 
land for their criminal operations. 
 
NARKOBUSINESS TRIANGLE 
 
Armenia and Iran Cooperate on Drugs 
in our occupied territories 
The fate of Karabakh 
 
Ten years ago on May 6, 1992 Murad Abakumovich Shahnazaryan making 
speech before the Armenian community in Isfahan stated that Armenians should 
glance over the way of the Great Tigran and search ways to its lights for 
themselves. Otherwise "we shall be doomed to failure in his shaked world "Mr 
Shahnazaryan goes on later: "To win a nation a people or any ethnic group you 
should sit on their brain. Before its inner world it is necessary to occupy its brain. 
Because everything is controlled from the center of the brain. We shall celebrate in 
some days in Karabakh". (See newspaper Araz 1992; V 11.p2 Iran Isfahan). As to 
Murad Abukomovich he keeps to be one of the general of "Armenian corps" 
functioning illegaly (in fact legally) in Iran territory. As to the "festivity" that the 
general noted, we witnessed it. Two days later Shusha surrendered. 
According to our investigations a person meeting Ter-Petrasyan who came 
to diplomatic meeting to Tehran was Abukumivich himself. They had also 40 
minutes talk. During their talk ex-president Ter-Petrosyan expressed satisfaction 
with the stuff of corps and their armed group moving in the direction of Shusha. 
(The letter of General M. Abakumovich" to the president Ter-Petrasiyan. See: 
Yerevan "Hayastan" Bulletin (is published in Armenian and Russian languages) 
1992/04/07). 
According to the information, General Abukumivich was interested in 
Azerbaijan lands, occupied from Gubadli to Fizuli regions. As to the strategical 
advantages of this lands the territory was bordering zone with Iran Islamic 
Republic. 
Abukumivich: Will there be life in those lands? 
Ter-Petrasiyan: How do you think we can use those lands? 
Abukumivich: Lease a part of them to us. That is to Iran commercials. 
Iranian businessmen can work in those lands. We would help them. 
Ter-Petrasiyan: if it is possible arrange a meeting of businessmen in Tehran. 
Give your proposals. Those lands are already ours...all armenian nation's (See 
11 
 
M.A.Shahnazaryan. "Before the battle and after it". Tehran. "Ararat" intelligence 
1995 p./82 Section" Acquaintance with the President" published in 1000 copies. 
According to "Armyansky Vestnik" the publication of an armenian community in 
Moscow the book was published in 500 copies (1997) in Russian in Stavropol). 
The Armenian General Abakomovich has his own plan in connection with 
the occupied bordering lands of Azerbaijan. This plan was the component of a 
strategical plan called "Great Territory" developed by Iranian Economic 
Intellegence Office and Armenian Corps leaders. As to "Great territory" plan it was 
an issue raised by the members of Armenian Comminity in Iran Parliament on July 
12 1990 Now the knot was coming untired. The signature in "Great Territory" were 
seen one by one, another Armenian officer who had a signature in the "Great 
Territory" Rafik Sirajyan Ishakovich confessed: ".. the psycological condition 
among the civillian and soldiers of Karabakh is not in order because it was natural 
after the crimes terror acts perpetrated by Armenians in Karabakh". The general 
Abokumovich had his own economic thesis on occupied Zangilan-Fizuli border 
stripes. And this program was interpreted among the Armenians as 
"Abakumovich's program on level of lives" 
According to the information we got, the General Murad Shahnarzanyan's 
letter dealing with the "Economic Program" in connection with Zangilan-Fizuli 
frontier stripes was put into consideration at the meeting of the Security Councel 
held in Yerevan on April 1994, with a participation of the president Ter-Petrosyan. 
 
Information about the land 
 
According to our investigations, on April 13-21, 1994 a group of econ-
omists consisting of 4 people came to Zangilan. This group programized on the 
basis of thesis of eonomic department of Armenian Intelligence Office had to 
research the strategical points of the occupied territory make division in the area, 
prepare separate proposals on the fields. 
At the results on May 26, 1994 information "On the Geo-economic 
condition of Zangilan region" was prepared with signatures of the can didates of 
economic sciences Rasulbekyan, H. Ajaryan, M.Atom, U.Saakyan and 
O.Markaryan. This information was introduced to the intelligence department of 
MD. The doctor of economic sciences (He defences his doctoral thesis completing 
the reseaches in his scientific work in February of 1995 and goes to Moscow to 
work). Oranel Markaryan in his book of essays "Economic Thinking" notes that a 
part of land in the direction of Zangilan, Gubadli did not fit as they were already 
inarable. 
12 
 
Those lands have to be reclamated. "According to our researches, only in 
the territory of Isgandarly village (North part) the land has lost its chestnut 
colour..it was bluish grey, muddy colour" (p 19). 
The scientist writes in his book called "The colour of Fauna:".  "...The lands 
in the south parts of the region between areas called Razdara and Bartas of 
Zangilan have kept their fertility...When I explained the colonel Boris Kapilyan 
who was collecting information on the strategical points in this zones and working 
in Armenian MD, that these lands could be useful he asked: "What can be planted 
there?" I said: "Everything... - flower, vegetables, grain legumes," The colonel put 
his hand on my shoulder and added : we shall lease these lands to our Iranian 
brethren. We have no such opportunity to do ploughing here..." (See: ibid Moscow 
"Armenian news" - p3 1995N=24)". 
Then the Armenian economist focuses on the brief interview with Kapilyan. 
"..He asked me: (i.e. Kapilyan)" 
-How do you know that the soil is spoiled? 
I said:-Where biological deliterious elements consentrate, the soil is 
considered to be spoiled. The soil becomes crusted and eroted. The necessary 
climate in the soil disappears..! saw all of them in Zangilan territory. 
I asked: You mean nothing can grow there? 
I said: What do you want to plant there? (My question was not answered..)" 
p 19 
 
Tuberculosis 
 
107 ha preserve (it was created on June 1974) in Zangilan territory has been 
destroyed. Plane tree wood was sold to the building industrial complex of Iran 
furniture factories. For instance, the wood of 42 ha (plane trees) specified for use in 
the militiary industrial complex of the country was changed into powder being 
passed through special equipment and chemical detergent solutions. And this was 
used in packing the heavy weapons and ammunations. From our investigations, it 
turns out arrested on transportation drug trafficing was as the following: 
-Did you know that transportation of drugs in the territory is prohibited? 
-Yes, I did. 
-Where did you get these drugs? 
-I bought them in Vajnaly valley. 
-Where is it situated? 
-Near Kaleybar. 
-Whom did you get Aga Latif? 
-Pirim Aga. 
13 
 
-Who is he? 
-He is an Armenian... (See newspaper "Iran" 04/1995/ p4). 
There is not any information about an Armenian Pirim. As to Primyan, we 
got such information: Migran Pirimyanis the chairman of coordination comission 
of Tehran eparchy with Artsad (Khankendi). He s an economist. He owns a 
premices of 1800 sm2 in Karabakh. He has factories in Kargijahan and Minjivan 
that prepare medicines from the medicinal herbs. In these factories the Armenians 
as well as Persians have been employeed. As to the settlements Vajnaly and 
Kaleybar that the defendant Aga Latif highlighted, we have clarified it. It is curious 
that the defence Yusif Mahmidi notes Vajnali as the north area of Iran in his 
investigation materials. In a report of Iran officials of July 2, 1996 to UNO on 
struggling measures against the purchase, transportation and sale of drugs Vajnali 
is noted as the planting center of drugs. In the intelligence materials that the Ahar 
city "Sepah-e-Pastaran"(the guard of Islamic Revolution) got (extract fron this 
report is noted in an official document which Iran addressed to UNO), it is stated 
that Vajnali is the settlement in the bank of Araz river. "It is uncontrolled and 
solitary place..." Therefor runs: "..There are great opportunities for growing the 
drugs in Vajnali, Bartar areas. Because these places are uncontrolled and without 
owner..." (See: newspaper "KHazar"1996/09p3). 
Vajnali and Bartaz the name of which are mentioned in an official 
documents are Azerbaijan territoriy, a piece of Zangilan region occupied by 
Armenians. But Kaleybar belongs to Iran. It is an ancient settlement in the west 
part of Tabriz. There is such a claim in the information spread on March 26 2001: 
"In Kaleybar village of Iran, 3 armenians, 2 persians and one Azerbaijanian were 
arrested. These were engaged in drug trafficing and transportation of drug" (See: 
ibit.N=42p1). 
April 21, 2001 from the notes of journalists E.Ohanyan: "Armenian soldiers 
together with Russian frontier troops fired wild poppy bushes grown in 22 ha field, 
(the field of Armenian Bgaraten Devidyab and Persian businessmen Abdul Ali 
Safaye).. " (See: ibit N=50 23/2001.) 
 
The Karabakh Narkobusiness Nest 
 
Listing these facts we witnessed one more time that narkotics are grown in 
our occupied territories. A part of settlements are under control of Iran. For 
instance, every month approximately 12 kg of heroin, 14 kg of cocaine, 25 kg 
synthetic drugs are transferred by the way of contraband to Jalilabad, Masalli areas 
of Azerbaijan from Kaleybar and Jermi directions of Iran. We take average. Let us 
precise the facts a little more .."monthly weight of narcotics transferred from 
14 
 
Gubadli and Zangilan areas to Iran is 25.5kg..." (See: Tehran. "Sepah"- e-Pastaran" 
bulletin. 2001 p12 N=4). 
According to the information we got (mainly the collection of UNO 
strategical information) at present 8.5million people in the world are heroin 
addicted. Besides 13.3 million addicted to cocaine, 141.2 million marijuana, 280 
million to synthetic drugs. According to the documents of FBI only in USA every 
430 people from every 100 thousand are drug addicted. A person who 
"investigates" a dollar to the narkobusiness, earnes 12 thousand a year. Further it is 
also stated that the annual earnings from drug trafficing make up 400 billion USA 
dollar. It makes up 8% of the world trade. 
Occupied territories, uncontrolled zones and areas play strategical role in 
development and increase of narcobusiness. For instance, only from Afganistan 
4.600 tonnes drugs were transferred. 
According to our investigations increase of narcotic plants coming to 
Azerbaijan area is being observed. 
 
Confidential information... 
 
Chemical Weapons In Khojali 
 
Sniper girls came from Lebanon took part in the genocide 
Armenian terrorism... "ASALA" and Haydad" groups in the Khojali 
tragedy... Unknown realities 
 
"Special" meeting 
 
A person, by nickname "Misha" looked with approval at Boris Gevorkov, 
who had him get used of visiting Baku, enabled his free visits to the scientific - 
research centres on oil and chemical industry, "issued" visa for him, who was one 
of the "Godfather's" and the ideologist of Karabakh. On 14 January, 1992 Mikhayil 
Pogosyan - "Misha" gathered information on Baku, its social and political status, 
geopolitical situation of Khankandi and went to Moscow, to "typist" Larisa 
Suderenko (?) who was in the Russian Ministry of Defence. 
At one time working as a general cosntructor in the military industrial 
complex (bombs for bombing aircrafts were prepared in the workshops) in 
Novosibirsk, Mikayil Pogosyan suggested the western part of Azerbaijan which is 
the most beautiful, valuable place from geographical point of view for testing the 
radius of new balls invented by him in the Headquarters of Russian MoD, suitable 
time of bombing target. He didn't mention the name of the place at that time (He 
15 
 
will mention the name of that place in the "special meeting" of Headquarters - 
V.R.Savelyev). 
That meeting began after two days - on 16 January at half past six in the 
evening, too. For Commander of 366 - motor infantry regiment of the Russians 
located in Khankandi, Colonel Zarvigarov had also come there to attend the 
meeting. After "special meeting" he introduced Colonel Pyotr Maslennikov, Chief 
of special department controlling the protection of martial secrets in the motor 
infantry regiment to "Constructor" Mikhayil Pogosyan. 
They returned to Khoyali, again. At that time a professor by name Serj 
Babayan was with them. He was sent to Khojali from Washington as representative 
of Hayk Astarjanyan, Head of Strategic Research Centre belonging to Armenians. 
In fact, financial problems were under his responsibility. Associating closely with 
the Research Centre in those years related terror act in Khojali, Mahmud Anvar 
Chayan, chemist by profession called on the Presidential Office in Baku on 
January 19, 1992, the Supreme Soviet on 21 January, the Popular Front 
Headquarters on 22 January and gave his information on terror act to be 
happened... On January 24, 1992 he was sent to Tehran (?). 
 
Some soldiers of Regiment 366 were demobilized 
 
Concerning Serj Babayan, Hayk Astarjanyan's information provider, he was 
introduced to Yergeni Kabokikh, Head of the third battalion of Regiment 366 in 
Khankandi as an authorized delegation of "Haydad" - Armenian terror organization 
setting bloody traces in the history of international terrorism. 
On January 23 of that year an order was prepared with the approval of the 
leadership of Russian MoD (to say so would be more correct) in Regiment 366. 
According to Order No 93/5 (forged Order) some soldiers serving in Regiment 366 
had to be demobilized. As a result, according to the prepared order with the 
internal seal of regiment, 194 persons were demobilized from the Army 
(Gerogians, tatars, Byelorussions, Turkmans, Kazakhs and Lezghins were set free). 
Serj Babayan paid the expenses for travel and clothes of the soldiers more 
realistically, he made them sign the document written "201" that belonged to 
"Haydad" (donation document) for each money they received. Getting "Signature 
wages" the soldiers were immediately sent to Yerevan and from there to their 
homeland. 
On January 9, 1992 airplanes from France, Lebanon, New-York landingine 
after another in Domodedova international airport of Moscow immediately started 
off to Yerevan. The very day the aircrafts left Yerevan for Khankandi. And in 
16 
 
Khankandi Advisor Serj Babayan, Colonel Pyotr Maslennikov met pro - "Haydad" 
people came to Karabakh. 
Note: Let me remind you that only during last three months of 1985 
membership fees of 133 thousand manats from Georgia, 1 million 212 thousand 
manats from Armenia and 720 thousand manats from Azerbaijan were paid to 
Lebanon for "Vartan knights" and this money was deposited in "Armenia Lots - 
216" bank in Beirut. We will return back to it. Because this money covers only 
Baku. And Armenians were getting armed and purchased military supplies with 
that money. 
 
 
"Haydad"ians in Khankandi 
 
We would remind that all these confidential missions were implemented by 
the residents of Intelligence Agencies subordinated to the HQs of the Russian 
MoD. 
Demobilized soldiers from Regiment were replaced with specially trained 
"Haydad"ians. Two commanders, Armenians by nationality gave operative 
information to the Armenian groups in the capacity of "experts" about Khankandi 
that was selected as an attack object. Colonel Suren Ohanyan (he was both Lamvel, 
Sirdak and Seyran), Colonel Vartan Chitchiyan (he was both Valeri and Vargash) 
held continuous consultations with the "guests" coming to the training camp in the 
Bodovo settlement in the north-west of Khojali. Consultation plans were sent now 
from Yerevan, now from Moscow, Tehran, now from Lebanon, France... 
On January 30, 1992 leaflets with the outline of the map of "Great 
Armenia" were thrown over the settlement of Khojali and Shusa from the "MI - 8" 
military heliport. That very day group of "Vartan knigts" sang the anthem of "Great 
Armenia" and took a vow in the "Alverdi Church in the Sarikeshish Settlement 
(Northern part of Khojali). 
On January 29, 1992 that group coming to Khojali explored Western part of 
Khojali, developed plans on the basis of operative -confidential information. 
 
Operative - "Chevik" "Haydad" group 
 
On 29 January the uninvited guests coming to Khankandi were divided into 
operative groups of "Chevik" for doing some work in the direction of north, south, 
west and east of Khojali - Shusha. Training zones and area were allocated in the 
company. 
1. "Haydad" group prepared for Khojali-Shusha direction: 
17 
 
- Suren Pashayan headed this terror group. The group by code "16 c 97" (i.e. 
17 persons from Haydad organization, 97 persons from Regiment 366) in the form 
of separate groups settled in Irek, Mon, Vanli, Pichonis, Dig, Sejimli, Ardashava 
settlements. Those groups could establish strong communications links among 
themselves by confidential calls - with the signal of calls such as "Arsakh", "Sunj", 
"Vano". On the other hand, all the churches in those territories were declared 
number one headquarters. 
Suren Pashayan was born in the village of "Zanjurli" of Armenia in 1953 
(the south-east settlement of Yerevan). When he was 2 his family migrated to 
Lebanon. He was a member of "Armenia Struggle Alliance" in Beirut. He was 
trained at the military wing of the organization together with the supporters of 
"Hisbullah" of Lebanon. When he was 17 he went to France with his father. He had 
worked for two years in the France section of "Krunk" organization established by 
Armenian Community. After some years he was accepted to headquarters of the 
organization with the letter of "Haydad" (the supporters of "Haydad" called that 
letter as "recommendation letter") - with the letter signed "Asayan". 
Suren Pashayan was known by nickname "Canavar" ("Wolf") who was 
perfectly educated in the millitary field and took part in the terror acts against 
Turks. 
Cruel and ruthless terrorists like Gurgen Amiryan, Tomris Asadyan, Sharl 
Balayan were included in the divided groups. 
Russia's Ministry of Health and MoD HQs assigned duties for those groups: 
A: - a) to finding out Turks - Turk soldiers in the military unit of 
Azerbaijan; 
b) to learn camps, groups belonging to Afgan rebellions in the area; 
c) to learn territorial circles of military administrative centres of Khojali; 
B: - a) to take children being from Armenian families, to ensure their 
"securities"; 
b) to maximum benefit from conflicts among the military voluntary unit 
of Azerbaijan; 
c) to provide the first phase of "Great Armenia" movement program; 
d) to paralyze law - enforcement agencies in the direction of Khojali - 
Shusha. 
Pro - "Haydad" groups were divided into two military blocks in the 
direction of Dashbulag and Khanabad. Qurgen Amiryan headed Armenian military 
block of Dashbulag and Sharl Balayan headed Armenian military block of 
Khanabad. 
 
 
18 
 
"Vartan knights" group 
 
And the second group: the East group in the direction of Khojali-Susha - 
"Vartan knights" group (let me eremind you that Washington section of this terror 
group applied to USA congress on June 4, 1998 with a letter. They called the 
congressmen not to abolish section 907 applied to Azerbaijan). On February 3, 
1992 Colonel Pyotr Maslennikov, "constructor" Mikhayil Pogosyan met Qabriel 
Shekhanyan representing Vienna section of "Vartan knights" in the military 
headquarters of Khankandi. They discussed joint plan. The plan focused on 
strategical points of Gulably, Pirjamal, Nakchivanik, Abdal, Malibayli settlements. 
In fact, Qabriel Shikhanyan was originally from Yenikand settlement. He 
was born in the family of Murad Simonyan known as "Usta Simon", Generally, the 
Simonyans went to Brussels from Yenikend under the name of migration and from 
there to Vienna. Qabriel Shikhanyan's uncle Frahad Simonyan received Canadian 
citizenship. 
Fighting for "Great Armenia" idea this man headed the "Gardash" group, he 
inflicted reprisals to the Azerbaijanis driven out of Armenia at the beginning of 
April, 1988 and he was awarded with Mesrop" Order for this (Golden order 
established by "France" Armenian community). 
 
Special program of "Vartan knights" 
 
"Vartan knights" had two main goals: 
A: - a) to use 1988 syndrome among Khojali people, to put into practice of 
"Special Programs" to create feeling of fear around Khojali, b) Flexible terror acts 
before unexpected military attacks. 
V: - a) to learn crossing points and roads, connection between the 
supporting groups in the territories covering all the ins and outs of Khojali, 
preparing companies. 
The East Group of Gabriel Shikhanyan acted with code "14 - 64" (i.e. 14 
"Vartan knights", 64 Russian soldiers and officers). 
On February 9, 1992 telephone message came to the name of Colonel 
Zarviqarov from Russian MoD. In the phoned telegram coming at 16:00 (i.e. at 
four) was informed that soldiers serving in the regiment would be separately paid 
wages instead of prize, officers would be provided with apartments in any places of 
Russia. 
That day adviser Serj Babayan submits to Russian Generals the bank 
account book opened to his name in Washington ("Eukpara" newspaper. 1999, V 
1-21). 
19 
 
"Anthrax" 
 
The phoned telegram received by general read said that physician brigade of 
Ministry of Health was sent to hold" operative measures in the regiment. Brigade 
provided vaccinating against Anthrax and tuberculosis inflammation among 
personal staff. After two days new technology added to the military supplies of the 
regiment. 
Under the leadership of military expert, Colonel Nicolay Medvedyev, "set" 
of motors for using in to-be-produced "T-80" tanks, missiles, new squared bullets 
for AK... were given to the commandment of regiment to be brought to Khankandi, 
and from there to Khojali. All this should be tested in the allocated zone. Testing 
Zone was already known, too; Khojali area located in the 14 km of northwest of 
Khankandi. 
And an interesting aspect was that in that period phoned telegram addressed 
to Moscow headquarters from Regiment 366 informed the tuberculosis disease 
reached mass scale in the areas of Khanabad, Pircamal. And also a copy of this 
notification sent by General Zarvigarov was delivered to the Ministry of Health. It 
remained as the component of planned crime of "Great Armenia" movement 
against Azerbaijanis. 
 
Secret Armenian front 
 
On February 16, 1992 a company named "Secret Armenian Front" attached 
to Regiment 366 was established in Khankandi. Armed Armenian detachments, 
hanging the map of "Great Armenia" on their heads, representing Armenian 
community in Lebanon, America, Canada, Switzerland, Turkey, Italy, the 
Netherlands organized the foundation of this platoon. On 17 February "Shushanik" 
sniper detachments consisting of girls joined that front. Having high military 
training and high shooting indicators those Armenian girls had come from 
Lebanon. 
Khachik Vartanyan headed "Secret Armenian Front". At that time heads of 
36 famous Armenian firms rendered massive assistance to "Secret Armenian 
Front" with US $ 470 thousand under the name of "relief". 
Note: According to facts that we investigate 974 thousand manats were sent 
to the Armenian community of "Armenian secret front" in Isfahan from Baku, 
Ganja, Nakhchivan including Agdam - Fuzuli zones of Azerbaijan in 1987 and 
"Fral - Atik - Ar men 002" document, i.e. the receipt was given them on it (No 
doubt, it was the state of being without control of Baku leadership at that period). 
20 
 
At one time served in HHO of Canada, retired Major Khachik Vartanyan 
involved the Armenian youth living around Khankandi in "Great Armenia" 
program. One after another the youth joined the front. So the unemployed 
Armenian youth were provided with the financial aid. As a result, Khachik 
Vartanyan established his supporting points in the Qajar, Veysalli, Zorisli and 
Chanakch settlements. 
 
Terror began in Khojali 
 
The night of 25 February over to 26 February, 1992 the area of Khojali 
settlement was occupied. 
On 25th of that month "Azg" published in Yerevan wrote: "We liberated our 
native land from Turkish invaders. Glory to the persons who died, united and 
helped us for "Great Armenia" ..." 
Khojali was destroyed. The first phase of "Great Armenia" plan prepared by 
Armenian community in the international scale, the first item of this movement 
was executed together with pro - "Haydad" and "Asala" people. 
The motor of "T - 80" tank having glorious place in the millitary-industry 
complex of Russia, Ukraine MoD missile having heading of to chemical weapons, 
new round bullets belonging to automatic "Kalashnikova, vaccines against 
tuberculosis and "Anthrax", "bronojelets" were tested (bullet-proof vests). 
Khojali became trial polygan, as well. The lungs of the youth didn't stand 
firing shells, they bursted... Among the old directly nervous system paralysised, it 
ruined their eyesight and their blood vessels. The women deprived of mother milk 
and on a mass scale they were poisoned "Circulator" bullets hit the target, but they 
didn't remain there, circulated again and went out. This bullet didn't leave anybody 
targetted alive. 
"When I could not help 8 - 9 year old girl with bullet wound at 10 steps of 
distance from me. I am afraid of the day God will punish me. Damned days 
substituted each other". 
And this is from "Confidential information" of V.R.Savelyev, Colonel of 
"Special department" No 02270. 
 
ECOLOGICAL TERROR 
 
Armenian female terrorists are active against Azerbaijan today 
 
Professor Movses Shorenatsi claims in his book of "Armenian history" that 
"Ara Prekrasny" (God of Armenian) always saved Turkish world from misfortune 
21 
 
and protected from natural disaster. As they had nomadic life he gave them the 
right for living on the foots of Ararat mountain. Mr. Movses writes in other sourse 
"... Sentence to death each Turk from the day of birth. Don't give them the 
opportunity to resurrect. Because each resurrected Turk causes mischiefs and 
commits tragedy for us ... (see: Mr. Khorenaqdi: "Ararat" newspaper, Beirut 1999, 
page 2, Lebanon). 
Mr. Harri Sarkisyan, Academician of Armenia NAS mentions to the 
Armenians: "...Listen and be aware. Each Armenian child coming to the world 
should understand who his friend is, who his enemy is. I wouldn't like our children 
to open their doors to anybody's face. An Armenian child should realize while 
being in the cradle that why they were born, for who they will live. For this each 
Armenian Mother must read the admonition of Great Tiqran... and "St Ara" into 
the ear of the newly born child, she should make the child drink a prayer water 
(see: O.Adamyan Moscow "Information on ancient history" 1984, page 46-51). 
Writer Silva Kaputikyan concretizes the subject a bit. She writes: "Hayk 
should know that an Armenian born in the family of (Armenians loving Allah) not 
for living but first of all for helping the Armenian nationality. Therefore, it needs to 
tell loudly and loudly into the ear of a newly born Armenian Child: "Eyy... Aram... 
your enemy is Turk... Motherland is prior to Allah, Church is prior to Motherland, 
Great Tiqran is prior to Church, Great Armenia is prior to Tiqran..." (see: 
S.Kaputikyan "First time... Book of Essays NASA speech at the NASA's meeting 
1998, Yerevan, it was published in Russian and Armenian, page 46-48). 
 
Ecological plan of Armenians 
 
According to our investigations "moral - ecological program" has its origin. 
The purpose of this program was to divide into parts of the human beings 
psychologically and to disable them. The Notorious writer suggestes his successors 
that it needs to knock down each turk, especially, its Azerbaijani wing. 
"... Denounce them. Rebell against them. Our struggle against each 
Azerbaijani should be done in the frame of "State Program" (see: The same book 
and speech. 1988 V - 12 page 76). 
According to the information, after it in order to work on writer's thesis a 
group was established consisting of a group 8 persons of S.A.Akopyan. Well - 
known personalities of the republic included in this group. 
On December 29, 1991, the primary variant of co-operation on security and 
strategic problems of Armenian was given to L.Ter-Petrosyan to look through. 
According to our investigations, on February 16, 1992 new appendices were 
added to the document prepared for the sake of national interest in Security 
22 
 
Council held in Yerevan. O.Shahnazaryan and Q.Markarov, the leaders of 
"National Liberty Movement" of General Headquarters located in Yerevan 
published that document and disseminated it under a new name. The booklet with 
the issue of 1500 copies was titled: "The Ecological Program" of Armenian nation 
against Azerbaijani nation" (see: Yerevan, Q.Markarov. "Ecology", 1994). 
In accordance with the investigations, on May 21, 1992 document titled 
"Ecological program of the Armenian nation to the Azerbaijan nation" headed by 
Academician A.Agambekyan was discussed by the members of Armenian 
Community in the famous hotel of "Continental" in Paris (see: Yerevan 
Q.Markarov: Ecology 1994). After the additions of Academician - economist the 
document was published (So, an ecological attack began against Azerbaijan). 
Section "A 214-1" of "ecological program", against Azerbaijan. This 
program whose content was kept confidential, focused mainly on two issues: 
1. To spread preparations affecting to the nervous system of men and 
paralysing them. 
2. To operate especially among the girls and mothers studying in 
the secondary and higher education system of Azerbaijan. 
3. To establish the work in the sphere of reducing mass increase of 
population in Azerbaijan (see: The same source, page 76). 
 
Incurable Diseases 
 
According to the information we have that program against moral purity 
and rich nature of Azerbaijan was not a spontaneous program. For realizing the 
program Yerevan had addressed to the Armenian communities living in the world 
by the line of "Vatan" society and the word "Azerbaijan" was taken out the 
preliminary variant in the appeals. As a result Yerevan got first aids to the appeal 
connected with the "Armenian ecological disaster" from Armenians living in 
France, Californiya, London, Lebanon, Syria, Iran and Irag. For instance, 
bussinesmen living in Marsel, Armenians by nationality Qustar Bablumyan, Robert 
Safaryan sent US $ 102 thousand by cheque to Yerevan. According to information, 
on October and November, 1992, three small laboratories started functioning in the 
direction of Dagliq Karabakh. In accordance with our investigations, one of these 
laboratories (DK - 3) was directly interested in researching "pesticide" chemical 
production and primary results under laboratory conditions. 
According to our researches, on March, 1992 Tehran bought 500 kg of 
"pesticide" production from Beijing. On May 26, 1992 Yerevan bought 150 kg of 
"pesticide" for experiment from Tehran (In getting different poision materials and 
preparations and gas was widely used from this material). On June 19, 1995 
23 
 
Military physician, director of small scientific-research centre in Gorus, Professor 
K.Fazilyan addressed to the head of country with an official letter. According to 
the letter, the syndromes of diseases that were impossible to learn their symptoms 
had appeared in the area. 
For instance, in Azerbaijan and its occupied territories new forms and 
syndromes of tuberculosis were created and spread among pregnant women. 
According to the information, only in the territories of Fizuli and Jabrayil regions 
found out four types of tuberculosis (see: "Pediatri" newspaper 1995. No19, page 
4). 
The first experiences were carried out on the Azerbaijanian women who 
were taken hostages. Armenian scientists obtained serious results as everything 
was considered carefully. Some parts of chemical battalion in Gorus were moved 
to the occupied territory of Jabrayil region. Their purpose was to realize the first 
plans of "Ecological war" in the direction of Agjabadi and Beylagan. According to 
our investigations, on August 9, 2001, the Ministry of Health of Armenia proposed 
a new project in connection with the lives of the people who were infected with 
incurable diseases in the region. 
They proposed the problem of moving some parts of patients infected with 
tuberculosis from their territories to the South - West of Dagliq Karabakh. 
As a result, according to "Shata Project", on September 14, 2001, 115 
persons infected with tuberculosis were sent to the two - storeyed hospital in 
occupied Guneykhirman settlement. Due to the lack of beds patients were located 
in the additional unfinished building. Physician specialist group from Iranian 
Islamic Republic was sent to the region to work there. According to the project 
worked out in Yerevan the people infected with AIDS were planned to send to Ali 
Madatli settlement of Agdam. 25 Armenian women infected with the desease had 
already been taken to the region. On the other information it is said that there were 
allocated a space for graveyard for the dead from tuberculosis. According to the 
information we have, on September 30, 2001, being invited to the conference held 
in Yerevan on health problems, preparing projects related health problems in 
Khankandi, and expert of non-governmental organization, physician-professor 
Ararat Yekunyan mentiones in his speech: 
"The lives of the patients sent to the zone are obscure. Khankandi does not 
have financial possibilities, as such. Death cases are increasing. The South of 
Khojavand attracts attention as the death zone" ("Arstakh (Khankandi) tele-
channel, 2001, Kh.S.). 
 
 
 
24 
 
"ERRI - BAY" poisonous gas 
 
According to our investigations, the ecological status of the region was 
taken under the control in the departments and sections of military - intelligence of 
Armenian Ecology Intelligence project titled "Circle" was worked out on the 
initiative of Albert Boldasaryan, Captain of Security Service. In fact, "Circle" plan 
directed to the ecological status of Azerbaijan was connected with the name of 
chemist-scientist Karapet Kasakhyan. On the one hand Captain of Security Service 
prepared plans, on the other hand he proposed the problem of establishing 
"ecological terrorists". 
According to the information chemist-scientist, Karapet Kazakhyan lived in 
USA till 1981. He came to Yerevan from Beirut in 1976. Chemist - scinetist 
worked in the "Natrium" rubber industry centre in Yerevan in the first years. He 
did investigations in connection with AES. But after the occupiation of Dagliq 
Karabakh K.Kasakyan changed his working principles. We prefered to work in the 
other field. The program and an official document directed to the poison "stream" 
from the territory of Armenia in the direction of Azerbaijan was also connected 
with his name i.e. he was the author of the "Circle" project, too. 
Experiment - test rooms of Armenian scientists were established in the 
occupied territories (Lachin, Gubadli, Kalbajar regions). A branch of the scientific 
- research was to poison mass the bordering villages in the territory of Azerbaijan. 
Some parts of poisonous gas named "ERRI - BAY" keeping as a secret in the 
military intelligence of Armenia were decided to use as a chemical weapon. This 
chemical weapon is in the shape of dust and it was passed to the Azerbaijan 
direction from Karabakh and from settlements near Nakhchivan by means of 
special electronic installations. According to the primary source, strongly affecting 
on the nature and human beings, causing some diseases, the sphere of influence of 
this chemical weapon covers from 5 km to 75 km distance. The result of scientific 
works that carried out in this direction of Armenia remains seriously. In the health 
bulletin of "Ideal" publishing in Yerevan - there is such a note in the issue 6 of 
1994: "... Armenia does much work in order to protect and increase its military - 
potencial power. For instance, firstly, we achieved serious results after test 
experiments in the section of specified area - in the Beylagan and Agjabadi 
regions..." 
The results were not shown openly in that document signed by intelligence 
collective Saat Alekseyevich Kasparyan. But, when we look through the ecological 
and moral - phychological status in the regions whose names were mentioned in 
the document in 1994 the views became clearer, and it becomes clear as a result of 
test - experiments carried out by Armenian scientists in the direction of Beylagan - 
25 
 
Agjabadi, infant mortality increased 3,5 times in the villages, (Gahramanli and 
Shahsevan) near the border of Beylagan region in 1994. Out of 5 pregnant women 
two died together with their children. At the same, we cannot help thinking of the 
results of the problems in the territory of Agjabadi regions (Arazbari and Kurdlar). 
 
 
Terrorist Women 
 
According to our research, special group of Security Service of Armenia has 
been carried out an active work in this direction in our territory since 1990. 
Detachment consisting of girls and women functioning in the terrorist group of 
"Armenia National Freedom Movement", according to primary source, began 
functioning in the territory of Dagliq Karabakh. For instance the group of 
"Yerangiley" took an active part in burning and blowing up of the gardens and 
forests in the Garigishlag village - in the territory of Lachin in 1991 (at 22:00, the 
night from 22 december to 23 december). The activity circle of the woman terrorist 
group consisting of 14 persons (Armenian by nationality) increased from the 
beginning of May in 1992. The members of the group took an active part in 
destroying of their homeland, burning the forests, killing women and children 
without inquiry. 
If we look through 1991, we can get more serious results. According to our 
research, Yerangily Abramovna Vaskanyan called "Yerangiley" was born in 
Asgaran in 1962. Working as a pediatritian Yerangiley has been the member of 
"Intigam" group established in Gorus region (on May 19, 1989). Two members of 
the "Intigam" terrorist group have come till Baku abusing the fact that the lands 
were left uncontrolled and borders, they hold meetings with the officials in the 
Ministry of Defence General Headquarters. Armenian woman Yerangily 
Abramovna was known as an Azerbaijani woman everywhere according to her 
notes in the "Armenian history" newspaper (on July 15, 1999). "At that period I 
would carry out any plans easily..." (see: same source). 
Pro - "Intigam" woman claimed that she was in Tehran on May 4, 1992. She 
met the then officials of Azerbaijan leadership (on the eve of Shusha's occupation). 
Today "Ecological program" of Armenia against Azerbaijan remains in force for 
theses of this program are incomplete for the present. As saying of Armenian 
politologist (RF) Grigori Grigoryants: "Armenians should be able to realize all the 
strategic programs till the last item in the direction of Azerbaijan. It is impossible 
to keep incomplete any program against Azerbaijan..." 
Let us look at the list of Armenian killer terrorist women: 
-Laura (Arnold) Gerorkovich Lalayan (1962 - ?) 
26 
 
-Irina Andryevich Kasparyan (1960 - ?) 
-Rozanna Sayavushovich Kapilyan (1964 - ?) 
-Evangiley Abramovich Vaskanyan (1962 - ?) 
-Laluya Abramovich Chinaryan (1967 - ?) 
-Susanna - Garik Sitaryants (1966 - ?) 
-Aramisk Bakhtovich Amiryan (1968 - ?) 
-Berta Danilovich Danilyan (1963 - ?) 
Background: Laura Gerorkovich Lalayan was born in Sumgayit in 1962. 
She worked in the passport registration department of Urban Apartment 
maintenance office. She moved to Yerevan in 1989. She published the list of 
Armenians living in Sumgayit in the bulletin "Krunk" issued by opposition in 
Yerevan (Issues 6-8). According to information, she works in the millitary - 
intelligence service of MoD of Armenia since 1993. 
From 1 May to 10 May, 1992, she took part in being interrogating of 
captivated female children in the battle of the direction of Shusha. 
She headed the revanchist - terror detachment of "Laura" organized by 
Armenian women in occupation of Shusha. She took part in Dashalti operations of 
"Tigran" organized by army units of Armenia. The writings were published about 
her in the monthly journal with fascist bias of the "Con Berchi" organization 
named "American Orinion" (The opinion of America) published in America on 
March, April of 1993 (see: The same journal. 1993, III-IV). It is also found out 
from the materials Laura Kovornovich has put an end to 19 children captivated 
from the territory of Shusha. Distingushing with her cruelty Laura had a school and 
a special amputation room in the Khalfali settlement of the western part of Shusha. 
The children had to pass the following procedures until amputation room: 
 to listen to Armenia's anthem 
 to tell the verse "My dream" in Azerbaijan variant (The author of this 
verse is Armenian poet Aleks Ohanesyan) 
 to bow to cross and to pray to the "tortured Armenian people", to 
entrust them with God 
 to read the prayer "Avraam who is close to God") of Pope of Rome. 
For the first time this prayer was spread by "The Pope of Roman" in "The 
voice of Vatican" Radio on August, 1991. 
After it Laura sent some of the children that lost their parents, being driven 
out of their native country to the military hospital in Yerevan. 
The book named "Laura - the girl being disappointed in life" written by 
journalist (Syria) Omar Said Farrahen is about an Armenian terrorist woman, Laura 
by name and her actions, "pages of heroism" of her life, and it was published in 
27 
 
"Al-Vahda" Publishing-House with thousand copies in Damashg in 1996 (in Arab, 
Russian and Armenian. Editor: O.Solomonov (Russian), S.Ohanyan (Armenian)). 
Beating about the bush Author Omar Said tries to make clear that this 
ruthless and cruel woman who lost her maternity honor "enjoyed her miserable 
behaviour with the children... She was prompt and quick. At a wink... She achieved 
her goal". 
Through surprising, Omar Said hides the actual observations in his writing 
and does not reveal the want of the terrorist woman. As result of our investigations, 
in the 16 - page newsletter titled "National information book" of "Krunk" 
department in Shusha is given an explanation the veiled labour of Laura 
Chevokaich Lalayan. In his "Geroicheskoe mist" "Heroic ideas" writing printed on 
the ninth page of the newsletter the author R.Babacanyan writes: "... This brave 
Armenian girl (i.e. Laura - R.N.) calls with her deeds to irreconsilability against 
enemy. Laura is the founder of "new front opened against Azerbaijan, against 
Turkish world in the national liberation movement..." In 1992 Armenian schools 
No 1110 and 1888 were demonstrated the album named "Laura's Shusha battle". It 
is shown on the other information that Laura had close relations with France 
physician and the surgeons of the hospital named after Nekker in Paris. 
Though "Heroic ideas" touches upon all these problems he thinks it needs to 
keep eberything in secret. But it becomes clear during the investigation that the 
physicians of Nekker hospital are serously doing investigations on transferring of 
cranial skull against the weakness of genetic immunity in the children to be served 
in the future France Army. I keep silence after all problems which at some point 
follow and compliment one another closely. I put aside notes for thinking. 
 
Killer Rozanna Kapilyan 
 
Background: Rozanna Sayalvushovich Kapilyan: She was born in the area 
named "Pogtavoy" in Ganja in 1964. From 1983 to 1986 she worked as a nurse in 
the "Railway" maternity hospital (on that time, i.e. on July 21, 1985 in the 
"Communist Kirovobad" newspaper. "Newly born... (then trouble) (author: 
"Q.Asgarov) informs that there were many death cases among newly born children 
in "Railway" maternity hospital. This problem had been discussed in the board of 
the Ministry of Health, Physician S.Avakyan, O.Potapovaya, D.Shahnazarova, 
F.Ambarsumov were given official reprimands). 
In 1989 Rozanna Kapilyan moved to Leninakan (Bashkand) inhabited by 
Armenians. On September, 1989 she went to Vardenis region of Armenia to 
permanently settle. On July 2, 1991 she wrote to the department of Armenia 
National Liberation front of Vardanis region and immediately she also established 
28 
 
sniper group consisting of "patriot" girls. From 1992 she was adopted to the 
terrorist organization of "Armenia Revolution Army". According to our 
investigations, from March 22, 1992 she established the base of Khankandi of the 
organization. She received assistance acounting to US $ 6 thousand from the 
Ministry of Defence of Armenia and US $ 14 thousand from "Kevercheyan" 
Charity Fund functioning illegally into the Armenian community (Isfahan) in 
Tehran mainly in the church. 
From 1998 the detachment of Armenian terrorist woman Rozanna Kapilyan 
(the girls consist of 8 persons) had declared the diplomats of Turkish world to her 
targets "... The only way to acheive fair trial is by means of armed forces" (see: 
Newsletter "28 May" Artsakh (Khankandi) 1998, No 4, No 6) - saying it Rozanna 
intends to Azerbaijani diplomats in abroad as a part of her target (Newsletter is 
publishing in Armenian and Russian). 
 
"Moscow detachment" of Kapilyan 
 
According to our investigations "Fighters course" terrorist detachment 
headed by Rozanna Kapilyan functioning since August 21, 1995 in the Qarsili 
settlement of Shusha has not handed off its dirty intention yet, today. According to 
the information, on September 19, 1995 Rozanna Kapilyan met with Shamil 
Basayev. At that time she was presented books dealing with the battle and struggle 
methods of Chechens including "The method of Fight", "The Chechen syndrome in 
"Taliban" combat", "Caliph", "The Caucasus" published in Empire in 1994. 
Note: According to the information we have obtained, the book written 
Amir Khattaby (Chechenstan) named "12 methods" of self-sacrifice for fighting 
and killing" widely spreaded in the troop detachments in occupied territories of 
Dagliq Garabag by Armenian terrorists on November, 2001. The book was 
published in "the Caucasus" Publishing House in the Southern Caucasus (in the 
territory of Makhachgala) in Armenian, Chechen, Avar and Kurdish. 
According to our investigations, Rozanna Kapilyan was close connected 
with the terrorist women of Chechen - Dadashova and Teymoskhanovay in the 
terror acts held in Pyatigorsk (RF) in 1997. She took directly part in Armavir 
explosions. But according to unclear reasons, the Security Service of RF deleted 
Rozanna Kapilyan's name in the events from the investigation materials "Rosy 
handkerchief" group (no doubt, Rozanna's group) of terrorist Armenian woman 
Rozanna Kapilyan established in the territory of Vayk region (Armenian) was 
active in the realizing of Armenian Kurdish joint provocation plans named 
"Khatun" in the direction of Nakhchivan. Publishing in Moscow the bulletin of 
"Armenian news" No 2001, XI. 9, No 24 note that all the members of "Rosy 
29 
 
handkerchief" group remains as an example to others with feelings of national 
patriotism. 
From the materials we have, it is obvious that Rozanna Kapilyan's "Moscow 
detachment" has been established and the main members of it are Armenian girls 
studying in the area of RF and then remaining unemployed. 
13 Armenian girls are engaged in their "Involvement" plans among 
Azerbaijanis who went to Russia to seek job and to study in from April 14, 2001. 
Some of them met with Azerbaijanis, create commersial relations and as a result 
some of them are married with them, then they come back to Azerbaijan again. 
Terrorist Kapilyan's group establishes connestions with Azerbaijani 
intelligentcia working Moscow, with the specialists on science and technique (on 
cybernetics and computer, nuclear physics) and for obtaining information they 
make a great effort to establish information exchange with them. 
 
BIOTERRORISM 
 
Armenia threatens Azerbaijan and Turkey with biological weapons. I want 
to remind you such a fact:-In 2001 political events changed and replaced one 
another (in time and place) 2.5 times more speedily, i.e. frequently than in 2000. It 
is noted that in 2002 this indicator will be 3, in 2003 it will be 3.8...And all this 
affects badly "The Conception of National Security" of any state, and everything 
changes. 
According to calculations, if any country, nation, people or policy is left 
aside of processes or delays to them, it is due to be removed from map, to be split, 
to diminish or to join others in order not to collapse in 2010. For instance, the 
general of Egypt Rauf Al Manou who accuses US Central Investigation Bureau in 
training "Talibans" reminds: "...To delay or to be left aside of political events is 
equal to collapse. A country, nation, people or society that survives information 
war will live and create. Every country head should call his people to struggle for 
information. Because who has information will be the one with power and 
authority..." (Egypt. From the report of "Military Counter-intelligence". April 19, 
2000.) 
The second power of time and world is in mass destruction weapons. It is 
not a possibility. It is a reality. From the war headed ballistic missiles that differ for 
target reaching distance substituting each other to bacteriological weapons that 
destroy nerves and wholly rots person directly ruining the genes in "Rakst Atlas" 
keep to be a danger. And this danger is not weakening, on the contrary it is 
increasing. 
 
30 
 
Yeltsin Supporting Yerevan 
 
Famous professor Kheyraddin Gilinj who is engaged in Turkish nuclear 
physics says that Turkey must surely product nuclear weapon. Construction of APS 
will be a center in the power of 2800 Mg Vt. It will be built in Meroin town, in the 
coast of Mediterranean Sea and the first block will be put into use in 2005. 
It is natural. Because NATO member countries can't defend Ankara in the 
information war against Armenia that deals with nuclear weapons, as well as 
chemical and bacteriological weapons and searches Turkish boundaries. As the 
result Turkey is thinking about protecting itself from Armenian provocation. It is 
also natural, because in every NATO member country there are at least 20-25% 
Armenian politicians, let's say, in military industry complexes, in parliament and 
departments, in intelligence centers, in banks and companies. And according to our 
analysis, not only Turkey but also separated Turkish peoples need at least support 
of West in information war. It is so no matter we like it or not. 
Let's analyse. Which NATO country supported general Huseyn 
Givrigoglu's, the chief of Turkey AFGH fact and alarm that there were mass 
destruction weapons in Armenia? However on June 14, 1994 the "caring" president 
of RF B.N.Yeltsin who was receiving disgraced Zori Balayan together with 
Armenian physicists and president Ter Petrosyan put such a question: "... What do 
you lack now?" Disgraced Zori Balayan said without any shame:" ...Boris 
Nickolayevich, we are grateful for the favor you did (?) ...Armenia surely needs 
nuclear weapon in order to survive as a state and to be protected from the Turkish 
world..." Boris Nickolayevich" ...We need time. I 'm sure we'll have it too..." 
(newspaper "Artsakh". June 26, 1994. Khankendi. N 43, p.2." Boris Nickolayevich 
promised...") 
 
Armenia will Become a Base of Chemical Weapons 
 
According to our investigations, North, South, East and also West of the 
world are still powerless before mass destruction weapons. That's why a new 
military strategic establishment for measures against mass destruction weapons 
was set up in the USA. The new establishment called "Military-confidential 
operations" is headed by brigade general Bryus Loulor. The General Headquarter 
of the establishment was appointed Norfolk city (Virginia State). This military 
political organization the annual budget of which is $4million has 28 experts. 
In my view, all peoples of Turkish world should think over establishment of 
"Regional Unique Security Doctrine". It is interesting that Arabian world, i.e. 
Persian Gulf countries have already stood for such a unification. Sheykh 
31 
 
Mahammad bin Zahid al Nahayyan- the general of United Arab Emirates, the chief 
of GH proposes: "...It is high time to unite. 
A Security Doctrine should be established. Foreign military forces are 
temporary. We should invite Iraq to this unification in the interest of Arabians...To 
unite... To unite... To unite... " 
This is the strategic program of Arabian world which sets in motion world 
infrastructure with oil, against Christian world or sly enemy which prepares or 
plans to prepare mass destruction weapons. 
But Caspian littoral states that have oil, rich fuel resources have not such a 
strategic program. And we should not doubt that Armenian which attempts to mass 
destruction weapons will challenge each of these countries (Caspian littoral states-
). Henry Stemson Research Center in New York has already submitted to White 
House the new version of strategic report called "Toxicological Archipelago" 
which deals with chemical and bacteriological weapons (December 20,2000) and 
on p. 14 of this report- in the paragraph "CIS countries" the name of Armenia is 
stated. And it is stated that Yerevan will become the potential base of chemical and 
bacteriological weapons in near 5 years. 
 
Armenian Operations on Captives 
 
According to our investigations, 9 groups of special assignment within 
frontier stand detachment. In ground troops in Armenian territory that is boundary 
to Nakhchivan-Armash, Rind, Zaritap, Agdui, Kajaran settlements will execute 
security issues in chemical and bacteriological war (?). (In every detachment serve 
18 people). 
There is such an address in Moscow: Leningrad avenue, apartment N80. 
(There is also an artificial board on radio appliances there). Through our 
investigations one of the interesting facts was that in 6-storey grey building were 
carried out tests with mass destruction weapons as well as radar preparations top 
secretly. One of these testing groups is led by doctor Ambarsum Georgiyevich 
Muradyan. Pay attention to the theme of doctor's dissertation of this person who 
was once (1988-1990) working in Armenian NAS Toxicological Institute: 
"Toxicological processes in Caucasus genes immune preparations". According to 
our preliminary investigations, the Armenian researcher made his first researches 
from July 22,1994 to June 14,1995 in captured territories of Azerbaijan, in captive 
camps, especially on Azeri captives kept in Shusha prison. Mr.Muradyan writes in 
his report (July 21, 1995) addressed to the Secretariat of Scientific-Research 
Institute dealing with preparation of radio- appliances: "...I was satisfied with the 
32 
 
first variant of my tests. In the test ward specified for me 3 out of 6 "volunteers" (?) 
could not stand the preparations. 
The other 3 have already cured. They feel well. Rashes on their faces have 
already disappeared. Their blood circulation is normal..." 
One of the interesting aspects is that the director of the institute -general 
Boris Vinogradov has confirmed this report with signature and seal. 
From the other side, during the investigation it turned out that Adnan 
Khashoggi, the Lebanese leader of "Caucasus Investment Bank", the central base 
of which is situated in Washington also assisted the Armenian scientist with 
technical equipment in the amount of US $147 thousand. 
 
 
 
 
Secret Storehouses 
 
Another Armenian scientist Anostas Gurgenovich Karpov has been invited 
to conduct his experiments together with Persian scientists in scientific-research 
institute engaged in microbiological issues in Tehran since September, 2002. 
However doctor Abdullah Mazandarani, general secretary of the association of 
assistance to people suffering from chemical and bacteriological weapons in Iran 
Islamic Republic states in his report (December 3,2001, parliament): "...During the 
war with Iraq 25 thousand Iranian soldiers and officers died from chemical and 
bacteriological weapons. 65 thousand people are paralyzed." From the other side, 
Armenian microbiologists that work in Ashtarak-2 (Armenian MEA* territory)- 
E.Ashkinazyan, D. Davidyan, O. Ohanesyan will participate in the experiment in 
Northern Korea too. It is an interesting and serious issue. Because South Korea is 
the country which has the biggest arsenal in preparation and usage of chemical and 
bacteriological weapons. There are 8 institutions that can prepare 15 tons of 
chemical -toxic substances and bacteriological viruses a day in North Korea. One 
out of 4 scientific - research centres in the North -East of the country works top 
secretly. There are 6 different storehouses in the country. And one of the "Umfi-3" 
type storehouses in the capacity of 25 tons is already planned to be built in the 
territory of Karabakh in the middle of 2003. 
According to the information of Judit Miller, New-York politologyst, 
(Newspaper "New York Times", 2000. 4-16) a new chemical weapon called 
"Novichok" has been produced in RF. (2 chemical elements unite and create a fatal 
weapon. Those compounds are used in shells too."...In the journel "Sintez" 
published in RF (Moscow) (2001. VII -2) Armenian scientist L.M.Teroyants 
33 
 
states:"...The weapon called "Novichok" is a "binary weapon". I am grateful to the 
Russian scientists who appreciated my labour in preparation and production of the 
weapon there...(?) We tested this weapon which paralyzes nerves and "rots human 
beings"(?) in "Shusha" area..." 
In this regard the head scientific worker of Henri Stimson Centre in 
Washington - Ami Stimson states:"...Russians will never destroy these weapons 
volunteerly. On the contrary, they will sell them to their partners and 
allies...America should think about it carefully."...(USA. Report made for 
Pentagon.2001, X -16) 
We should not forget that V.A.Togosyan and A.G.Ashakyan, the emloyees 
of physiological laboratory on nerve systems situated in 22 Orbeli Street in 
Yerevan were sent to business trip to Karabakh. (1998-4-XI) and created there a 
branch of this laboratory. Because the scientists conducted their first tests on our 
captives in the frame of "Hayastan" Beneficial Aid Society in Karabakh. 
 
Laboratories in Karabakh 
 
According to the information, in order to abolish chemical and bac-
teriological weapons in CIS countries, $18.6 million per year is required. 6 
different scientific-research laboratories were built in Armenia, as well as, in 
captured territories of Azerbaijan during 2001. For instance, the laboratory built in 
Khankendi (March 4,2001) conducts physiological and ecological researches on 
human beings. In Shusha a group of scientists led by professor Adamats 
Danishovich Grigoryan investigates genes, differential influences, genetic changes 
in the Biotechnical and Molecular Biology Institute. And directly with licence 
"21504-A-VS -04 "of Armenia MN they are preparing medical preparations for 
protection of the army from toxic substances. 
We also found out through our investigations that all of the CIS countries 
are powerless before ever possible bioterrorism. 
Margaret Khemberg, the leading expert on bioterorism and chemical 
weapons of American Ministry of Health and Social Care writes:"...It is a real 
danger. We should overcome this danger." Also John Henderson, the director of 
the centre investigating problems of bioprotection of population attached to John 
Hopkins University writes:"...Such kind of attack is possible within next 10 years. 
And it is possible that this attack will be from Iraq, North Korea, Iran and Lebanon 
sides. It is important that one of the CIS countries should participate in this 
process..." 
34 
 
Toxic Microbes are Prepared 
 
According to our investigations, 2 scientific-research departments of 
"Vector" biological laboratory of RF are situated in captured Khojali and Zangilan 
territories. It is also interesting that professor Sergey Netrosov, deputy of the 
laboratory was sent to a business trip to Karabakh in 2000-2001 and met with 
Armenian scientists S.T.Petrosyan and Sh.O.Mikoyan. 
We should also note that 4 thousand people work in "Vector" and 15% of 
them are Arnenians by nationality. In "Vector" centre biological toxic microbes of 
4th degree are being researched and new ones are prepared. The experts have also 
learned that it is possible to destroy 50% of any territory with these microbes. 
There's no vaccine that would prevent it. 4 laboratories in "Vector" are preparing 
microbes that would result in death. Here work 6 people, Armenians by nationality. 
And there's no vaccine against them. For instance, new conclusions are 
made about "Ebola" virus. New types of "Elghefalit" virus are prepared. There are 
a lot of refrigerators in the main building of "Vector". These numbered 
refrigerators are supplied with high power. And there are approximately trillions of 
bacteria there. Enthony Kordesman, the specialist of USA on biological weapons, 
the expert of International Researches and Strategic Investigations Centre in 
Washigton says: "lt is not possible to enter there...You are checked thoroughly." 
Military doctor G.O.Babayan, the Armenian researcher engaged in 
toxicology in his  discussions  with  Beyrut scientists (meeting  of August, 2001   
on the subject "Views on  new biological information,.. "Moscow) highlighted that 
"we can easily enter there for the exchange of experience..." During our 
investigations we also found out that there are 47 such kind of centres in RF In 
Armenia 14 such kind of laboratories are funtioning. Beginning from November 21 
of last year 4 refrigerators for storage of bacteria in "Vector" for their usage in 
testing areas were stopped on the pretext of technical unfitness and transported to 
the territory of Karabakh. And it forecasts the next disaster for our lands that are 
not under our control. 2 of those refrigerators were transported towards the 
borderline with Turkey, 1 of them in the direction of borderline with Nakhchivan, 
the other one to Jabrayil region. According to our investigations, while the 
refrigerators were installed in predetermined places, Russian and Armenian frontier 
guards told the special security detachment to be careful in some technical issues. 
After all these observations Dennis Deplanter, the colonel of Pentagon notes in his 
report:"...We are trying to find out yet..."But we are asking: To find out what? 
Armenian professor V.S.Gevandyan draws the microbiological map of 
captured territory of Karabakh (especially, for experiments in settlements in 
Zangilan and Gubadli) in the Microbiology and Virusology Institute of RF 
35 
 
(Moscow region, Pokrov city). Professor Varonik Gevandyan was conducting his 
scientific research mainly in the direction of anthrax. 
On November 3, 2001 according to the opinion of military experts of 
London, it was informed that works in the direction of invention of "ethnic 
weapons" in some countries are finished. Among these countries Iraq, Iran, 
Russian and some CIS countries are stated. Through our investigations we found 
out that it is not difficult for, let's say, Russia to create such a weapon. And it is 
interesting that in the production of this weapon red pine tree is used. According to 
the information of 2000, groups of RF cut red pine trees from the area of 12 
hectare of Lachin and Kalbajar forests, (see: Arushan Jigarkhanyan, the doctor-
ecologyst, the member of group engaged in ecological issues in Karabakh. 
Khankendi. Newspaper "Ararat", 2000. XII-4) 
It turned out that one of the creators of this ethnic weapon is Mr Serj 
Hasankulyan, the professor of Armenia MEA. And yet no vaccine for this weapon 
has been invented. It is also known that some soldiers fighting in the Iraq direction 
from Persian Gulf were struck by diseases spread by these weapons and left the 
army. At the result, Ministry of England in its № N secret reports sent to the Prime 
Minister and to the Headquarters of FT (2000. X- 4) notes that such a virus exists. 
 
"Anthrax" in Armenia 
 
During our investigations we have also found out that famous Armenian 
scientists on microbiology Doctor Burgen Agurenevich Shakaryan and Artunen 
Saakovich Artunen together (of course, with the help of Russian 
scientists)established special laboratories on anthrax in both Armenia (Yerevan) 
and in captured regions of Azerbaijan (Gubadli). But Armenian specialists getting 
aware of the danger, transferred the laboratory in Yerevan to the direction of 
borderline with Turkey. (July 2, 2001). And the aim was to use it in the preparation 
of biological weapons in military-industrial centres of Armenia in the result of their 
researches. One of the interesting aspects of it was that no one asked these 
scientists in both Yerevan and in our captured lands: What are you doing? Or 
what's your aim?... 
However Feyzullah Yusif, the employee of Beyrut Biological Research 
Centre being the guest of B.A.Shakaryan and the scientific worker S.O.Kocharyan 
in April, 2000 writes in his travel notes named "Researches of Armenian 
scientists..." in the newspaper "Aztag" (May, #26) published in Lebanon;"...I was 
in the scientific laboratory of one of my Armenian brother. We should also think 
over what I saw, the scientific conclusions....Because there is such a danger as 
Armenia for Lebanon too. 
36 
 
But viruses of anthrax which was observed in April, 2000 and which was 
already inevitable on February 3, 2001 spread in Armenia... But the professor had 
intended to test this virus first of all in the territory from captured part of Karabakh 
to the places where Azeri Frontier troops are placed - Tartar, Goranboy, Aghjabafi 
and also in the direction of Nakhchivan. (See: the report of Armenian MEA for 
July 21, 2001) The report was prepared with the signature of Dr O.D.Galabekyan. 
The final document of the meeting on toxicological conclusions. P. 9) 
We should not doubt that this matter could have been realized in the 
direction of Azerbaijan too. But the Armenian scientists feared that everything 
could turn vice-versa as the wind in Azerbaijan changes its direction and speed 
very frequently. Though it sounds very strange, they were brought to such a 
conclusion by A.Prokhorov, the professor (on microbiology) of Moscow Federal 
Scientific Research Centre, (the very document p.21). But the mechanism meant 
for revival of anthrax has already been established in Akstak 2, in Armenia. And 
this is the beginning of expected crimes...The fact that there are anthrax viruses 
that directly affect "SI-SI-ER 2"and "SI_SI_TH 5" genes in human body invalidate 
people and kill them exist in Armenian territory and that scientific laboratories are 
built in our captured lands makes the problem more serious. 
 
TUBERCULOSIS 
 
Those who get uncureble diseases are moved 
to the occupied territories. 
Biological Depression 
 
According to our investigations, on February 17, 2002 at the meeting of 
health workers in Yerevan professor Akor Arakelyan who carries out serious 
researches in the field of microbiology, revealed in Shusha problem that upset of 
biochemical and genetic features among the armenian families is increasing. 
According to the professor approximetly 54.3 % of armenian families "Laws of 
genetic changeableness" have broken. 
According to our information, the professor who established micro-
biological scientific researches 1992-1997 on the Azerbaijan captives, (he has 
closed laboratories in Gorus and Vardenis settlements), sees the ways out in 
cleaning armenian territory from the people, infected with uncureable deseases, 
reconstructing the parts of the area subjected to biological and ecological 
depressions, creating separate changes for invalid and disabled and for those who 
are invalid from birth. On February 25 2002 he sends his proposals in connection 
with it to the Security Council and writes: "Mr General! My proposals are directed 
37 
 
at future armenian generation being physically healthy, morally rich, 
phychologically strong, mentally and intellectually developed. Adopt my program 
as a component of Armenian National Security Conseption.. (Armenia. "Special 
Bulletin of NAS Yerevan. March 2..2002 p12" ) . 
According to our information, on March 3 the professor was invited to the 
ministry of defence. He was asked to develop a special program in connection with 
proposals he made. Military expert intelligence Colonel Arkadi Migranyan meeting 
with professor remined him not to limit the program with Armenia's and consider 
Karabakh territory too. Such announcement was given in the 10th issue of 2002 of 
"Military Bulletin" (has been published since 1991 in Russian and Armenian 
languages with 1000 copies) which is published with the financial support of 
general headquarter in Yerevan, the professor of NAS A. Arakelyan submitted a 
"Special Program" of 14 pages to the Security Council of the country. The 
assistanceof the secret services of Armenia should be in theimplementation of this 
program 
 
"A Special Program" 
 
According to our investigations, the essence of the "Special Program" 
consisting of 14 pages was revealed as the following: 
The first variant: To provide taking the people infected with hard and 
incurable deseases out of the city where people live dencele. Setting the 
tuberculosis clinics, oncologic hospitals, health clinics of those who subjected to 
depressions, shocks and stress and lost their work ability in 200-250 km distance 
from the dwelling centers. On the first stage this process should be carried out in 
Yerevan, Razdan, Kalso, Sevan, Sisyan settlements and continued from May 10, 
2002 till 2004. 
The second variant: State Medical Institute, the treatment prevention faculty 
in 1983. He worked in military hospital for two years. Then moved to Yerevan for 
permanent residence. He has scientific researches inconnection with genetic 
changeability. 
Henry Ayvazovich Arustampan was born in 1950 in Damascus. He came to 
Yerevan to fight in the volunteer armenian detachment in theoccupation of 
Karabakh. In 1994 in the newspaper "Sisyan Heros" (the newspaper started its 
publication on May 141993on August 9 1995 its publication was terminated) 
Zorik Alaverdiyan the principle of Agudi school village, who knows him 
personally writes:"..when I heard that one of the fighting heros for our lands (he 
means Karabakh) R.N. ii Henry Avazovich. I became glad. I know him personally. 
38 
 
In 1980 when I was in Suriya I witnessed his patriotic work.." /Sisyan heros/1994 
N19p3 
Shahab Al-Gasimin who fighted in Karabakh in 1992 in his essay book 
"Way to the homeland" which is published in Suria, writes: "My aquaintances 
among the fighters in Karabakh were a lot. Henry Ayvazovich attracted my 
attention. He was one of the members of Armenian National Liberation Movement 
in Damascus.." 
"His name is in "ASALA" is honourable folder" /Damascus. "Al-Vahda" 
publishing house". Way to the homeland" book 1996 p34 
Expert Yangibar Erokulovich Galustyan worked an engineer during 1980-
1985 in Ganja Helicopter repairmant plant. According to our investigations, each 
of the settlements mentioned in the special program Yerevan, Razdan, Kamo, 
Sisyan has according to professor Akor Arakelyan, its own serious demographic 
problems. In his report addressed to the Security Council, Yerevan and Sisyan is 
indicated with facts and fugures as cities with suisides./30.03.2002/ 
For instance according to our scientist, in 2001 the number of suiside was 
2.5% more than in 2000. Separately in Yerevan area the viruses of tuberculosis 
syndrome not any preparation Vaccinis discovered yet for treatment of these 
syndrome. 
At the result, tuberculosis clinics, experimental laboratories in Yerevan, 
Razdan, Kamo had been closed from February was transferred to Vardenis region, 
it caused the rejection of the local people. According to theinformation at the result 
after some days the tuberculosis clinic was transferred to Zar settlement in the 
territory of the occupied Kalbajar on March 2.2001 
 
AIDS In Yerevan 
 
According to our investigation, approximately 26.7% of the population in 
Yerevan infected with tuberculosis. Only in the mentioned city he number of AIDS 
infected people makes up 419. 
We do not include 21 persons died in 2000 and 32 in 2001 The number of 
people who got cancer has increased 7.6times in the last 6 months of 2001 than 
2000. During the last 4 months of 2001, the number of people died from this 
desease was 126. ("Capital Health of CIS countries" Moscow 2000). 
According to the toxicologist Armaic Sattaryan who has included into 
"Business Comission", "..revealing these figures, also the hospital and clinics" 
located in city center psychologically influences the young generation .. We should 
immediately use the deserted areas in Karabakh" /newspaper" Armenian 
community" Khankendi 2001. N=16/ "The Capital Health", the comment of the 
39 
 
book) At the result on March 29 mutual asssistance document between Armenian 
Ministry of Health and Ministry of Defence, was signed for realization of the 
program. On theorder of the Ministry of Health dated 2.04.2002, "Special health 
maps" to the republican Cartography Institute was drawn in connection with 
Karabakh areas. And themarksof tuberculosisclinics anthrax and oncological 
hospitals, lunatic asylums (mad houses), health care zones for disabled to be built 
were put on this map. 
After demonstration of the maps issued by Armenian Cartography Institute 
in 1000 copies, in Arsakh TV channel, physician-phycologist Agasyan Aravisyan 
writes on Aprel "...We need the assistance of our sisters and brothers living abroad, 
for building the health care centers specified in Karabakh territory. We have made 
challenge. We should-train thepeople for charity and benevolence. You should 
remember that what we do it for welfare and development of armenian people, 
future generation." 
According to preliminary information, transfer of people dying, abnormal 
born children patients suffering from incurable deseases, has been realizing from 
April 2, 2002. According to our investigations the-program "Fighting Month 
against infectious and contagious desease in the Region", developed on March 27, 
2002 in Armenian Health Ministry was realized beginning from April 2. According 
to the result Armenian Security Counci, this process should not have mass 
character on the first stage. Setting gradually the process was advised. Because this 
problem was not met unequivacally, caused confusion and exitement among the 
people. As the propaganda program of the government was law, much work had to 
be done. The fact was that, our occupied territories were reoccupied by Armenians. 
 
Karabakh is also the testing area of tuberculosis 
 
According to the information, this problem was considered in Armenian 
Security Council to be serious and important from the Strategical view point. On 
the first stage, a physician brigade consisting of 40 compitent and experienced 
doctors was mobilised. Volunteer groups consisting of unemployed graduates of 
the medical colleges in Gorus and Sisiyan werecreated. During 10 years 34 houses 
ruined in Zangilan, Jabrail and Fizuli regions, as well as in Gubadli, Hadrut, 
Agdam were reconstructed with the help of militiary men. 
According  to  our  investigatons, on  April  4, 2002 Strategical Operative 
measures plan called "Project-02" on Gorus and Gafan areas noted as a frontier 
settlements was discussed in Armenian MD. At the meeting it was noted that MD 
had spent from his account 847000 on these issues, on the first stage. 
 
40 
 
The physician of Gorus city hospital Mr.Bablumyan noting all of these as a 
humanist step, gives such a revelation in the news bulletin in of "Voice of 
Yerevan" radio prepared for foreign countries: "..Looking for policy in this step is 
ridiculous. It is a serious and humanist and witty step by Armenian Government, 
there is no any serious purpose in transferring the patients to the picturesque zones. 
The supposition of their recovery being more seriously treated, is high" /2002.IV-
2/ Voiceof Yerevan radio /Persion Bureau/  
According to the information, the "division" made in Armenian MD is 
designed as the the fallowings: 
a) Transferring the patients with infected hard tuberculosis inflammation 
from Yerevan Central city hospitals: 
b) -To Zangilan Settlement : (to Razdara and Ordakli villages) (Laying the 
graveyard in Minchivan area) 
Note: From the fact and information we got it turns out that, armenians 
keep the names of occupied regions in the division documents as they are. 
According to the initial information, from April 2 to 5 of 2002, 87 dying 
patients of the heavy syndrome of tuberculosis, transferred from Yerevan area with 
special military helicopters to Gorus and Gafan regions. And from there they were 
distributed to areas of Jabrail, Fuzuli. 
-To the Jabrail settlement: (A plot for grave yard was alloted in Khorovlu 
village area. In Hajili and Minbashli villages, in the houses considered beforehand 
created condition for patients with cancer) 
-To the Fuzuli settlement: (In Ushbulag and Juvarli villages the little houses 
of soldiers were operatively repaired. But in region center a land plot is alloted for 
grave yard) 
This time Arman Galayan the demobilised colonel from the intellengence 
service of Armenian MD makes an interesting revelations to "Vestnic Armenia" 
bulletin. In his talk with the commentator Galin Avakyan he states that this transfer 
Policy is not a new issue. This issue was arosed in 1994. But it caused great protest 
in Yerevan. Fromother side, one part of the facts were commented in the interna-
tional organizations, democratic institutes differently. The intelligence colonel goes 
on: "..Today the work is carried out considering the law. Not any patient is forced 
to be transferred. From the other side, the number of population living in poverty is 
great in Armenia. The patients who are living their last days and whose recovery 
are not possible keep to be load on their families living in poverty. Already the 
relations of the patients understand that their patient for example, who got canser, 
faces death and there is not any hope for his/her recovery....The people understand 
all of this. From the other side the transferred patients keep to be under control of 
doctors..."Strauropol" Vestnik bulletin of the same title. 
41 
 
In fact, all of this is nothing but confession. A new plan of moral and 
psychological terror on the governmental level was realised. The armenian death 
camps laid in Karabakh was the beginning of a big policy. 
 
 
Armenian Move to Karabakh 
 
According to our investigatons, the transfer policy of Yerevan officials in 
the direction of occupied Karabakh is not today's plan. All this-policy started on 
February of 1994. It was sounded on May 5 2000 in Armenian Security Council 
during the dicussion of the document "On National Security Problem of Armenian 
People"/ In the speech of general O.S. Bagdarsaryan /. During the discussion it was 
also noted that it should be adressed to the leaders of communities, churches in 
abroad to assist the ousted, bitten, lonely armenian people within CIS. According 
to the information we got on July 7,2000 at 21 o'clock with Baki time" The Pope 
lohan II addressed through Vatican radio. In his address the Pope states that if any 
of armenians living in Rome wants to move to Karabakh area, to own a house, to 
light "the extinguished hearths", he is ready to bless them. 
According to our investigatons, the first family from Rome businessmen, 
"the father of priest Albertino" Eramus Sarkisyan with his son come to Khankendi 
/2002.21.07. "Stainza Sera" newspaper. N=81.p4/He is living there up to now. 
Following him, on April 15-20 2000, 26 armenian families moved to Karabakh for 
residence. 
From the fact we got, it is also becomes clear that after the meeting held on 
May 5, letters for aid were sent to the leaders of Armenian community in France, 
America (mainly Califomiya) Iran, Russian Federation, Argentina, Lebanon, 
Suriya.. on behalf of the president Robert Kocharyan. One of the letters was 
published in "Lavie-(Life) journal published in Paris on June 6, 2000 (N=28p2)" 
As to thelist of Armenians coming to or being moved from abroad to 
occupied Azerbaijan lands during 1991-2001, this is as the following: 
1. France 
Paris:3 families in 1995, 21 families in 1992, 19 families in 1999, 33 
families in 2000 
Marsel: 15 families in 2000  
Lion-8 families in 2000 
2. Lebanon: 
Beirut: 42 families came to Armenia. 13 of them moved to Khankendi in 
1999 
3. Argentina: 
42 
 
Buenas-Ayres: 5 families /in2000/ 
4. USA: 
Washington: 4 families /in 1999/ 
5. Californiya: 11 families in1999, 4 families in 2000, 
6. Suria Arabian Republic 
Damascus:9 familiesin 1996, 2 families in 1997, returned to Yerevan. 
7. Livia 
Tripoli: 16 families in 1995 
8. Sudan: 
Khartum: 3 families in 1999 
(Bulletin-I.R.S (Paris 1997, N=6)). "Ararat"- (Lebanon, 2000, N=26), "La 
Nasion" (Argentina, 2000.N=28), "America"- (New York, 2000 N=4), "Tishrin"-
/Suria, 2000 N=16/, "Al-Fair al-Yadid"-(Livia,1996.N=2), "AI-Sahafa"-(Sudan. 
2000 N=12) 
According to other information we got a part of these people got double 
citizenship documents by Yerevan officials. During our investigations it becomes 
clear that a part of these families moved to Karabakh territory, had been in the 
component of different terror groups in their living place. According to the logics, 
part of people living moved to the territory of Karabakh are the persons who 
participated at a separate terror acts. We have new investigations on this direction. 
43 
 
44 
 
Parliamentary Assembly-Report of debates: 
Tuesday 25 September at 3 p.m 
 
Mr. Ilham ALIYEV (Azerbaijan). - Dear Mr. Chairman. Ladies and 
gentlmen. 
Unfortunately, I must start by responding to my colleague from Armenia 
who made groundless assertions about so-called connections between bin Laden 
and some people in Azerbaijan. With full responsibility, I can assure the 
Assembly that that is a lie. That this groundless assertion has not been confirmed 
by anyone. I urge all my colleagues not to use the Chamber of the Council of 
Europe to spread slanders? for their own political ends. 
Dear Mr. Chairman. Ladies and gentlmen. 
All of us were greatly shocked by the terrorist acts in the United States. On 
behalf of the delegation of the Republic of Azerbaijan, I should like to express 
my sincere condolences to the Government of the United States and to the 
American people in connection with those terrorist acts that killed and injured 
thousands of innocent people. 
I also re-emphasise the full support of the Government of Azerbaijan for the 
United States in the action to find and bring to justice those who committed that 
terrible crime. 
Those acts of terrorism against the United States show clearly how fragile is 
the world in which we live. No one can feel himself fully safe. Therefore the 
whole international community must unite in its struggle against all forms of 
terrorism throughout the world. 
Now is the moment of truth. It is not possible for countries to position 
themselves between two chairs - trying to have good relations with both the 
victims of terror and those who organize it, and calling it a balanced policy. Such a 
policy cannot be called balanced; it is hypocritical. Any country or organisation 
that directly or indirectly supports terrorism must be held responsible by the 
international community. 
Azerbaijan has suffered greatly from terrorism. Since the beginning of 
Armenian aggression against our country, 32 terrorist acts have been committed in 
Azerbaijan by Armenian terrorist groups, as a result of which 2 000 of Azerbaijan's 
people have been killed and tens of thousands injured. Those acts of terror against 
the Azerbaijani people were perpetrated on trains, buses, ferries, the underground, 
and so on. Acts of terror committed by Armenian terrorists against the people of 
Azerbaijan is one of the main elements of the large-scale aggression of Armenian 
armed forces against Azerbaijan. As a result of this aggression, tens of thousands 
of Azerbaijani's have been killed and one million people have become refugees, 
45 
 
20% of the territory of Azerbaijan has been occupied by Armenia. The Armenian 
terrorist organisation ASALA has played a highly active role in the policy of terror 
and genocide that has been conducted by Armenia against Azerbaijan for the past 
thirteen years. 
Now, the territory of the so-called "Republic of Nagorno-Karabakh" and the 
other occupied regions of Azerbaijan are completely uncontrolled. These 
territories are lawless zones in which the Armenian authorities have created 
terrorist camps where terrorists, not only from Armenia but also from other 
countries, are trained. The territory of Nagorno-Karabakh is used for drug 
trafficking, and enormous sums derived from drug production and trafficking are 
spent on terrorist purposes. 
In the battle with terrorism, Azerbaijan is allied with the United States. We 
are united with all the democratic world and stand ready to make our contribution - 
to do whatever is necessary to put an end to terrorism in the world. The President 
of Azerbaijan, Mr Heydar Aliyev, in the statement he made after the attacks in the 
United States, expressed the full support of Azerbaijan for the United States. 
Azerbaijan has opened its airspace to the United States and stands ready to provide 
infrastructure and communication facilities that may be necessary to the effort to 
bring to justice those who committed terrorist acts in the United States. The 
international community has lost a lot of time in its struggle against terrorism, but 
better late than never. 
It is high time to take serious steps in the battle with terrorism. Not only 
must we act against those who were involved in the terrible acts of terror 
committed in the United States, but it is time to launch a wide-scale campaign 
against terrorism in all its forms throughout the world. 
Thank you for you attention. 
 
AZERBAIJAN FACING TERRORISM 
 
Military wing of Armenian Diaspora...  
Hunt of "Sadval" and PKK... 
 
One of the coordinators between the "Dashnaksutun" Party and the 
Armenian Diaspora in the Council of Europe member-states, military expert Sauri 
Shakinyan, who has emigrated to Syria, and is living in Washington since 1999, 
writes in his publicist notes: "That will do. You (the Armenians) have done much. 
You have revived Karabakh... Don't be sentimental as Azerbaijanis. Or you lose 
much. Remember, where is our brother Pogosyan... Remember our beloved 
Hambarsumyan... glorious Valiyan, Matevosyan, Fazelyan, and others... If we don't 
46 
 
secure them, and be sentimental, we shall fail...". (Washington, "The Armenian 
revival" newspaper, 2000, #2). 
As to the aforementioned Michael Pogosyan, he was appointed as Director 
General of the "Sukhoy" military-industrial complex by President of the Russian 
Federation... It has to be noted that the complex has no analogy in the world, and 
plays leading role in production of the long-range ballistic missiles with "Topol-M" 
nuclear war-heads. The Complex also produces invisible "S-37" jets, tests the new 
"MIG-29" and MIG-30 bomber jets. 
Assignment of such a Complex of strategic importance to an Armenian 
national, Michael Pogosyan, should not be ignored. 
He is also one of the leaders of the Armenian Diaspora in RF. And one the 
authors of the book, "Strategic importance of Karabakh for the Armenian 
Diaspora", published in eleven languages in 2000, one of the coordinators of the 
Paris bureau of the International Armenian Diaspora. After he was appointed as a 
director of the military-industrial complex, 17 Azerbaijanis lost their jobs in the 
Complex. 
Or, appointment of the historian Ashrafbey Fazelyan as a coordinator of the 
Armenian Diaspora, established in Saudi Arabia in February 24, 201, cannot but 
rise interest. And on the eve, Ashrafbey Fazelyan was appointed as a consul of the 
Russian Federation in Mecca and Medina, and was granted a diplomatic status quo. 
(But when meets with the founder of the Saudi Arabia cell of "Vahhabism", Imam 
of Medina, Abdul Hamid Jafar Dagestani, it cannot but remain in the focus. 
Because, interests of the Imam of Medina in the oil issues in the Caucasus, in 
particular, in Dagestan and Azerbaijan, the existence of the certain strategic plans 
in this regard, is a fact. Another diplomat, ex-speaker of the National Assembly of 
Armenia, Babken Araksyan was elected as the coordinator of the "Armenian-Near 
East Diaspora". Further, just on the "ground" of the documents, collected by him 
and presented to the Lebanon parliament, under the pressure of speaker Nabih 
Berri, the notorious resolution on the "Armenian genocide" passed the parliament. 
On December 28, last year, there was established a "Union of Defense", 
uniting the "Armenian-Lebanon-Syrian Diasporas", in Beirut. On January 16, the 
"Union" set its military wing "Apostol". The "Union" adopted a resolution in 
regard with Azerbaijan: "If we shall have to resist, then, we must unite as the 
attackers do..." 
Catholics of Armenia Garegin I writes in the book "Church and the 
Armenian Diaspora":  "...  Lebanon's Armenian community is the weighty part of 
the Armenian Diaspora. Lebanon and Syria are the countries where the "greater 
part of the western Armenians were sheltered after the genocide". (Yerevan, 1999). 
In fact, the "Union of Defense" was a new question. Prior to this, such "Unions" 
47 
 
were set in 1991, in Europe (Moscow, Athens, Rome, London, Marseilles) on 
September 16-28, in Asia (Delhi, Tehran, Abu Dhabi, Tokyo), on November 24-
December 16, in Africa (Egypt, Rabat, Algeria), on July 26, 1997, in America 
(Florida, Los Angeles, Washington, Buenos Aires, Ottawa, Karakas), as well as in 
the Eastern Europe, in 1998 (Bucharest, Prague). And these "unions" were 
officially registered as charity organizations. In common, there are 869 Armenian 
organizations against Azerbaijan and the entire Turkic peoples. The finance issues, 
programs and documents, diplomatic way-outs of these military-political, strategic 
structures, acting under the umbrella of charity, are regulated directly from the 
centers of the Armenian Diaspora, listed below: 
a) Armenian Catholic Church, with centers in 56 world countries and a 
cell in Khankendi (June, 4, 2001); 
b) American Armenian Assembly (covers 22 states, with a center in 
Daglig Garbagh (July 14, 2001); 
c) American Lawyers Assembly (for European countries); 
d) American World Gospellers Council (for European countries); 
e) Armenian General Charity Union (based in New York, with a branch in 
Karabakh, set on July 29, 2001); 
f) American Armenian Missionary Association (for the CIS country), was 
set in Karabakh on August 3, 1001); 
g) American Armenian National Committee; 
h) North American Armenian Society for humanitarian assistance (set on 
March 3, 2001); 
i)  Eastern Eparchy of the Armenian Apostol Church; 
j)  Western Eparchy of the Armenian Apostol Church; 
k)  Knights of Vartan (officially set in Karabakh in 2001); 
l)  Eastern Episcopal Office of the Armenian Apostol Church; 
m)  Western Episcopal Office of the Armenian Apostol Church; 
On January 7, 1997, these organizations sent a letter to the US 
Administration, to the ex-President Bill Clinton, in regard with Karabakh. The 
same letter, with supplements, was re-sent to President George Bush in 2001. The 
letter runs: "... Mr. President, there is no alternative to the right of self-
determination of Karabakh. There is no stable peace without the freedom of choice 
of the basic right. The people of Karabakh has gained this right in account of 
inconceivable victims. The United States must support the people of Karabakh, 
who wants to peacefully enjoy their right. 
Just basing on this principle, the United States must not justify the 
Azerbaijan government, who pursues the old policy, strengthens economic 
blockade against the neighboring country, discredits rapprochement, 
48 
 
unprecedented regards the people of Armenia and Karabakh with racial 
discrimination. The US Congress has many times protested to the policy of 
aggression of the government of Azerbaijan. Government of the United States must 
support the position of the Congress. Azerbaijan and other states of the region 
should be told that the only guarantee for the security of Karabakh is the right of c 
loice of its future...". 
It was also ascertained that, to the contrast of the Armenians, neither the 
oppositional party leaders, nor organizations, associations and groups from 
Azerbaijan have sent such documents. 
It has to be noted that the Armenians, who moved to America for Permanent 
residence and adopted there a citizenship in 90s, numbered 80.000. In 1999-2000, 
this became 650-700 thousands. It is 20 percent of the population of Armenia. 
On February 24, current year, the "International Armenian Diaspora" held 
its meeting in Damascus. It was decided to open a private accounts of the "Union 
of Defense" in Paris, Beirut, Tehran, Moscow, Washington, Baki, set additional 
assistance funds. Such assistance funds also was set in Astrakhan by the Armenian 
communities, who moved there from Azerbaijan ("Araz" Armenian Fund). 
In the first quarter of 2001, the US companies "Lokhid", "Reyteon", 
"Nortron", the French company "Dasso", the German companies "Siemens", "Dil", 
as well as Iran's "Akopyan" company and 68 Armenians, working at the RF's 
"Sukhoy" military-industrial Complex have transferred $447 thousand to the Leon 
bank of the "Union of Defense". 
One of the Diaspora leaders, Tao Shaybazyan, in his interview to the French 
newspaper "Krua" ("The Cross") points: 'Irrespective of his faith and position, 
every Armenian in every country must feel that he is supported by his compatriots, 
his brothers and sisters. We have made a tradition the decision, adopted by the 
Diaspora - every third Armenian receives assistance from his friends and relatives. 
Every fifth Armenian receives assistance from the local state or government... Now 
we create the military wings of the "Union of Defense", set the defense system to 
provide security of the Armenians...". 
According to T. Shahbazyan, the Armenian youth wants to fight, to liberate 
the Armenian lands in the world, in particular, in the Caucasus. A group of them 
will enter the "Unions of Defense" to "acquire" (his own expression) the rules of 
battle, war tactics and strategy. 
Within the CIS, the "Unions of Defense" of the International Armenian 
Diaspora make contacts with the Lesghins. 
Khachik Alekseyevich Surenyan, the former expert of the ex-president Ter-
Petrosyan, since October 4, 2001, heads the "Araz" Armenian Diaspora in 
Makhachkala. 
49 
 
Forming their local cells in the Northern Caucasus, in particular, in 
Dagestan, and financed by the International Armenian Diaspora, the "Unions of 
Defense" relied on the radical "Sadval", in forming its military wings. Because, in 
Dagestan and generally in the Russian Federation, there function 6 legal and 8 
illegal separatist centers. But neither the Main Intelligence Department of the 
Russian Defense Ministry, nor special services and power ministries have regarded 
the mentioned organizations. 
It must be noted that the separatist Lezghin organization "Sadval" was 
registered with the RF's Justice Ministry in Moscow. It appeared that registration 
of "Sadval" as an international organization, was initiated by the aid of the then 
president, politologist Georgi Sattarov and one of the authors of the security 
conception for the country Andranik Migranyan... This was stated by A. 
Migranyan at a political discussion on the "Russian-Armenian strategic relations in 
the XXI century", held on August 16, 2001., where he points that it was a progress 
and that in early 1992, he had received an appropriate letter, signed by 4 high rank 
Armenian security officers. Signatures of the letter Avakyan, Babayan, 
Khanjanyan, Kevorkyan... asked to promote in the registration of "Sadval" Lezghin 
orgnaization. But the behind-scene events were known later. Registration of the 
separatist "Sadval" was suspended in 1994, then abolished. In 12.12.1995, the RF 
Cabinet of Ministers issued an executive order #1000, on the urgent measures in 
the North in regard with the socio-political situation. It was pointed that there were 
serious problems related to the Samur forests. The 100-ha forests were cut and its 
territory was decreased by 14 times. The issue, concerning the Samur river, risen 
by Lezghin separatists was resolved still in 1967. 
According to the agreement, concluded between Azerbaijan and Degestan, 
75% of the waters there belong to Azerbaijan. The borders are invariable and 
inviolable. 
Separatists form "Sadval" claim that there are one million Lezghins in 
Azerbaijan. Statistics of Russia, however, points at 300-400 thousands. But the 
claim was reiterated. On December 26, 2001, visiting one of the leaders of the 
Dashanksutun Party, Kim Balayan, in Yerevan, coordinators of "Sadval", Said 
Murad Ginchayev, Gulumsamad Geybullayev have again dealt with the "destiny of 
a million of Lezghins". 
At the Party conference, held at the open air on February 9, 2001, Kim 
Balayan stated that "against Azerbaijan, we intend to unite not only with Lezghins, 
but even with the Afghan Talebans". 
Contacts between the Karabakh military wing of the Armenian Diaspora 
and the military wing of "Sadval" separatists became a reality on November 4, 
2000 in Makhachkala and on October 7 in Khankendi. It seemed all were legal. But 
50 
 
there were behind-scene bargains against Azerbaijan. Security services of Dagestan 
and Yerevan were aware of it, too, but hoped for "salvation by devil". Since 
January 6, 2001, the radical Armenian group - the "Knights of Vartan", with the 
HQ in Paris, stated that the Armenian separatists in different world countries 
conclude military deals and agreements. The agreements base on the National 
Armenian interests, was stated. And these interests will be supported by all means 
and officially. So, rules for the military units under the Armenian Diaspora's 
"Defense unions" were written. The Statement was spread in the territory of the 
Russian Federation by "Stella Samara" business center that belonged to the 
Armenian Diaspora in Stavropol province. 
The Armenian Diasporas in the foreign countries expand their contacts with 
other nations' diasporas in trade, cultural and military ways. It appeared that on 
January 26, of current year, in Greece, there was signed an agreement on the 
exchange and processing of strategic data against Turkey and Azerbaijan, between 
the "Carrageen" group of the Armenian Diaspora and the "Ocala" group of Kurdish 
Diaspora. The Agreement was signed by heads of the groups, Barat Osipyan 
("Carrageen") and Ms. Hanifa ("Ocalan"). The parties also discussed the issues of 
marriage and  relationship between the Armenians and Kurd nation. The issue was 
in the focus of the recently held "Political-strategic tasks of the Armenian Diaspora 
in the XXI century", in Yerevan. 
 
PKK 
Ojalan-Kocharyan Cooperation 
PKK and "Asala " prepared special plans 
against Azerbaijan 
 
According to the head of the Washington-based "Armenian-Kurdish 
Research Center", Dr. Hank Astarjanyan (grandson Astarjanyan), "description of 
an eagle betokens the image of Kurds, who have lost their lands that were captured 
by the Turks. It is rather truth than myth is, and resembles our secular symbol..." 
(H. Astarjanyan. "Conclusions", monthly bulletin of the Center, 2000, p. 23). 
Hank Astarjanyan, who has also prepared the theses of the "Self-defense 
Committee" of Karabakh (17 theses, prepared on June, 14, 1991) claims in his 
theses, named "Great Armenia... Greta Kurdistan...", that the Armenians and Kurds 
have been always close from the "historical point of view. "The destiny of both 
nations underwent sufferings and tortures...". He, further, writes: "... in both of the 
would-be-established Republics, the issues of security should be put forward...". 
On August 16, 1993, Hank Astarjanyan sends a letter to Robert Setrakovich 
Kocharyan, who chaired then the so-called "State Selfdefense Committee of the 
51 
 
Karabakh Republic". It says: "Our Center plans to have a section within your 
Committee. It will implement the most confidential tasks, because, the information, 
you sent to the Washington bureau, is not exact. Information connected with your 
activity, confuse us. It seems we need an extra Lebanon meeting in regard with the 
shortages in your work...". 
It has to be noted that the mentioned "Lebanon meeting" was included to the 
"Modern History of Armenia" text-book, published in Yerevan (p. 87). The 
meeting also focused the intelligence and counter-intelligence programs of the 
secret services, necessarily to be set in Karabakh against the "Baki oil", the 
independent Azerbaijan, generally, the Turkish world. It is pointed that 
"establishing the "Great Armenia" it should be, at first, set the intelligence and 
counter-intelligence services, ruthless to the enemy. Without intelligence, 
Armenia... and Karabakh are doomed to failure". 
The Lebanon meeting was for the first time held on May 17, 1992. in 
Beirut. It was attended by 9 representatives of Karabakh, including Robert 
Kocharyan, Zori Balayan, Naira Melkumyan, D. Manucharyan, E. Grigoryan, A. 
Kevorkyan. 
 
Occupation of Karabakh by "Asala" 
 
The Washington-based "Armenian-Kurd Research Center" has prepared 
strategic-military plan of the captivities for the HQ (in France and Lebanon) of 
"Asala". On May, 21, 1992, the Center sent secret letters to the military units in 
Yerevan and Karabakh, sealed with a stamp "Armenia-Record-4". The letters 
included maps and schemes of the heights, hills, trenches, strategic objects at the 
territory of Azerbaijan for the Armenian terror groups. It was also pointed that to 
hold meeting with the supporters of idea of the "Great Kurdistan" was urgent for 
the "Asala" group in the region. Because, the Kurd factor was decisive in the 
region. It is not possible to win without regulation of it..." (p.4) The item was 
consulted by head of the Lachin bureau of "Asala" with colonel Barkhudar 
Gichkanyan, who has served in the Russian troops, then worked in the Razdan 
military commissariat and joined the "Asala" group in Lachin on December 12, 
1991. 
The first two meetings of Armenians and Kurds were held on June 9-12, 
1992, and on November 9-16, 1993. One of the meetings was held in Maku 
(Western) and attended by official representatives. The Kurdish delegation was led 
by Hussein Ocalan, brother of the PKK leader Abdullah Ocalan. 
On September 19, 1992, there established 6 cells of the Armenian 
Liberation Movement (ALM) to attack in the territories of Zangilan and Gubadli 
52 
 
regions of Azerbaijan. 47 of the 83 members of these terror groups were from the 
Lebanon school of "Asala", who prepared a large-scale occupational and predatory 
war. These criminal groups actively took part in the occupation of Lachin (terri. 
1835 sq km), on April 3, 1993, of Aghdam (1094 sq km), on July 23, of Jabrail 
(1050 sq km), on August 23, of Fizuli (1386 sq km), of Gubadli (802 sq km), on 
August 31, of Zangilan (707 sq km), on October 30. Thus, there was a "reason" for 
a new meeting. 
 
Abdullah Ocalan in Yerevan 
 
The second meeting between the leaders of "Asala" and PKK took place in 
the territory of Armenia, on November 9, 1993. A week-long meeting was attended 
by Zori Balayan, Robert Kocharyan (then, head of the armed units) and PKK 
leader Abdullah Ocalan. It was also joined by leader of the Kurdistan National 
Liberation Movement (KNLM), general Amid Jandarov. 
After long researches we learned the essence of this meeting. The 16th file 
with seal on the sheets and a note "For inquiry", kept in 27/2, Skuleva str. in 
Moscow (RF) contains much. It also contains the bank accounts of the Armenian-
Kurdish organization: RF, Moscow, "Mastroyskgobank", MFO-201575. The 
account is weighty source for publishing-printing works for "...Great Armenia" and 
"Great Kurdistan...". 
On page 36 of the 211-page file of the "Inquiries", there is a document (or 
extraction), signed as a conclusion to the political meeting, held in Armenia, on 
November 9, 1993. 
 
PKK moves to Armenia 
 
It appeared that according to the decision of the meeting, coded as "Sevan 
3", the parties agreed to move the HQ of PKK terrorist organization to the territory 
of Armenia till June 19, 2005. It was decided to warn bureaus of the HQ in 
Moscow, Tehran, Iraq, Turkey, Azerbaijan, Middle Asia, Karabakh, in every six 
month hold conferences in neutral zones to focus the Armenian-Kurdish strategic 
issues. This is the list, of those who attended the Kurd-Armenian meeting: 
 Levon Abramovich Molnosyan (Asala); 
 Nubar Rezaltovich Kevorkyan, coordinator of "Artsakh" Liberation 
Committee in Germany; 
 Javad Kazimi,  coordinator  of the  European Armenians for "Hayastan" 
organization; 
53 
 
 Robert Setrakovich Kocharyan, chairman of the Karabakh selfdefense 
Committee; 
 Zori Gaikovich Balayan, ideologist of the "Great Armenia", writer; 
 Jamil Bayik, leader of the Kurdistan Liberation Army (ARST); 
 Abdullah Ocalan , separatist, PKK leader; 
 Mustafa Vakili, member of the Kurdish Council, Karabakh. 
 
Sevan meetings 
 
All the participants were in military uniform with the description of a 
hunting eagle with large-opened wings. 
On November 11, 1993, there was held a meeting among Robert 
Kocharyan, Zori Balayan and Abdullah Ocalan. It was held at 16.00 pm (Yerevan 
time) in the north-eastern side of the Sevan Lake in Chambarak area, at a one-story 
house with four apartments (the PKK HQ was moved just to this area on 
November 26). Text of the talk, the parties held, was something strange: 
" Abdullah Ocalan: 
- We are concerned with the fact that there are Kurdish nationals among the 
Azerbaijan women captives. You must release them. It is necessary from the 
psychological point of view. 
Robert Kocharyan: 
- We have a special Commission on it. The Kurds will be released. They 
will be provided with home, land plots in Kalbajar and Lachin regions. But they 
had considered them to be Azerbaijanis. That is the trouble. 
Abdullah Ocalan: 
- We were told that you had killed 13 of them. 
Robert Kocharyan: 
- Of Kurds? 
Zori Balayan: 
-It is impossible. As a member of the Commission, I know that three of the 
women prisoners committed suicide. We cannot be accused in this. 
Robert Kocharyan: 
-We shall liberate the Kurds. They were forced to fight. They were obliged. 
Zori Balayan: 
-The commission has prepared an appropriate letter to the UN. 
Robert Kocharyan: 
54 
 
-We want to form military groups with Kurds and Armenians, set special 
corps. It is known as the 46th corps. We do not intend to return any plot of lands, 
we seized... These lands are yours, ours.. We have jointly liberated them... 
Abdullah Ojalan: 
-We have set a Council of Assembly in Lachin. We are resolute in the idea 
of "Great Kurdistan". 
Robert Kocharyan: 
-These are the beginning of our fight against the Turks. The XXI century is 
our century, the century of the fighters for truth. 
Zori Balayan: 
-Our commission considers as useful the agreement between you and 
"Asala". It was necessary. Our rapprochement worries the enemy. It frightens 
them, in fact. This is the beginning of  the coming victories. 
Abdullah Ocalan: 
-Our people are training in the "Asala" units. 
Robert Kocharyan: 
-It is expedient to favor from your experience. 
Zori Balayan: 
-We have prepared book, "Strategic and tactical war plans", which was 
experienced by Chechen rebellians. And we also study the tactics of PKK... 
Abdullah Ojalan: 
- What are your positions in the territory of Azerbaijan? We do not worry 
on the matter. Our positions are in order and normal with the military circles of 
Russia, Iran... 
Robert Kocharyan: 
- We have a special plan for it. We get necessary data from the territory of 
Azerbaijan... And favor maximum from our sources. We preserve our links of 
friendship and relationship there. 
Zori Balayan: 
- We have no problem in this. A part of the prisoners gave their consent to 
cooperate with us. Our "friends" took part in interrogation and talks with prisoners. 
Note: The text is supplemented, the expression "our friends" was clarified. 
It appeared that in interrogation of POWs, together with the Armenians, there took 
part specialists, invited from the FSS and MIA of the Russian Federation. They 
collect strategic information, and were interested in the military ties of Azerbaijan 
and Turkey. Perhaps, this way of interrogation must be in progress in the Armenian 
secret services at present. 
Robert Kocharyan: 
55 
 
- We have a special tactical plan of activities with separate persons, 
oppositional leaders, political figures in Baki. It was prepared by our French 
friends. 
Abdullah Ojalan: 
-This is one of the main point of our actions. Our plans will remain 
incomplete without strongholds in Azerbaijan. 
 
POW camps in Armenia 
 
According to investigations, the Armenian side always bewares of pointing 
the real number of the women, they have captured. Because these women were 
unprecedented tortured on special programs. We shall try to bring light on these 
programs. As provided, on May 26. 2000, a woman prison for 400 persons, was 
built in the Ekheknadzor area (south of Armenia). Some 60 Azerbaijani women 
were kept there. In addition, as we defined, there were built prison camps in 
Armenia and Karabakh in 1994-2000, by the constructors from Argentina,  
Portugal, Afghanistan,  Russia, China,  Iran, where the Azerbaijani were kept. 
 Vardenis (Eastern Armenia, children camp), 250 persons; 
 Getashen (Martuni region, west side, women camp), 380;  
 Jermukh (Eastern Armenia, women camp), 250; 
 Razdan (western Armenia, children camp), 180; - Kalbajar (the village 
Zar, south side, women camp), 150; 
 Khankendi (Karkijahan, south, children camp), 180. 
There is a graveyard in every camp without addresses and names of the 
buried. For example, there are 28 graves in the Karkijahan children camp, where 
mothers and kids were buried together. (Rasht, Iran, "Khazar" bulletin, 1996, may, 
p. 26). It was stated, though incomplete, by Sweden diplomat Ion Eliasson, who 
said:"... The world must be aware of it... I saw ... the Azerbaijani captives... I 
witnessed the tortures, they were undergoing...". 
According to investigations, since February 13, 2001, cells of the "Artsakh" 
Liberation Committee were set in Jabrail, (Khorovlu), Khojavan (Mughanli), and 
Fizuli (Alhkanli) residential areas. "Kurdistan National Liberation Movement" 
founded its cells in Kalbajar (Gilijli), and Lachin (Alhkanli), on February 25, 2001. 
 
"Asala" and PKK stronholds in Moscow and other places 
 
The Council Assembly of PKK with the HQ in Lachin was founded (ON 
April 30, 2001, the US State Department named PKK as a terrorist organization). 
56 
 
On March 12, 2001, strongholds of "Asala" and PKK were set in Yerevan 
and Moscow. The Yerevan bureau (Yerevan, Alahverdiyan st., 5) of the Armenian 
Liberation Movement (ALM) published its "Bulletin", founded first on August 26, 
1990, in Portugal and Argentina, (then, in France, Syria, Lebanon, Pakistan). 
On May 4, 2001, (also on October 10, 1993 and December 4, 1999), to the 
Kurd organizations, acting in CIS countries, were sent letters with 17 signatures: 
"To the leaders and partisans of Kurdistan... Political map of the world 
changes.. new sovereign national states are established. Should we omit this 
historical chance, then, can you find a single Kurd, who could remember your 
graves in future? This is what our enemy wants. It is high time for the Kurds to 
come out of this political oppression. Today, with your hands, the enemy digs 
graves for the Kurds and Kurdistan... Wake up! After all, the Kurds must hold a 
worthy place among the nations of this cruel and prudent world!.." 
Head of the Krasnodar Kurd community Mahmud Abdullayev makes a note 
on the letter: 
"At the historical territory of Kurdustan, which is larger than Yugoslavia, 
Abkhazia, Cyrpus, Karabakh, Palestine, taken together, there are over 30 million 
Kurds. Struggle of the Kurds for independence... holds one of the main places in 
the world liberation movement..." 
Logically, Mahmud Abdullayev recognizes the occupied Karabakh as a 
"Republic" and justifies this notorious commitment of "liberation". 
On May 10, extractions from the "Political report" of PKK were sent to the 
Kurd Leaders in Armenia, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Russia, Syria, France, Iran, 
Turkey, Iraq, America, Germany, Greece, Lebanon, England, Afghanistan, 
Pakistan, Saudi Arabia... 
 
E-mail and terrorism 
 
As the e-mail is an internal part of intelligence, the US has passed to a 
serious regime in the Internet. Because, according to the Harvard University 
Strategic Studies and Research Center, in the latest terror acts, 63% of the fault 
rests on the out-of-control e-mails. 
According the diplomat, analyst of the National Security Agency, Mr. 
Stuart Baker, the e-mails and their bureaus must be strictly controlled. Because, the 
e-mail maps are the most reliable source in expansion of terror activities, 
smuggling, weapon and narcotics trafficking... in theft and delivery of the nuclear 
materials. 
57 
 
Just from this standpoint of view, FIS (US) started to apply the 
communication-control system, called "Garnivar", to control the information 
centers and e-mails that will enlarge the activities of the main strategic center. 
According to the technical system, the e-mail bureaus are placed in all 
strategic points of the region, territory. 
As provided, in December 13, 2001 ("Iravunk" newspaper, December), at 
the metering on electronic and telecommunications issues, a Defense Ministry 
leading officer Artur Agabekyan have dealt with the intelligence communication 
system to be installed towards Azerbaijan and Turkey. 
He offers to implement his proposals in several phases. As to him, the 
Defense Ministry must complete the electronic installation as below: 
I phase-2001-2003 
II phase - 2003-2005 
III phase - 2005-2008. 
 
Special assignments for Armenian officers 
 
On the other hand, commander of the 5th Army, deployed along the borders 
of Turkey and Azerbaijan and the occupied Karabakh, colonel Aykaz Bahmanyan, 
commander of the 1st Army, colonel Levon Eronosyan, commander of the 2nd 
Army, colonel Seyran Saroyan were assigned to expand the e-mail nets for 
collecting and processing the strategic information. The control over these 
electronic centers is managed by the defense minister,  general  Serzh Sarkisyan. 
To acquire the necessary knowledge on electronic intelligence, in April-May 
current year, a group of 56 officers from Yerevan and Khankendi, were sent to the 
Russian Federation, China, Iran, Lebanon and Syria. 
As provided, on June 19, 2001, the Armenian American Democratic leaders 
Council (headed by Mr. Makhdesyan) has presented to the "self-defense" militants 
in Daglig Garabag, computers and electronic equipments in 30 nominations. And 8 
groups of engineers have participated in the installation of them along the borders 
of Turkey and Azerbaijan. 
It is also attractive that on September 25, visiting Armenia, the Pope of 
Rome, John II, recommended the head of the "self-proclaimed Republic, Arkadiy 
Gukasyan to widely apply Internet in the Army, expand the e-mail nets for contact 
of the Armenian diasporas. Commenting on this, the "I`Osservatore Romano" 
newspaper (Sept. 28) writes: "... The Pope of Rome visited the Khor-Viran Church 
on Armenia-Turkey border. He stated at the meeting: "Vatican must expand and 
strengthen its relations with the Armenian Grigoryan Church". 
 
58 
 
"Asala" Awards for Zori Balayan 
 
On May 9, 1994, marking their victory over Shusha, members of the 
"Artsakh National Liberation Movement", held a meeting in Dashalti area. There, 
head of the "Asala" terror school in Cyprus, colonel Grant Martirosovich 
Markaryan (he took part in Karabakh military units in 1988-1992) invites Zori 
Balayan to his school. On May 21-26, visiting Cyprus, Zori Balayan was conferred 
with the diploma of "Honorary Ideologist... "sufferer" of the "Great Armenia..". 
On June 2-9, 1994, the "sufferer" was welcomed by members of the 
Dashanksutun Party in Beirut airport. On June 8 of the same year, another 
"sufferer"- Robert Setrakovich visits Beirut. The other day, was opened a 
"Strategic Military and Political Studies Center" - "Greta Armenia", in Beirut. At 
19.20 pm, on June 9, members of the Lebanon bureau of "Asala" hold a meeting in 
the Armenian newspaper "Aztag". The meeting decides that strengthening of 
military operations towards Azerbaijan and Turkey, mass terror acts will be the. 
beginning for next successes. 
As provided, Zori Gaikovich makes a suggestion on sending the captured 
and newly born children to the Armenian training camps of "Asala" in Lebanon, 
France, Canada, Nicosia, Iraq... 
 
Azerbaijan facing terrorism 
Internet terror 
Armenian intelligence in the e-mail 
E-mail and secret information 
 
"Screening" is not a mere, or abstract notion. It has also its specific political 
meaning. According to director of the US "Secret Service"(it is not CIA), Louis 
Merlett, each intelligence service, or center, power centers, must pass through 
"screening" process. Otherwise, they will have nothing with confidentiality. After 
these technical operations, it is impossible to get in the computers, or phone talks, 
secret meetings and conversations, correspondence and e-mail banks. "Screening" 
is a barrier for this. For example, an item in the military cooperation between 
Washington and Yerevan (concluded on July 24, 2000) was reconstruction of the 
e-mail net of the Armenian secret services. $75,000 of the received $300,000, were 
spent on this purpose. According to the projects of Pentagon, technical departments 
of the Armenian intelligence and counter-intelligence services were completely 
reconstructed. 
New e-mail channels were opened to provide contacts with Azerbaijan and 
Georgia, as well as the Middle Asia. 
59 
 
Enriko Aprimanov stated: "The time does not wait. Yerevan has every 
technical opportunity to join every site. The data operations are important for us. 
As to the electronic mails... Yerevan has a strong "Security conception on strategic 
data to control the information technology both in the Middle Asia and Azerbaijan 
and Georgia...". Then, as noted the Armenian general, Yerevan can receive 70-75 
percent of the information, being processed at the departments and companies, 
secret services and power institutions in Baki. It is provided by the "provider's. 
It has to be noted that of the 7 "providers", acting in Azerbaijan, 3 use the 
channels of the US, while 4 use the air of the Russian Federation. The new 
"technical opportunities" created by the Pentagon projectors, enable the Armenian 
secret services to easily hook up each of these channels. As a result, the Armenian 
intelligence service can direct every secret information, every e-mail data to its 
office. 
 
The company, financed by Bin Laden 
 
It appeared that the Defense Ministry of Armenia made its first cor-
respondence with the company "Ahmadjan Haji Muhammad", which opened an 
office in Yerevan (June 2, 1999). The e-mail correspondence was managed by 
officer, Gegam Arutyunyan, engaged in "computer business". In April 2002, it was 
known that the HQ of the company "Ahmadjan.." was in Pakistan (Ravalpindi) and 
that the Company had industrious offices in the Middle Asia, in particular, in 
Kazakhstan, and 4 of these offices played an active role in sale-purchase, theft and 
delivery of the radioactive materials. 
 
US refuse e-mail 
 
On the other hand, Yerevan hooked up "SOMIT" technological system to its 
e-mail channels of the military and security system (Feb. 13, 2001), which enables 
to: 
 define the dislocation of radars, entering Azerbaijan by means of codes 
and signals through "SOMIT"; 
 codes and siphers able to regulate the electronic rays of radars, enter the 
e-mail; 
 damage the economic intelligence (by e-mail, one can interfere 
correspondence, talks, communications of the diplomatic missions, oil companies); 
 contact with mobile phones. 
60 
 
According to Richard Saffer, head of the operative group, engaged in 
security issues (intelligence communications) of the Pentagon information system, 
"...e-mail is the key base for strategic data and correspondence in intelligence...". 
From this standpoint of view, the issue of "E-mail and correspondence" was 
put into discussions by the lawmakers to be legalized. The Eastern European 
countries, as rule, have defined limits and restrictions for e-mail and 
correspondence, for the security reasons. The Middle Asian countries, Uzbekistan, 
Kazakhstan and Turkmenistan assigned the question to the intelligence 
departments. It was completely restricted in Tajikistan. As appeared, there was 
found numerous information's in the illegally e-mail correspondence between 
Dushanba and Herat (Afghanistan). 
The "E. Kantriz" Information Service (New York) has made notable 
conclusions in regard with the data leakage. The Service points in its March 
Report: "With the strategic information, code and figures, talks and 
correspondence... sent or received by e-mail, it is possible to frustrate, or destroy 
every power structure... e-mail can affect every infrastructure...". 
 
Electronic terrorism 
 
As provided, 49% of trade in the US, 12% - in Germany, 8% - in Slovenia, 
have joined the e-mail. Special rules have been worked out. On certain economic 
laws, the Russian Federation has also joined the electronic trade. It has priorities, 
less waste of time, decrease of cost, operative economic relations... But these are 
possible with a strong and all-rounded information security conception. Without 
this conception, to join the electronic trade system, as well as e-mail, is nothing but 
compulsion. 
Yerevan has not joined the electronic trade. It has one-sided link with the e-
mail - only receives information, but sends nothing. The Armenian specialists 
Arustamyan and Pogosyan took part in the symposium, held on the topic of 
electronic terrorism, and organized by the famous "Ziff Devis" Company, with a 
large web-net. 
The electronic terrorism-caused catastrophes that Armenians strive to study, 
terrifies much than the bombs do. Just by this way, the energy system of every 
country can be frustrated. Or, the transportation system can be paralyzed, caused 
chaos and agony. Banking system, electronic databases will perish... (in the 
September 11 events in America, physical and electronic terrorism were committed 
on the same time). 
 
 
61 
 
"Alive intelligence" 
 
Interesting and serious researches are carried out at the FIB computer lab in 
Chuantika (US). According to chief of the electronic technology department, 
Marius Thomas, the conflicting and fighting states are much ken in the electronic 
net of intelligence as well as the e-mail, which is the visual contact between the net 
of "Alive intelligence" and the net of "electronic intelligence"... 
According to investigations, 29% of the intelligence data of France, 41% of 
the intelligence data of Syria, 47% of Lebanon intelligence data (Beirut-Yerevan 
military agreement, 22.10.2001) are connected with this. 
There is a special point in the agreement, signed between the defense 
minister of Armenia, Serzh Sarkisyan and of Lebanon, Kahlil Al Harun, on the 
electronic technology, e-mail and correspondence in the military relations. 
Armenia has such a treaty with Syria (28.10.2001)... The German intelligence 
service receives 33% of its data from the e-mail, England - 35%, Japan - 37%. As 
to military intelligence, RF gets 46% of its secret information's from the e-mail. 
Iran - 31%, Turkey - 48% (It also includes communications, press and 
correspondence links). 
Special programs of Armenians 
 
In August-September 2000, the Armenian intelligence center put on the 
agenda the issue of making contacts with the Armenian communities, unions, 
Diaspora centers in the CIS countries and preparing special programs for this. The 
issue was considered at the country's Security Council. On August 14, hundreds of 
a dozen of specialists, "coordinators", researchers were sent to Moscow, 
Khankendi, Dagestan, Dushanba, Tashkent, Astana, Tbilisi, Ashgabad... The goal 
was to resume links with the Armenians, who, on different reasons, moved from 
Yerevan, and involve them to cooperate with Armenia in numerous fields... The 
initiators have distributed special inquiry sheets with the idea of the "Great 
Armenia", among the Armenians-former residents of Sumgait, Baki, Ganja, 
Nakhchivan, to set links. 
AS provided, Yerevan has purchased a number of privatized buildings in 
Astrakhan, Stavropol, Saratov, Moscow, Alamty, Ashgabad and Makhachkala to 
accommodate with computers and electronic equipments and the local Armenians 
are involved in the work. The would-be electronic net is managed by a high-rank 
Armenian officer, Manvel Grigoryan. Armenians, who were asked in Stavropol, 
Pyatigorsk, Krasnodar and Soci, as well as other Northern Caucasus areas, whether 
they wanted to move to Karabakh, 47% responded "yes". The poll was financed by 
"Richel" Armenian company. 
62 
 
West distrusts in Internet 
 
Armenians involve religious communities, sections, charity companies, 
acting under the pretext of religion, international legal centers, engaged in the 
freedom of conscience, in the collection of intelligence data, passing the secret 
information through e-mail. Therefore, the Armenian Apostol Church demands 2 
thousands pastors to work in the regions and diasporas to set religious intelligence 
ties. 
On the other hand, the books of "Bakhagavat gita" (krishnaids), that are 
regularly sold in Baki streets, have been published in "Mitk" publishers by 
politologist Stepan Danielyan in Yerevan (twice in 1999, three times in 2000, two 
times in the first half of 2001 with 10-20 thousand copies). 
It was ascertained that still on April 24, 1995, the Defense Ministry of 
Armenia made a secret decision, related to them, who does not belong to the 
Apostol Church. One of the points of this decision was connected with change of 
names and surnames of the Armenians in the CIS countries and set contacts. After 
November 9, 1999, the item was included to the "Electronic intelligence program". 
In December 2000, a Memo was signed between the government of 
Armenia and the Apostol Church. Another document, on "Exchange of 
information", was signed by leader of the Yerevan-based religious center "The 
Jehova witnesses", Rustan Khachaturyan and Defense Ministry intelligence 
service. 
Chairman of the "Sakharov Fund", Agasi Arshanyan, said he would 
voluntarily assist in the provision with data. In fact, special services of the leading 
western countries, diplomatic missions have limited use of the Internet. Currently, 
the US and English secret services use a serious electronic program, named 
"Interlink". As to e-mail, secret programs are said to be prepared in this field, too. 
 
BIN LADEN'S CONTACTS WITH ARMENIANS 
 
Terrorists striving to acquire nuclear weapon 
 
According to investigations, there are no diverse national interests in the 
Islamic fundamentalism. All the Moslems are brothers for a common goal. That is 
to say, as a conclusion of the goal there is an Islamic formula in Islam - "Islam 
generates Islam". There is a note in the second paragraph of the "Doctrine of 
Fatwa", issued by the "Taliban Al Gadri" publishers at Usama Bin Laden's "Tora-
Bora" military camp (it was published three times - on July 13, 1988, on April 9, 
2000 and on June 22, 2001): "... I issued my fatwa. The territory between the Black 
63 
 
Sea and the Caspian belongs to Islam. There, nobody can own the abundance and 
wealth, except the Caliph (e.i. Usama Bin Laden) ..The Jews can not wash their 
feet in the Caspian oil (e.i. Baku-Ceyhan-author). On this purpose, we created the 
International Islamic Security System. Everybody, who admits Islam, can enter this 
system...". 
 
The Caspian in the eyes of terrorists 
 
In fact, Usama Bin Laden supplements the views of the triangle of Armenia, 
Russia and Iran, who protested at conclusion of the "Contract of the Century" in 
1994. Because, Russia wants the pipeline to pass through Armenia, while Iran has 
even announced on its 2 billion US dollars for the project). As to the Middle Asia, 
there was no reaction by Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan for the 
Caliph's fatwa on the "Black Sea to the Caspian". Because, the doctrine of Usama 
Bin Laden was against the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan MEP, the main item in the 
Azerbaijan oil strategy. An Armenian from Kalifornia, billionaire and businessman 
in the field of raods-pipeline construction Krik Krikoryan even alloted 85 US 
dollars to frustrate the route of the pipeline and turn it to Yerevan, also endanger 
the Baku-Black Sea communications. And consequently, the goal was to  impede 
Azerbaijan's links with the world markets. 
On this purpose, the Islamic analysts of the "Al-Kaida" "Vanguards" group 
made an interesting statement in August 2001. The statement was made public on 
September 9, 2001, at the meeting of the society of "Friends of Chechen", 
registered by the direct instruction of King Husseyn in Oman, Jordan, on Octobe 
21, 1998. Coordinator between "Al-Kaida" and the Northern Caucasus Sheik 
Abdul Baki Jama emphasized: "... The abundance and wealth between the Balck 
Sea and the Caspian, mentioned in the fatwa program of the Caliph (Usama Bin 
Laden) are the gift of Allah and nobody can devide them. They belongs to Islam". 
Look and compare: the French experts say there are about 70-250 billion barrel oil 
in the Caspian. According to the State Department of the United States, there are 
163 billion barrel oil in the Caspian. And there may be another 15,6 billion barrel. 
The English experts claim that there are 28 billion barrel oil plus 243 trillion foot 
of gas in the Caspian... Germans confirm that there are 19 billion barrel oil and 
2.300 billion cubic meters of gas in the Caspian. Experts of the Russian Federation 
have another conclusion: there are 7-8 billion barrel of oil and 5 trillion cubic 
meters of gas in the Caspian. As to "Al-Kaida", there are 98 billion barrel of oil, 
216 trillion cubic meters of gas in the Caspian... 
 
 
64 
 
Hunting for Nuclear 
 
The "Afghan Arabians" London-based bulletin informs that from 1998 to 
early 2000, 16 volunteers from the Dubna Nuclear Studies Center (near Moscow) 
have come to "Al-Kaida". They were analysts and scholars engaged in the nuclear 
technology. Some of them remained in Sudan's chemical plants, some moved to 
Algeria, three went to Lebanon, four came to the nuclear laboratory in the Tora-
Bora camp. It was ascertained that out of 47 specialists (the former USSR 
physicists) working at the nuclear studies center in Dubna, 28 were the Armenian 
naitonals. On the other hand, in that period those Armenian specialists in associate 
with their Chinese colleagues have participated in construciton of the cement plant 
in Gandahar, in the exploration studies of gas deposits in Jalalabad, Bamiyan and 
Gunduz provinces. The above mentioned "Vanguards" group was headed by Dr 
Levon Mikaelyan, who once taught at the Institute of Physics in Yerevan, later 
moved to Moscow. Dr Mikaelyan, in his turn, was invited to the group of analysts 
in the Kwetta bureau of "Al-Kaida" by a certain Brigadir Imtiyaz from Pakistan. 
As to the intelligence agent of Pakistan (SIS) Brigadir Imtiyaz, he also 
"labored" at the Scientific Research Institute named after D.V. Skobeltsin under the 
Moscow State University (Russia) in 1994. The Instutute was engaged in nuclear 
physics. From Februry 26 to March 28, Brigadir Imtiyaz visits Yerevan, where he 
meets with a certain Santrosyan, professor of the physics faculty, who also was 
engaged in the nuclear technology, and lived at the appartment in A. Manukyan 
street. 
In April-July of the same year, Brigadir Imtiyaz appears in Kazakhstan, 
where he was "welcomed" by Dr Yusupov at the experimental scientific research 
Institute of therotical physics. 
As it was clarified, just in 1994 (December 23) 15 kg uranium was stolen 
from the Ulbinski mettalurgy plant in the Eastern Kazakhstan. 
On the other hand, on 29 December, 20 containers with the radioactive 
materials was apprehended at the Gisht-Kuprik customs station at the Kazakhstan-
Pakistan border. But it was only a stop-gap measure. The customs official appears 
to be professor Santrosyan's "relative" ... and so, captain Amanak Santrosyan sets 
things going... 
Brigadir Imtiyaz, an intelligence agent of Pakistan ("SIS"), one of the 
leaders of the "Islamic Brotherhood" organization, who also implemented the 
"nuclear operation" for "Al-Kaida", from 1999 heads the independent, radical 
Islamic terrorist orgnaization. ("Jamaat ul-Fukra, Jihad Sokneil for the North 
America, Muhammad Sommandos, Moslems of the America, Soldiers of Allah"). 
And, in 1999, Brigadir Imtiyaz founds his New York bureau (BQ). 
65 
 
Armenian wings of Bin Laden 
 
In September 1999, Brigadir Imtiyaz, with the mediation of Kamal Ahmed 
Al-Fadl, one of the companion-in-arms of Bin Laden, more exactly, a paymaster 
and financial adviser, makes contacts with the "Barklayz" (London) and 
"Jirocredit" (Vienna) banks. Under Bin Laden's instruciton he resumes the 
financial channels. 
In 2000, Islamist Brigadir Imtiyaz founds the bureaus of "Jamaat ul Fukra" 
in Beirut, Lebanon (September 14), in Marseilles, France (August  9),   in   
Damascus,   Syria   (October 25),   in  Tehran,   Iran (November 5). On 26 
September of the same year, he gives an interview to Asala's newspaper "Hay-
baykar" in London, whereby he confirms that "we (e.i. "Jamaat ul-Fukra") had 
consultations with the Armenian "Asala" organization in Damascus" (On the same 
year, he was given the rank of "Sheik"). Sheik Brigadir Imtiyaz says in "Hay-
baykar" newspaper: "We established alliance with the Armenians. The Armenian 
patriots from Asala (Armenian Secret Army of the Liberation of Armenia) always 
serve us. They are good guides, they lead us, help us in trade (e.i. trade of arms and 
narcotics) and other deals. Some of them serve in "Al-Kaida", in the "Uzbekistan 
Islamic Movement", in the "Islamic Group"... in "Al Muhajirun"... as bodyguards". 
Usama Bin Laden's "Al-Kaida" is engaged in numerous fields. They 
conduct operations in trade of arms, secret informations, confidential bargains. 
Islamic groups of "Al-Kaida" easily enter the conflict zones where the authorities 
are powerless. 
In March 29, 2001, the members of "Al-Kaida" have contacted through 
Internet with the Islamic "Bui Air" group, who are registered by the Bulgaria secret 
services and engaged in trade of arms... Later, this contacts become alive. Weapons 
and ammunitions are illegaly transported to the conflict areas in the Caucasus. The 
arsenal containing of "Igla" (ZPK) rocket complex, missiles of "Fagot" and neces-
sary equipment for them, "Strela 2M" rockets, anti-aircraft guns of 100 and 57 mm, 
electronic equipment, "Konkurs" rockets (to Karabakh and   Yerevan)   ...   has   
been  already  transported  to  Armenia, Khankendi, Chechenistan, Osetiya and 
Abkhazia. And the "Bui Air" is headed by the former chief of military economic 
service in Bulgaria Khristo Stanimirov. According to the defense minister of 
Bulgaria Boyko Hoevan, this "is a danger of international concern". 
Just from this standpoint, the statements by Armenia and the so-called 
Karabakh militants, who make challenges for war, should be analysed and worthily 
assessed. 
According to professor B. Rubin (US), the "Talebans" and "Al-Kaida" 
group have great contacts with the terrorists and weapon dealers. They can 
66 
 
instigate and embroil the ethnic-national and inter-etnic conflicts. Oil of Baku is 
one of key item of these conflicts. It needs a "new policy, a new ideology in this 
field". "Al-Kaida" is the most reliable and confidential bridge for trade of arms and 
narcotics... 
 
United States should be secured from 
nuclear strikes 
 
It was clarified that president of the United States has signed the #13129 
executive order on 4 July (Presidential Documents Executive Order 13129... 
Blocking Property and Prohibiting Transactions With the Taliban - Federal 
Register). 
As provided, purchase of the 50 mm "Barret M81-A1" and "82-A1" sniper 
guns with the composition of uranium isotopes (V-238) that were distributed 
among Usama Bin Laden's companion-in-arms in the United States, in particuclar, 
in Washington D.C. and New York cities, was also organized by Sheik Brigadir". 
People of Sheik were instructed by the Armenian terrorists (Abo Sattaryan, Farid 
Ovsaryan, Grant Pogosyan...) in the "Sakina Security Services" fundamental 
organization which was headed by Israel Yelizaryan. 
It was also ascertained that every year on August 14, numerous people of 
non-Islamic faith were converted to Islam and came the "Al-Kaida" group and 
joined the "Islamic Security Guards" of Bin Laden. According to the provided 
informations, last year 6 Georgians, 12 Armenians, 14 Lezghins, 5 Russians... from 
the former soviet space have joined the "Security Guards". A certain Abu Ibrahim 
regularly teaches the Armenians how to use the explosives and calls them to stand 
ready for battle for their ideas and never retreat in the face of fear... 
The Armenian analysts play a great role in making the web-site contacts 
among these terrorist organizations, which are called "small laboratories". It is 
interesting to analyse the links between Bin Laden's "Al-Kaida" and "Hizbullah" 
and "Hamas" groups. The Internet group of "Al-Kaida" in Lahor, Pakistan, was 
headed by Yozen (Surenovich) Malikyants, who was born in Yerevan in 1954 and 
lives in Lahor since his 12 years. The Internet group of "Hizbullah" (Iran) is 
headed by Mohanes Yahya Aslanyan, in "Hamas" (Lebanon) - such groups are 
headed by Harry Babluleymyan. These links are active in the territories of NATO 
member-states, including the United States as well. They make secret contacts 
through the Internet, collect informations on the energy resources of the Caspian 
littoral countries, including Azerbaijan, open bank accounts, transfer "orders" with 
secret codes. The April issue of the "U.S.A." newspaper writes: "Personnel of these 
stations are peopled mainly by Armenians and they are headed by Sheik Vadih Al-
67 
 
Heij". After all these, director of the US Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) Mr. 
George Tenet reaffirms: "The Islamic terrorists commit a real electronic jihad". 
Director of the US MTA, lieutenant-general Micheal Hayden notes in his report: 
"... They (the Islamists) have the best technical and electronic oportunities, the 
strongest telecommunications systems...". 
On the other hand, the Islam radicals through the Internet can easily set 
contacts with the Islamic research and religious centers, mosques in the Caucasus, 
receive the necessary informations. 
 
Armenian volunteers of the terrorist organizations 
 
Now, on base of the provided materials we present the list of Armenian 
volunteers at the terrorist organizations in 1998-2000. It has also to be reminded 
that these persons have voluntarily converted them to Islam and with a monthly 
payment of 5000-6500 US dollars serve in "Al-Kaida". 
1. Prosecutor (Yerevan) Arushan Agayan ("Prosecutor of the disbelivers") 
- Lebanon (1999). 
2. Officer (Yerevan)  Garik lalayan Borisovich ("Militant Islamic Group") 
- Libiya (1999). 
3. Professor  (Yerevan)  Aga  Saakyan   Mikhailovich  ("Islamic Group") 
- Egypt (1999). 
4. Journalist (Yerevan) Yura Chilgaryan ("Armed Islamic Group") - 
Algeria (2000). 
5. Teacher (Khankendi) Ambarsum Nikolaevich Karapetyan ("The 
Emigrants") - Algeria (2000). 
6. Fronteer  (Khankendi)  Stepan  Ter-Avanesyan  ("Al-Jihad al-Islami") - 
Egypt. 
7. Fronteer  (Khankendi)   Grigori   Petrosovich  Avakumov(yan) 
("Soldiers of Jerusalem") - Iraq... 
It is also pointed that these persons, who have been members of separate 
Armenian organizations, including Asala, now also lead the city bureaus of 
terrorist groups. Every such organization or bureau is a small laboratory. As the 
famous US physicist Dr. Steven Khakinch says: "... Terror actions are more 
dangerous and cruel than the nuclear weapons. A small laboratory is enough for 
terror...". 
a) Johns Arakelyan Belousovich - was born in 1957 in Yerevan. Graduated 
from the Yerevan Politechnical Institute. Since 1991 he was a volunteer in 
Karabakh and participated in the "Front of Defense". In 1996, he was conferred 
with the "Saint George" order. Emigrated to Beirut in 1997. He is the coordinator 
68 
 
of the Beirut-Khankendi group of "Asala". From April 14, 1997, also is the 
member of "Palestine People Liberty Front" (Al Uabha Al-Shabigah Al-Tahrir 
Filastin). Since July 15 of the same year, is a "trainer" of the "Heroes Backing" 
terrorist group. The "Heroes Backing" organization is in contact with Usama Bin 
Laden's "Al-Kaida" (1998), with the Beirut bureau of "Asala" (1990). According to 
the "Afghan Arabians" bulletin, Johns Arakelyan has visited the Gandahar bureau 
of "Al-Kaida" on 16-25 August 1999. 
b) Lella Bagdasarovich Bagdasaryan - was born in 1959 in Azatmut 
(Armenia), in the family of votary. Has fighted in the women sniper group of 
"Asala" who came from Marseilles (France) and participated in the 1992 battles 
under Shusha. In September 1994, she moved to France. Has led the women 
military detachment of "Asala". In 1998, she visits Saudi Arabia, where meets with 
the consul Ahya Bin Laden, appointed by Usama Bin Laden. In July 5, 1999, she 
was converted to Islam and leads the French section of "Al-Kaida". 
c) Argun Arustamovich Izraelyan - was born in 1951 in Khankendi, a 
chemist, fought against Azerbaijanis in 1992. Partcipated in the 
invasion of Khojali. Was warded with the "Marseilles" order. She moved to 
Damascus (Syria) in 1955. Was a coordinator in the Armenian Diaspora. At the 
joint meeting of "Asala" terror groups, was "elected" as the deputy chairperson of 
the Washington bureau of "Al-Kaida". Since 1999, she is in the group of Mulla 
Omer Akhundzadeh. 
d) Mishel Gaikovich Sarkisyan, was born in 1949 in Sumgait. Moved to 
Yerevan in 1959, then, with the whole family moved to Berd settlement (May 16, 
1992). In May 1992, he joined the volunteer militants in Karabakh, led "Sasun" 
detachment, participated in slaughter of Azerbaijanis. Since March 26, 1999, he 
leads the Cyprus bureau of Asala". Since January 9, 2002, he labors in the 
analitical bureau of "Al-Kaida". 
 
1. Headquarters ("From the Black Sea to the Caspian") 
 
6. Collection of the military-strategic informations. ("Asala", "Jamaat ul-
Fukra"). Studies on Islamic factor. Data of economic intelligence ("Asala"). 
8. Establishment of confidential links with with opposition (with their 
participation to provide for opening of research centers, Institutes, laboratories 
connected with the oil policy). The divided economic interests. Studing the reasons 
of failure of the oil contracts. Who purchases the illegaly transported oil out of the 
region? Bank ensuring of the profit. Division of the profit (among the opposition). 
"The policy of grant" ("Al-Kaida"). 
 
69 
 
2. Studies of the local energy resources and nuclear wastes ("Asala"). 
a) Territory of the oil processing factories, capacity, personnel. Scientific-
research institutes (Alliance of "Asala" and "Jamaat ul-Fukra"). 
b) Studies of the military contracts. Purchase of military technology, use, 
renovation (for the London bureau) - ("Asala"). 
c) Capacity of pipelines, term of laying, costs. 
d) Collection of anti-propaganda materials on the leading persons, 
engaged in the oil strategy in the regions (Lebanon bureau). 
e) Exploration of new energy sources - territories. Studying the newly 
invented oil technology and equipment. 
 
11-3. Installation of "RS" in the strategic corridors. A group of 
communicators. Electronic system.  
12-4. Strategic-research departments. 
 
a) On ecological issues (nuclear wasts). 
b) On nuclear wastes (Egypt bureau). 
c) On bacteriological, chemical, nuclear weapons. 
d) Composition of the materials, transported from the region. 
Establishment of secret contacts with the customs stations and centers. 
 
13. "Interlink"  -  top  secret special  computer system   (on  the Caspian 
region). 
a)  Realization of the oil policy of strategic oil plan, coded as "Muhammad" 
in the regions (Saudi Arabia bureau). 
 
14. Establishment of contacts with the intelligence centers, secret services 
and department in the regions. 
15. Security group. 
 
9. The militarized strategic analitical center. Studying the military industry 
complex in the regions (on the Black Sea region). 
10. Studying the territories, engaged in chemical, bacteriological and 
nuclear weapons. 
 
5. Establishment of secret contacts with the local law-enforcement bodies 
and secret services. Group of guards. Counter-intelligence detachments. 
 
 
70 
 
USAMA BIN LADEN WHO PROCLAIMED HIMSELF "CALIPH" 
IN 50 COUNTRIES 
 
...After the death of Mahammad bin Laden known as millionaire in Saudi 
Arabia his sons headed his construction "Bin Laden Brothers for Strasting and 
Industry" 
Ahya bin Laden who is popular in the world and Europe reconstructed the 
center Beirut. He established the grand fund at the Harvard University and he sent 
the scholarship to those who fight for their motherland and for their land. As a 
result two Armenians Rezat Artunyan and Babak Yenezaryan were among those 
who got that scholarship in November 14,2000.It is written in the record-book of 
Rezat Arutunyan who graduated from the Harvard University: For being ready " to 
martyrize for the sake of the land"(?). Which land was meant wasn 't explained. 
In February 14 of this year Ahya bin Laden's network of the international 
coordination center in London broadened (Binexport). The right side of the 
network which consists of seven rooms was given to Armenians as their verifying 
center (?). At this time Mohammad's fifteenth son Usama bin Laden established 
cooperation with the Switzerland's "SISO" company. 
Mohammad's sixteenth son Salam bin Laden was accepted to the Council of 
Directors "Bahgue AE Saoudi". Lion Nairyan who left Karkijahan settlement of 
Khankandinin 1992 for the Lebanan and then emigrated to France was elected 
secretary of that Council of Directors. 
Mohammad's eighteenth son Khalil Mohammed bin Laden was appointed 
the consul of Brazil to Saudi Arabia and married to Brazilian citizen Izabel 
Kristina Bayma. Izabel's mother Kamilla Garajanyan and her nurse were 
Armenians by nationality. So, in November, 2000 Khalil Mohammad bin Laden 
addressed to the Brazilian government to send him to work at the diplomatic corps 
in Armenia (?). 
 
The "All-Kaida" army 
 
The late father's seventeenth son (Mohammad bin Laden has got 54 sons) 
appeared in Afghanistan. His name was Usama, too. Having graduated from the 
university of Abdulla Aziz in 1981 Bin Laden made his way to the religious, 
radical, Islam organization "Jamaat-e islamiyya" founded in Karachi (Pakistan). He 
met a professor who organized "All-Kaida" (Vaza) radical Islam army. But in 1998 
he established "Caucasian intelligence of Islam". 
1.In the direction of the Black sea (through Georgian territory). 
2.In the direction of Azerbaijan (through Karabakh territory). 
71 
 
3.In the direction of Armenia (through Iranian territory). 
In the same year he organized "Al-Jihad-International" terrorist group. 
According to our investigation it became clear that this organization has got several 
coherent and stronghold gangs consisting of 25-30 members Brooklyn, New 
Jersey, Detroit, California, Virginia (USA). 
 
Ibrahim Bin Laden in Khankandi 
 
...Mohammad's nineteenth son Ibrahim bin Laden laid the foundation of the 
"Laden" international construction company in 1984 Ibrahim bin Laden whose 
profession is a civil engineer appeared in Khankandi of the Karabakh in 1999. 
After two days he was heard in Lachin and Shusha. In June 16 and 19,1999 he was 
accompanied by the millionaire, Girayn Ovanyan heading the construction 
magnate in the state of New-Jersy(USA). Millionaire Ovanyan tried to explain to 
Ibrahim bin Laden that Armenians had already marked their "Silver wedding" in 
Karabakh. 
As to Ibrahim bin Laden, his mother was Armenian whose father Afik 
Akopyan was a merchant and lived in Syria(in Damascus). The late millionaire 
Mohammad bin Laden's family is divided according to their ties of blood. His 
children born by Syrian, Armenian woman organized one front but the other 
children born by Jordanian woman grouped in the second one. But in spite of all 
these, all of them were under the late Mohammad's command. 
Ibrahim bin Laden known as the chief of the construction company in 
appearance, invested in every country which had suitable conditions for preparing 
chemicals from its natural riches and from whose territory uranium was extracted. 
In the lands of Syria, Iraq Iran, India, Pakistan, China, Russian Federation, 
America, England and Germany he has got his own construction groups and some 
of them are still working. The members of "Laden" company constructed medical 
factories, built storehouses for nuclear remnants laid foundation of the laboratories 
which could work in quite secret conditions in those territories. According to secret 
materials of USACIA as third, more precisely as a transit state or transit territory 
Armenia and Afghanistan are one of centers that were able to transport and convey 
nuclear materials through the way of smuggling. 
 
"Vadical-Kaid" in Yerevan and Kalbajar 
 
It is curious that on May 4,2000 the branch of the "Vadi al-Kaid" company 
belonged to Ibrahim bin Laden was organized in Yerevan. It was given location in 
the south west of Armenian State University, approximately 500 meters apart from 
72 
 
main building, in A. Manikyan Street. In the academic years of 1994-2000 the 
tution fees of nine afghan students having graduated from the Yerevan State 
University were paid by "Vadi al-Kaid" company (?). In June 16 of the same year 
the resort-center in Istibulag-Chaykand zone, which had been built in the northern 
territory of occupied Khalbajar, was organized for the same students. According to 
the information obtained by us a businessman Ayyubkhan Shirzad gave those 
students the cards, the products of the company "Vadi al-Kaid" on which the 
number of the brigade 005 was written. 
 
Brigade "055" 
 
I'd like to remind that according to the information investigated by us, this 
brigade is a military brigade number 055. It has got Islamic-military cells in the 
cities of London, Yerevan, Paris, Washington, Tehran, Cologn, in Russia, 
Argentina, Brazil, Georgia, Daghestan. Besides, the brigade number 055 financed 
directly by Usama bin Laden hasn't got any connection with "Taliban". It is an 
independent brigade, which worked secretly). It remains as an interesting and seri-
ous problem that Ibrahim bin Laden who is an engineer of strategic objects for 
mass-destruction weapons by profession, created business-like cooperation with 
Armenian millionaire. 
 
Bin Laden and "Chegakron". 
 
According to the information, on November 21, 1999 Ibrahim bin Laden 
met with Vartan (jan) Arushanyan who was one of the leaders of the Armenian 
organization "Chegakron" located in the north-east part of Khankandi (in the 
territory of Gubadli and Malibayli). In the same year Armenian's Ministry of 
Justice restrained to register this organization in Yerevan being afraid of the 
International Juridical Norms, because it was set as a formulation with fascist 
mood, created with occupation mood towards Turkish peoples, especially towards 
independent Azerbaijan country. So, in 1999 the organization "Chegakron" moved 
their headquarters to Khankandi. And at that time from the old building of the self-
proclaimed Ministry of Defense four rooms were given to them and they were 
registered officially. 
From the information obtained by us it become clear that bin Laden worked 
out a new plan for the strategic, training camps in the occupied territories of 
Azerbaijan especially Jabrail, Zangilan and Gubadli. He invested 320 thousand 
dollars of total sum. The fact is that one of the international coordinators and 
leaders of the "Chegakron" terrorist organization, a physics scientist Mark 
73 
 
Shakiryan joined the radical organization "The Armed Islam" of Algeria with bin 
Laden's certificate and this man performs the mission of coordination between the 
two organization. 
 
"The armed occupants" and "Chegakon" 
 
In February 13,2000 the changes were made both in the fourteenth article of 
"The Rules" of the organization "Armed Islam" and the ninth article of the "Rules" 
of the organization "Chegakron" (the aim connected with the Christian - Islamic 
relationship). It must be noted that in 1993, Omar Abd-Ar Ramah nicknamed blind 
Sheykh, who was supported by "Al-Kaid" and blew up the Trade Center in New 
York, was trained at this organization and sent as an executor from this 
organization. And another article of the "Rules" of "The Armed Islam" radical 
organization, spread in 1994-Article 13 was rewritten." ... Every person who loves 
Islam, accepts it irrespective of his race, language and religion... who fights for his 
motherland and land... is with us .It makes no deference, this fight takes place in 
Asia or in Europe or in Transcaucasia... We joined together for the only idea... we 
created the word "Irshad" in this unity. We created "Irshad in Islam". Wherever is 
"Irshad" we are there... There are young people between the ages of 19-25 among 
the members of "Chegakron" directly learning the radical Islamic terrorist 
organization. 
As to its structure "Chegakron" built its headquarters as the form of pyramid 
as the numbers of "Hawas" of Lebanon. 
 
Tehran... Khankandi... Bin Laden 
 
On those days it can't make us think of visit of Migran Pirimyan, the 
chairman of the Relation committee of the Armenian diocese in Tehran with 
Artsakh and the Union of Armenian businessmen in Tehran to the Karabakh and 
their meeting with USA millionaire, Ibrahim bin Laden shareholder Girayn 
Ovnanyan. Because, Pirimyan's cheque of fifty-seven thousand dollars was given 
to "Chigakron" members as the contribution of the Armenian community in 
Tehran. In April 13,2000 the employee of the strategic investigation center Laura 
Surenovich Agayan thanked for this "gift" on "Motherland" TV show transmitted 
by "Artsakh" (Khankandi) TV channel. It became clear from our investigations in 
the years of 1992-1993 millionaire Ibrahim bin Laden passed through the places 
where voluntary Afghan Arabs took part in the battles in Karabakh and he shot 
them by the camera. 
 
74 
 
The terrorist group of "Evkrapa" 
 
From June 12,1992 a joint team work was established between the members 
of upper-mentioned "Laden" brigade number 055 and the terrorist group of 
"Evkrapa" formed as the voluntary relations detachment in Karabag. Two groups 
"Artsakh-3" and "Aram-4" of the members of this organization financed by Aram 
Sarkisyan who once worked as the director of the "Ararat cement" plant and as 
Armenian ex-prime minister, control directly Orta-Garashanli and Agjakand 
settlements of Kalbajar occupied region in Azerbaijan. In November 9 of the last 
year Garun Khanzayan and Taran Sirdagyan accused of participating in the 
narcotic trade mafia, were exposed during the flight of the Dynshambe-Moscow 
airline. It became clear that till September 26-30, 2000 both of them were in 
Agjakand with the "Evkrapa" detachment and carried the geographical maps of 
Kalbajar, Lachin, as well as the surrounding villages of Khankandi with them to 
the center of the narcotic trade located in Dushanba (?) 
 
 
 
Armenian narco businessmen. 
 
It also became clear that Armenian narco-businessmen's names were 
revealed in "Yerevan-Moscow " and "Yerevan-Khankandi" airlines. 
The investigations show "Artsakh-3" and "Aram-4" groups of the "Evkrapa" 
voluntary rebellions' detachment were marked in the state organs of Iran Islamic 
Republic being occupied with narco-business, as well as using the intelligence 
service of the "Senah-e Pastaram" people in the Karabakh and as the groups 
connecting with narco-resources in Dyushambe (Tajikistan), Serakhs, Kushka and 
Tedjan (Turkmenistan). 
It becomes clear from the information that "Evkrapa" rebellions participate 
in the speculation of weapons on the side of the military brigade "number 055" 
belonged to "Laden"ist people and being engaged in weapon speculation and the 
financial expenses of the "Typhun" missile sold by the private company of the 
People's Republic of China belong to them, too (?).We don't want to accuse 
anybody. Simply, according to the information on the narcotic, produced in the 
Karabakh six "laboratories" with different size work there. (Look at the table) 
According to our investigations, the members of "Evkrapa" are going to join 
Astana group (Kazakhstan) in February 12, of this year. Because the Kazakhstan 
network of narco-business is wide. So, 93per cent of heroin, 85 per cent opium and 
78 percent of hasish were transferred to the Russian Federation from Kazakhstan. 
75 
 
Without doubt "Evkrapa" was noted in the documents of USA CIA for being one 
of the coordination groups between the narco-mafias in central Asia and 
Transcaucasia. 
As to the "Evkrapa" armed narco-business speculators in the Karabakh, in 
the July-June of the last year the additional branches were organized by the 
Armenian Diaspora in cities of Fargana, Hemangan, Andijan, Hukus... 
The price of narcotic substances, especially, one kilogramme of heroin 
produced in Transcaucassia, as well as in the Karabakh: 
 
Table 1. 
 
Years Dyushambe Tashkent Moscow Tehran Ashkhabad Europe 
1998 
$ 
14000 
$ 
34000 
$ 
82000 
$ 
23000 
$ 
41000 
$ 
220000 
$ 
1999 
$ 
16000 
$ 
37000 
$ 
91000 
$ 
21000 $ 
39000 
$ 
240000 
$ 
2001 
$ 
17000 
$ 
40000 
$ 
100000 
$ 
26000 
$ 
42000 
$ 
300000 
$ 
 
Yerevan activity of terrorist organization 
 
We don't analyze these views, keep them open. Though strange but it 
became clear during our investigation and researches that on May 12, 1992 the 
poet Michael Dudin was presented a card of "Armenian Liberation Movement" 
with a map "Great Armenia" on it, on the occasion of Shusha's occupation. (Card 
number: 04-105/22 Armenia. May 12, 1992. Signature: A.Gukasyan. Yerevan 
bureau). And Arkadi Gukasyan, the fabricated "president" of fabricated "Karabakh 
Republic" has been member of "ASALA" since 1992. Gukasyan was given a card 
for the first time in Lyons city of France on March 22, 1992. The number of the 
card was UAF 03-111/214. About a year later, on February. 21, 1993 Arkadi 
Gukasyan was given a new card in Krasnodar city of Russia. At present Gukasyan 
has got membership card of "ASALA" № UAM 10-100/244. 
That year Arkadi Gukasyan, the "president" of fabricated Karabakh was the 
coordinator between "Shiras" (a settlement in Armenia) group of Armenian 
Diaspora in Portugal that was on a "business trip" in Armenia and Lachin, 
Kalbajar, Shusha regions of Karabakh On October 4, 1992 A.Gukasyan was 
appointed to Yerevan bureau of "Armenian Liberation Movement". One of the 
76 
 
terms of the agreement signed between terrorist organization "ASALA" and 
"Armenia Liberation Movement" in Italian bureau of the former on October 2, 
1990 was that the movement had to use "ASALA" as a physical, military and 
ideological base. 
 
Banks assisting terrorists 
 
The center financing "Armenian Liberation Movement" situated in 
apartment N5, Alaverdiyan street in Yerevan was found: "Akopyan" bank (France, 
Lebanon centers) (Don't confuse with "Akopyan" firm) I'd like to remind that this 
bank is connected with the name of bank opened (by "ASALA") under the name of 
Akop Akopyan, ideological follower of "ASALA", killed in 1988 and then burned. 
According to our investigations, "Akopyan" bank was functioning ... with 
the code "Arm.Va.-"Asor"x"Ararat"-220011-44421" in Shusha, "Arm.Va 
"Asor"x"Liberation"-0426-441" in Lachin, "Arm.Va-"Asor"x"Sesret-Au"-
13942/36" in Kalbajar. And it's also known that each of these banks took part in 
local bank operations besides bank system of Az. in Shusha since November 13, 
1990. Each of these banks took active part in black market economy of Armenians 
operating in the areas they belong to. 
It carried out several bank operations through state bank "Gadirov-
Asratyan" operating on June 12, 1991 in Shusha region. As a result of this 
mysterious bank operation 182 thousand manats were transferred to Mr.Baji 
Ayrapetovicvh Asratyan, the department of "Armenian Liberation Movement" 
operating illegally in Apartment 36, Telman street in Shusha region. According to 
the transference document, construction-building group had to found a new Palace 
of Culture in Shusha. In reality this money was spent on construction of charity 
building of Armenians in the area. This building became Bank Headquarters of 
Shusha bureau of "Armenian Liberation Movement" by order of Yevond 
Fklatovich Ayraltyan appointed to Shusha since June 26, 1992. (by Mr. Georgi 
Sursiovich Adamyan, colonel of Yerevan bureau of "A.Z.M.") (Tel: 20-84). 
 
"ASALA " wings in Karabakh 
 
Everything was controlled from Shusha. On September 26, 1992 in Shusha-
General Headquarters a military meeting was held where "Hayastan" (Founded on 
July 4, 1991. The head - Z.Gulbekyan), "Haydad" (The branch was founded on 
March 2, 1992. The head-S.Karajanyan), "Ksammet" (The branch was founded on 
Feb. 23, 1990. The head-captain N.Agabekyants), "Arstakh" (Founded on Nov. 12, 
1989. The head - F.Feliksyan)... Edvand (Edmund) Safaryan, the lider of Armenian 
77 
 
Diaspora in Russia, Afaran Stepanyan, the member of "Yeish al-Shaab-Armenia" 
(Armenian national army") community founded in  Damascus  by Armenian 
diaspora in  Syria,  Abakum Avakyan the head of Military wing of "Dashnaksutun" 
organization founded in Beirut by Armenian diaspora in Lebanon ... also the 
representatives (L.Kasparyan, A.Duriyan, S.Tigranyan, D.Sumbatyan, Sh.Ararat...) 
coming from France, England, Spain, Iran, Argentina, Iraq centers of terrorist 
organization "ASALA" participated. Newspaper "Aztag" ("Position") published in 
Armenian in Beirut on Sep. 30, 1992 states pointing to the meeting: "... (over the 
telephone)... Robert, Badalyan, our correspondent from Armenia informs that a 
powerful Security Council able to control Armenia, also Karabakh was set up in 
Shusha. The members will live till setting Karabakh free and independent. (?)... 
Arkadi Gukasyan, the coordinator of Yerevan bureau of "Armenia.Z.M." was 
appointed the council assistant chief of headquarters of "self-defence forces" ...(?) 
 
 
Armenian maniacs put out children's eyes 
 
Newspaper "Aztag" (Lebanon) points out in its article "Armenian captives" 
published on October 4, 1992: "... the number of the captured - the first captured in 
Shusha is 16. All of them are children." The newspaper then writes: "... These 
children were in blood. Some of them were taken away from the city in cars 
covered..." 
That was written by Erem Lalayan, the Armenian correspondent of the 
newspaper. (It was the first Armenian newspaper to create its correspondent office 
in Shusha), But our investigations opened another view for us. On Nov. 4, 1992 
Armen Bagdasarovich Bagdaryan, the doctor - surgeon of Military hospital of DM 
of Armenia demands to close "amputation" rooms opened in Shusha in the 
meeting. (The meeting started at 17:30 by Baku time and ended at 21:10) (Don't 
forget this fact)... But 11 participants of the meeting voted against him and put the 
issue of dismissing him. On Nov. 7, 1992 Military doctor A.Bagdasaryan was 
dismissed. 
But the confession of Armenian doctor was true. 
In the history of Karabakh the first amputation room was opened in Shusha. 
In these rooms they amputated the broken limbs of the children... wounded 
and also hurt, suffered from mine, sometimes deliberately put their eyes out, 
fractured their fingers. And then they used the disabled infants ... not able to do 
anything but begging as profit, wealth source. 
 
 
78 
 
"Amputations" in Karabakh 
 
It became clear during our investigations that a certain Laura Leonova 
Ishkhavyan headed one of these first amputation rooms. 9 captured Azerbaijanian 
children aged 10-11 had already been amputated in this amputation room №2. The 
second "amputation" room was opened in Shusha on Feb., 1993. They usually 
operated on our captured women here. And Galustayan Yevelina Mikrichnovna 
headed this new room, (formerly, i.e. before the meeting and disturbances in 
Baku.) 
Investigating this fact it became clear that doctor E.Galustyan was doctor of 
the Maternity hospital № 5 in Bayil. Several months later surgeon Anda Saanyan, 
dostors, Arina Arutunyan, Asratyan Lidiya also joined doctor E.Galustyan. 
According to the information we got Amputation rooms were operating in 6 places 
besides in Karabakh territory from 1992 till the end of 1993: 
6. In the territory of Lachin region (In Garigishlag village - in eastern 
direction. Doctor V.Majaryan's group) 
7. In the territory of Gubadli region (In the center. Doctor U.Rafaelyan's 
group) 
8. In the territory of Kalbajar region (In Zar village. Doctor 
Y.Aratangesyan's doctors group) 
9. In Khankendi - (In Malibayli village. Doctor O.Babayan's group). 
10. .. In the territory, of Yorus - (In Nothern direction 1 km away from the 
centre. Doctor L. Irajyan's group) 
According to our investigations, these amputation rooms, far from humanity 
incompatible with international law norms, also surgical operations were carried 
out on the bases of "militarized program" of Arkadi Gukasyan, the leader of 
"A.Z.M", A wing of terrorist organization "Asala", controlled from Apartment №5, 
Alaverdiyan street of Yerevan, the general Headquarters of which was situated in 
Shusha then in Khankendi. 
The captured azerbaijanians disabled in "amputation" rooms... were sent to 
Arabian countries, also Germany, France, Italy, England ... the order of Armenian 
Diaspora in order to beg... 
Additional cemeteries for the ones died under surgeon's knives were laid 
down aside from Armenian cemeteries... 
 
Secret cemeteries of separatists 
 
It would be necessary to remind the UN officers searching for chemical, 
biological weapons, toxic gas in Irak that they visited Armenia. And Karabakh saw 
79 
 
the cemeteries where innocent infants, women, old men, mass fired, sent to 
amputation rooms by force and died of surgical operations ... Come and see, 
misters. I remind you the territorial circle of these secret cemeteries: 
5. On Kalbajar region (Bashlibel settlement. South eastern direction. The 
foot of of Dali dag mountain Infant cemetery. The fast infant was buried on June 9, 
1994). 
6. On Zangilan region. (The territory of Isgandarbayli village. Northern 
direction. The first pregnant woman and her son were buried on May 3, 1994). 
7. On Asgaran region (The territory of Nakchivanik village. Eastern 
direction. The first infant was buried on August 16, 1995). 
8. On Jabrayil region. (The territory of Dag-Tumas village. Western 
direction. The first dead was buried on July 26, 1995. The buried was 
between 10-11). 
 
"ASALA"s "Charity" 
 
Our investigations show that the foundation of the attack of Armenians-
terrorist Armenian groupings, groups and communities, organizations to be begun 
in Karabakh direction was laid inside our country, i.e. Armenians didn't attack  
Karabakh   let's say from Moscow, Yerevan, Khankendi. They first attacked Baku. 
At that time a saboteur and terrorist group "Committee for "Artsakh"s 
freedom" began to function in 1988 in Azerbaijan - Karabakh, Baku, Sumgait, 
Ganja, Nakhchivan. Till that time the members of that group were occupied with 
charity affairs abroad, especially in France, Lebanon and Iran... It began to 
function since 1982 within the framework of the laws of these countries. At that 
time this Armenian organization was called: "Charity fund of Artsakh 
Armenians..." On July 22, 1985 this organization held conference in its residency 
in Lyons (France) and was formed as "Committee for Artsakh's freedom" func-
tioning as a subsidiary organ assisting Armenian terrorist org. "ASALA". And at 
that time 3 main objectives were put forward before the org: 
d) To get support in Azerbaijan Opposition and Means of Mass Media.(?) 
e) To create or Resume relations with public-political figures having 
blood relationship with Armenian in Azerbaijan. 
f) To extend relations with the Headquarters of "A.Z.M" in Yugoslavia 
and Poland. 
"Committee for Artsakh's freedom" had to supply Karabakh with weapons. 
In reality this org. beginning this mission in 1989-1990 get the first ammunition 
from Yugoslavia under the leadership of colonel Vazgen Bagramovich Sisliyan. 
80 
 
The way of carrying weapons to Khankendi was so: Belgrade (Yugoslavia) 
- Tehran (Iran) - Khankendi (Today this way is also narcobusiness way.) The 
colonel of "ASALA" writes on page 26 of his book "My friends in CIS countries 
..." published in "Al-Qaida" publishing house in Lebanon on Feb 4, 1998: "... I was 
in Baku in 1988 - ten years ago precisely. I didn't even differ from local people as I 
knew Azerbaijani well. On Feb. 21, 1990 I became member of one of the 
opposition parties... There're my photos with opposition leaders of Baku in my 
album. I know all of them. (?)... They're poor and not sensible guys ready to fight 
for power than for their country, for their family... As to Karabakh this land is 
already ours... 
Look at the photo. The man putting his arm on my neck is one of the leaders 
of Baku. His name ... 
Note: Though interesting this man - this opposition leader embracing 
colonel Vazgen Sisliyan, the leader of "Committee for Arstakh's freedom" is today 
claiming for presidency...(?) 
 
Address to Armenian Diaspora 
 
Let's look through the letters addressed to Armenian Diaspora, church 
priests living in CIS countries at those years, i.e. the period of Karabakh's 
occupation. 
c) ".." To the USA Congress. To mr. Con Edvard Porter, the co-chairman 
of Human Rights Committee. We - Karabakh Armenians are too glad that in the 
USA, the cradle of democracy you defend our just and fair work. Yes, you put the 
matter quite right. Karabakh is our fair battle stage. But the Turks help 
Azerbaijanians in this battle stage. They give weapons and ammunition... All this 
happens in front of us ... But we fight. We fight to the death. Give our regards to 
your wife, mrs. Catherine Porter. 
Sincerely yours, 
Levon Abakumovich Abgaryan, "Council Member" of "A.Z.M..." 1993. 
VIII-2. 
d) "... Dear mr. Oder Bajil, the head of Parliament group of "England-
Armenia"... 
We're" grateful that you call our struggle in Karabakh "fair struggle." We 
are thankful for the assistance of Armenian lobby in London (?)... We weren't 
defeated and weren't nation sacrificing our justice work. Because our struggle is 
important and necessary... 
Sincerely, 
81 
 
The members of "Committee for Arstakh's Freedom": pr. Grogoryan, doctor 
Ter-Grigoryants, doctor Ali-Khanyan..."1993.XII-S". 
As to "Shahab-4", the war-head of this missile is 1 ton, target shooting 
radius is 1250 miles. But Iran's specialists engaged in missile technology (with the 
help of Minsk and Moscow specialists) let's take London, Paris and also the eastern 
part of the USA, the technologists of another industrial group "Shahid Bagire" 
declared a new engine to be tested after "Shahab-5" with the radius of 2800 miles 
till 6300 miles appeared. 
Byelorrusia's nuclear specialists made, installed and tested this engine. 
(pr.O.A. Simanov, pr. D.S.Kalinin, pr.Z.D.Katko, O.N. Dashko occupied with 
Quantum physics, scientist S.Kh.Khazaryan, S.U.Rabatovich...) 
According to the information there are 124 large and small trade companies 
and org.-s of the RF in Iran Islamic Republic. 64 of them form scientific technical 
field, create relations nuclear technology, arrange visits of scientists and 
specialists. (The international company "Bon-Eyr" of the country is more active in 
this field). 
The GHQ of Iran Armed Forces make strategical changes in its Air Forces 
and Naval Forces. Agreements on extending nuclear relations were signed among 
the RF and China People's Republic, Byelorussia and Ukraine, (in 200 and 2001). 
Iran landed high-speedy motorboats "Hery" made in China (the amount of 
the Military agreement is $4.5 billion) to the Caspian Sea. If the number of these 
motorboats were 8 in 2000, according to the information of Nov, 2001 they were 
16. I'd like to remind that they were loaded with missiles "S-802" with a radius of 
120 km, warhead of 700 kg. At any time they can wreck oil platforms, any 
strategical and civil objects on shore and offshore. Iran's warship was loaded with 
400 missiles of "Silkuorm" and "Sirsakker" type made in China. Tehran increased 
the amount of its missiles "SA-6" of "the Earth and the Heaven" type to 4 in 1998, 
12 in 1999 and 16 in 2001. On the other hand, Iran's submarines "KILO" (RF) on 
the Caspian Sea carry out easily intelligence operations. 
 
THE CAPTURED CHILDREN ARE SOLD 
 
For instance, colonel Daniel Arushahbekyan serving in Armenia's Military 
Intelligence from 1992 have held one of the leading positions in France part of 
"Motherland" society since May of 2001 and colonel Marsel Avakyan working as 
an assistant chief in Yerevan Security Service -Ijevan region department from 1996 
-in Khankendi city centre of "Charity society "Hayastan". These men must be 
accused of transferring captured children abroad, sending them to training camps 
engaged in terrorism, getting them to work in toxic medicines factories, uranium 
82 
 
plants . (We don't doubt these children losing their parents to return a bit later to 
their country as persons able to carry out terrorist acts. It's also interesting that the 
West especially the US administration accuse directly Islamic terrorist 
Organizations in the latest terrorist acts happened in the world. If someone 
analysed the investigations carried out by the country's (the USA's) special service 
organs together with Armenian terrorist organization "ASALA"s training camps 
operating in Lebanon, Marseilles (France), Syria, Canada, Cyprus, Argentina and 
Iraq they could witness interesting and serious events. But nobody needs that now. 
 
Exploding metro in Lebanon meetings 
 
The plan of exploding Baku metro was discussed in Beirut -in editorial 
building on 3 June, 1994 (at 8:31 a.m) It was also decided to use radical wings of 
the Kurds in carrying out this terror act. In accordance with this training camps of 
PKK in Southern Cyprus was also addressed. But Jalil Fakhr Alim, the leader of 
the training camp "Ramr" refused to take part in this act. According to Robert 
Kocharyan participating in the discussion, it was considered reasonable to use 
more sensitive lezgian or talish ethnic groups in carrying out this act on 17 June, 
1994; "It's necessary to create a dramatic atmosphere in Azerbaijan. We've to win 
both psychological and information wars till the next military actions. After all this 
we've chances to win. We can't win without Russia and Iran (?) We shouldn't 
forget that". (Folder: 19/10210-Address: Shkuleva 27/2) 
Jori Gaykodich Balayan returning to Khankendi on 21 June, 1994 visits 
Shusha, Lachin, Kalbajar, Karkijahan, Gubadli, Khankendi city prisons. He makes 
a list of the captives of Kurdish nationality. On June 24 in Khankendi where the 
captives are in custody he talks to the persons separately able to carry out terror 
acts in Azerbaijan according to the plan. On 25 June at 21:00 in Khankendi he 
finds Azat Aslanov Salman of lezghin nationality tortured as a captive. He takes 
part in the operation "Recruitment" carried out by Alik Manilyan, the major of 
Khankendi military counter-intelligence and inspector Serj Ter-Grigoryants. At 
that time notorious "writer" Gori Balayan was fulfilling the tasks of the 
international Armenian terrorist organization "ASALA". 
 
Zori Balayan's "Big School" 
 
The inspector Serj Ter-Grigoryants pointes in his article "Big School" about 
Zori Balayan in 1996. (newspaper "Aztag" 1996.XI-3) "... Gaykovich was a real 
intelligence officer. He chose questions beforehand prepared for the proposed 
person. We felt that these questions were thoroughly thought." 
83 
 
The inspector Serj Ter-Grigoryants affirms his words again in his book 
"Between the Hell and Paradise" published a year before, in May of 1995 (in 
Moscow, in publishing House "Academy"): 
"... A tall, fair-haired captured battalion commander, the captain of 
Azerbaijan Army of lezghin nationality stands in front of me. (Captured battalion 
commander Azer Aslanov) 
-Do you know that your nation is at war even if not with Azerbaijan but its 
leaders who realized and are realizing genocide against your nation? - I asked. 
-I do. 
-And how do you fight on Azerbaijan side against Armenians who had been 
exposed to ethnic cleansing as lezghins, talishes, Kurds, Greeks, Russians and 
others for 70 years. 
-We all are victims of propaganda. They could convince the nation in 
Azerbaijan, that this war is a religious war. I went to Russian school. I'm married to 
the Russian. My native language is Russian. My two little daughters are half -
Christians. And I am a battalion commander of Muslim army . 
-You were commander. Everything is in the past for you. 
-Quite right. Aliyev's carried on such a propaganda for the last 2 months 
that war seems never to end. What is not said about Armenians. It'll probably take 
decades in order to let it all out from the nation. 
-I'm informed. I know well what is spoken about and written in Baku. As to 
your fate I'd advise you not to suffer from the complex of treason when you tell the 
truth to our command. By the way it's necessary for your nation. I mean not only 
lezghins but also azerbaijanians: too many victims. 
-I agree with you. I commanded one of the 8 battalions forming troops of 
Fuzuli direction. Let's begin from the end. The last two battalions consist of 
exceptionally afghans. Each has a grenade thrower. They say that 3000 grenade 
cup discharges were bought or got in China. There is a battalion of criminals in 
front of them. Aliyev released from prison all the men - criminals, mighty powers 
with guns in their hands. 
-I think Heydar Aliyev acts so not of good life. 
-Right, if taking into consideration that these criminals are rare masters of 
crossbow. The rest 5 battalions are ordinary. They consist of the Russians and 
Ukrainians. We've got 25 tanks and as many other armoured tanks. "Grad", long-
range guns. Ammunition is continuously given and delivered. 
-Why do you think you can't break the enemy's defences and reach 
Karyagin with these forces. You probably know that Fuzuli was named after the 
Russian officer Karyagin not long ago (till 1959). Well, why can't you break the 
enemy's defence? 
84 
 
-It's hard for me to answer this question. I've to give a complex, a long 
answer. 
-You can't answer shortly. The matter is that we, the Armenians take our 
lands, but you lezghins-the others. 
I don't want to give any comment after all this. Let the investigators of the 
Council of Europe and UNO, the USA's special service organs investigating terror 
and terrorism sources read and analyse Azerbaijan literature, speeches and 
comments in press. 
You'll probably never meet such incidents, correspondences and the 
captured being offended, humiliated and used to carry on terror acts. 
Armenia has already signed this act. Azer Aslanov the azerbaijanian captive 
was instigated to terrorist act to be carried on in Baku... 
As a result of this there was a big explosion in metro station "28 May" at 
8.31. on June, 1994. 13 men died, 42 men were injured. 
It reminds me terror acts of 11 Sep, 2001. How will it be? All this don't 
complete each other logically. America The o'clock 8:31 reminds me of the 
terrorist act carried on in the USA at 8:34 (8:42 in some places raises a general 
alarm in the world for the terror act in its territory, destroy terrorists nests bombing 
Afghanistan. But America, England, Germany, Russia, Iran, Japan and France... 
still close their eyes to terrorist acts carried on in Baku by Armenians. I'd like to 
tell that terrorist carried on in Azerbaijan by Armenian terrorist groups can be 
forgotten for the ones who're interested in Baku oil. But the history is not 
forgotten. It gets renewed passing through generations. We shouldn't forget that. 
The plan made in Beirut newspaper editorial office was realized. On 14 July 
(1994) Zori Balayan is invited of Isfaghan (Iran) to the meeting with Ishan 
Topuzyan, the leader of Armenian community. On 19 July Topuzyan, leader of 
Armenian community, Grigoryan, "treasurer" of the church Ambarsumyan greets 
him in Tehran airport. He makes a speech before Armenians in the building N 14 
in Revolution Avenue in Isfaghan on 22 July at 17:50 (?). On 14 August Zori 
Balayan was honoured with the order "saint Georgi" for the "service before the 
motherland". 
 
Kurdish problem of the terrorists 
 
Azer Aslanov was arrested by the officers MNS. A verdict was brought in 
to him. Zori Balayan instigating him to this dirty action was given to "Interpol" (?). 
It's our history. But unfortunately we forget it easily. If not so, we wouldn't have 
presented 16 kg of black caviar as a "wedding present" to Armenian businessman 
85 
 
Ashot Markovich Nersesyan in the restaurant "Alyona" around the metro Pushkino 
in Moscow. 
On the other hand, the RF, the USA and let's think Iran and Turkey have no 
"justice principle" for Azerbaijan. Each of these countries has special interests 
related to Azerbaijan's economic life, especially fuel resources and these interests 
are part of "National security concept" of these countries. As to Armenia, in 
strategic programs of these countries it's shown not as an aggressive country but a 
democratic country carrying on reforms. The Karabakh regions remains uncon-
trolled by aggressive Armenians from this point of view. We don't doubt that 2 
puppet "republics" will be established. I want to remind the ideas of Gennadi 
Seleznov, the RF Duma's speaker: "... There won't be 15 republics, there will be 
19. There will be these republics in the former USSR. (1992.XI-21. IIAR-TASS) It 
means the Karabakh is supposed to be divided or to collapse in the future. The 
Karabakh region has already been divided between "ASALA" and PKK and I don't 
think that the RF, the USA and Iran are unaware of this. I can't believe that. 
OSCE's activity as an international organization will be of no importance and it'll 
collapse after this problem is solved. We must be ready that one day the RF, the 
USA and Iran, in general NATO member countries may recognize Karabagh and 
Kurdistan which is formed in the region. Because political events problem" on 2 
October 1998. Even a book of materials collection was published with 2 around 
make us tell that State Duma of the RF put on the agenda geopolitical issues "State 
Duma and Kurdish thousand copies. It was written in the beginning of the book: " 
...The Kurds and Kurdistan were and are of strategic importance for Russia..." The 
map of Kurdistan republic is drawn at the end of the book. 
It became clear from our investigations that designer-engineers, technicians 
of Armenian nationality had constructed communication cables of military airports 
that were built or the runways of which were reconstructed (for cargo, fighter and 
bombing aircraft) in Azerbaijan after 1950s, i.e. till 1998. For instance, in 
Kurdamir housing area (general S.Mikayan, specialist on "Mig-28"), in Ganja-
Gazakh direction (colonel O.Arutunyan and engineer-colonel L.Simonyan, the 
head of designing group coming from Leningrad-Saint Petersburg), in casting 
harbors around Baku (colonel X. Siragbekyan) Armenians worked on the basis of 
their plan, but in "Russia's Azerbaijan policy" direction. (?) After all this I'd like to 
remind you that no missile belonging to America Air Forces won't be installed in 
Azerbaijan territory. Because the runways of the airports are not suitable for 
military aircraft produced according to NATO standards. Military airports in 
Azerbaijan territory are suitable for aircraft "Su" and "Mig". The runways aren't 
suitable. (Engine power is meant) Our airports have to be reconstructed for this 
purpose. But it needs time. For instance, Marneule (Georgia) air base is not 
86 
 
suitable for the USA's fighter-bombing aircraft "V-52" landing. The cover cracks 
and engine power is not enough for runway distance. At the result $1.3 million was 
allotted for the modernization of this air base, (by Turkey) 
Our goal in reminding all this is that Azerbaijan has to take its "National 
Security Concept" complex, correct gradually Armenian, Russian signatures in 
documents and projects. 
 
Modern Weapons in Karabakh 
 
Cargo aircraft belonging to the RF and Ukraine MAF, "rented"' to Syria 
took "active" part in occupation of our lands. According to the investigations, the 
crew of one of cargo aircraft was called "Matevosyan group". And on May 6, July 
9 of 1993 this group flied to Yerevan from Aleppo settlement of Syria and carried 
different kinds of weapons and other ammunition. A part of these weapons were 
divided between Armenian terrorist groups "ASALA" standing in agressive 
position under the label of "self-defense", operating in Karabakh direction by DM 
of Armenia and a part of them were the weapons demonstrated in the RF 
department of the international exhibition held in Dubai, United Arabian Emirates 
on April 16,1993. The plan structure was to pass the modern weapons produced in 
military plants of the RF from Dubai to Damascus, from there to Yerevan and then 
to Karabakh. Karabakh had already become ammunition debot. According to the 
information, weapons and other ammunition were sent for terrorist groups 
"ASALA" operating in Karabakh territory in the following quantity : 
-modern weapon of US $72 thousand cost for "ASALA" group N h/h 10-
201 in Khankendi 
- modern weapon of US $ 44 thousand cost for "ASALA" group N h/h 01-
604 in Shusha 
-modern weapon of US $39 thousand cost for "ASALA" group N h/h 61-
601 in Kalbajar 
It also became clear from our investigations that terrorist groups operating 
in Karabakh were primarily numbered in DM of Armenia. The groups with these 
were specified as military unit in General Headquarters established in Karabakh. 
The modern weapon that Armenian terrorists of "ASALA" possessed, were 
a weapon complex "Shturm-S" mainly used against tanks. The Headquarters 
(Moscow) couldn't explain the reasons how this weapon produced in military 
industrial complexes of the RF appeared in Karabakh territory. On the hand, it also 
became clear from the investigations of expert materials that passenger airplane 
(Moscow-Tehran) of "S-130" "Herkules" type belonging to Iran company and shot 
in the North of Khankendi at 23.30 in 1994 (March 25) was shot with that weapon. 
87 
 
Because the airplane flied from below... Because according to the review of the 
expert the speed, target hit and devastation radius of the shell thrown coincided 
with the signs of "Shturm-S" weapon. At a result, 32 diplomat families were killed. 
...On December 26,1993 2 parcels with a secret seal on them (the letters 
were initially sent to DM of Armenia) were sent from Viller-Kotre settlement of 
France to Khankendi. Aslanyan, the officer of General Headquarters of DM of 
Armenia delivered them to Khankendi. On December 27 these parcels were opened 
in General Headquarters of "self-defence committee" of Karabakh. The cards with 
the map "Great Armenia" and the words " ASALA" written on them were solemnly 
presented to their owners: Robert Setrinovich Kocharyan and Zori Gaykovich 
Balayan. Both cards were without number. Armenians called these cards "honorary 
fanatic card". Both cards had stamp and signature "Tilovyan" on them. (Though 
Barat Tilovyan had the authority of permanent representative of "ASALA" in 
Karabakh, he worked in General Headquarters in France for the present). So, Zori 
Balayan and Robert Kocharyan were on the honorary list of "ASALA" as real 
terrorist. 
 
Arabs were not recognized as terrorists 
 
We just stopped saying anti-terrorist operations. At symposia and meetings, 
conferences we couldn't criticize terrorism crimes committed by Armenians in our 
lands. The crimes committed by Armenian terrorism, a part of international 
terrorism were not discussed in the international conference "Islam against terror" 
(though this conference had a local character) held in Baku on December 20(2001). 
(While World Press already published materials connecting Armenian terrorists 
with the organizations "Al-Kaida", "Al-Muhajerun". At a result Palestine Arabs 
were introduced as terrorist groups to the conference participants, to the world. In 
return to this reproach (it is not a reproach, it is a sin before the nation) conference 
"experts" claim that this 15-minute film was bought from Moscow (RF) (?). I'd 
also like to remind that Palestine Arabs are not recognized as terrorists in any of 
state documents of RF. These unstable steps taken for something and somebody in 
Azerbaijan informs us about future grave mistakes in this field. And it will cause 
problems. We've to be ready for that. 
On the other hand, State Committee on religious organizations, holding the 
conference seems to have tried to correct "negligent" estimate got by the USA 
State Department. Thus on November 27(2001) the USA State Department's 
"Democracy, Human Rights and Labour Affairs Bureau" sent a critical letter to the 
president of Azerbaijan Republic. The letter has got critical ideas and reproaches 
dealing with improper work in the committee. (The radio "Freedom" broadcasted 
88 
 
its special program on this.) According to the additional information we got, the 
head of the government expressed his dissatisfaction with this scandalous and 
incidental conference. Because the head of the government didn't consider these 
conflicts as logical on the eve of his visit to Tehran. 
I'd also like to remind that a book called "Bin Laden. The Prohibited Truth" 
has already been translated from French into Armenian and is sold in Armenia and 
Karabakh region. The book was published in publishing house "Intelligence on 
Line" in Paris in 1998. (the authors: Jean Charles Prizar and Giyom Dasks ). 
We browsed this book's copy in Arabic (This book was published both in 
Arabic and English). There's much prohibited truth. And the authors analyse their 
ideas and comments connected with international terrorism with strong arguments, 
facts and documents. One of the reality prohibited in the book is so: "...There are 
secret and interesting issues. Saudi Arabia-Bin Laden's home is not specified as 
terrorists country anywhere. Because the USA wants that-it is a simple fact that it 
depends on the USA's wish. Because it has great position for oil in world market. If 
there were not this oil issue, it (Saudi Arabia) would be in the first place..." (p.56). 
It doesn't need time in order to investigate and analyse all this. We've just to 
think...think and finally feel the distance between our existence and non-existence 
as a nation. 
 
KARABAKH: UNCONTROLLED ZONE 
 
Armenians are also engaged in sale of arms, nuclear technology, drugs in 
our occupied territories 
 
Military supplies are transported to Garabag 
 
There's no region as contradictieds as Armenia in the frame of 
Commonwealth of Independent States "...there's nothing serious that can draw 
attention except the power set up on fear and alms. Every little incident is tightly 
knotted here. I asked the founder of Armenian Constitution, Professor Vladimir 
Nazaryan of all this. But he didn't answer..." (Professor O.Voskopulos, Greece). 
The author of "Great Armenia: juridical and philosophical investigations" 
("Ambarsum and Mon publishing house", Yerevan, 1994) lawyer Vladimir 
Nazaryan was also the author of the preface and edition of "Is death penalty 
necessary?" consisting of 235 pages which was printed in California (San-
Fransisco, "King fiches" Publishing house, 2002). Armenian lawyer claims in the 
preface: "...Armenia should observe capital punishment in the frame of its national 
laws. But the sentence should not be intended for Armenian nation. This capital 
89 
 
punishment should concern Turks and Turkish world that always remained hostile 
to us" (p. 101) 
Vladimir Nazaryan had special service in working out the charters and 
programmes of separatist terror organisations acting both in Armenia  and  the  
occupied  territories of  Dagliq  Karabakh.  On September 22, 2000 he presentec 
his book" The Constitution of Dagliq Karabakh Republic" to the Armenian 
Security Council for consideration that is incompatible with any international legal 
norm. And on October 1 the discussion of the book's first version was held in 
Khankendi with the presence of Arkady Qukasyan, "the president" of so-colled 
"KR". Armenian writer Zoriy Balayan who joined the terrorists in his notes of. 
"Humane laws of Armenia" printed in Moscow in 1996, advises his colleagues to 
call the famous and well-known lawyer  of Armenia  -  Vladimir  Nazaryan   "Law-
Nazaryan"   (M..., "Literaturnaya gazeta", 1996, p.26, p.4). Because, he is also one 
of the "Godfathers" of the country's Constitution that was adopted on July 5, 1995. 
Another report tells V.Nazaryan was one of the leaders of "Tygran" and "Scheme-
16" groups that organized the transportation of arms and military supplies into the 
region (i.e.to the Armenian territories and also occupied settlements of Karabakh) 
since July, 1991. This is what the former Minister of Internal Affairs, the leader of 
"Armenian National Movenment" (the organization was registered on January 16, 
1992 by the Armenia's Ministry of Justice) General Vano Siradeqyan famous for 
his aggressive policy in Karabakh, who has encroached upon hundreds of people 
and who presently lives in Lebanon, told in the interview he gave to the newspaper 
"Ararat" published in Beirut (2002.IV.9, p.2) 
 
Tygranists in Karabakh 
 
"Tygran" - (established on July 14, 1988) is connected with the name of a 
Baku armenian Tygran Moiseyevich Khachenyan. "Tygran with Moisey" Charity 
Organization acted in the territories of Sumgayit, Nasimy and Nizamy regions till 
the February 3, 1989. During three months (October, November, December) 
armenians living in Baku transferred 692 thousand manats to the organization 
["Tygran", RF, Stavropole., bulletin of the Charity Organization 2000, XI.81] 
On March 13, 1991 the groups of "Tygran" moves from the territory of 
Azerbaijan to the Kursk region of RF. On May 8, 1991 11 members of the group 
came to Yerevan and on May 19 passed registration by Armenian Ministry of 
Justice ("Armenian community" RF Kursk..., 1999.111.4 "Our national hero 
Kachenyan..." p.9) 
On July 2, 1991. Mygran Moiseyevich set out to Lebanon together with a 
colonel named Levon Eranosyan. They took part at the "Evening congress" held in 
90 
 
Ash-Shimal settlement, on July 9, 1991. "Evening congress" is a meeting where 
leaders of groups engaged in sale of arm's in Brazil, Columbia, Syria, Sudan, Irek, 
Iran, China and Greece take part. (Weekly magazine "De kuwwat al Mussallaha", 
the organ of Sydan SG informs in the report of military intelligence, 1992, No 8, 
p.10). 
It was namely "Tygran" who first organized the arms aid to Armenians in 
the occupation of Karabakh. The name of another group. "Scheme-16" led by 
Tygran Moiseyevoch is met in the documents of USA State Department connected 
with transportation of nuclear materials and technology, trade of drugs directly in 
the region, i.e. in the territory of Armenia ("Bulletin-report" - "International 
Criminal Polies Organization, Interpol", Leon, 1992, No 6). 
According to our investigations, between 1992-1994 members of the 
"Tygran" group transported 19 types of arms and military supplies from Lebanon 
into the territory of Karabakh. On August 1993 four members of tygranists - 
Abram Alekseyevich (military), Gavar Robertovich Avanesyan (lawyer), Papan 
Aradiyevich Igityan (scout) and Rimma Sergeyevich Rachikyan (journalist)... were 
arrested in connection with the explosion which took place at the ammunation 
depot in the territory of Razdan. In four days the problem solved by the efforts of 
general V.Nazaryan. Another news is that on February 14, 1993 (first meeting was 
held in house No 216, General Bagramyan St., Yerevan) a military-political 
organization engaged in economic intelligence (against the current infrastructure) 
named "Caucasus front" against Azerbaijan was established in Armenia. Since 
December 2, 1994 the organization stopped restricting its field of action with only 
Azerbaijan. The doors of the front expanded alsi to Turkish State. 
Tygran Moiseyevich Khachenyan was appointed the head of the connecting 
council between Yerevan, Athens and Tehran. Professor V.Nazaryan writes the 
charter of "Caucasus front". At that period of time according to the documents 
Turkey MIT (Special service body) collected, Elestratnos Horolombus, the attache 
on administrative affairs of the consulate-general of Greece to Istanbul was 
denounced. He established secret relations with kurdish separatists and armenian 
terrorist organization "ASALA" and transferred intelligence materials to Yerevan 
and Athens. A little later military attache, Colonel Costantin Balanos, who tried to 
operate with the armenian terrorists left the country. ("Cumhuriyyet" paper, 
Turkey, 1995. VI.12) 
According to our investigations, one active members of the "Caucasus 
front" Colonel Levon Eranosyan, who regulated the Tygranists' transportation of 
arms and military supplies to the occupied zone - the territory of Karabakh, was 
promoted the rank of major-general November 4, 2001 by the order of Armenian 
91 
 
president and was appointed the commander of the First Army Corps ("Armenian 
news" Yerevan version 2001.IX.6, page 11) 
November 19, 2001 Tygran Moiseyevich was awarded the order of "Golden 
Gross". At the meeting where the terrorist "president" of the occupied territory 
Arkady Qukasyan, the so-called diplomat Naira Milkumyan took part, Tygran 
Moiseyevich was also promoted the rank of Colonel and he was entrusted one of 
the leading departments at the military intelligence office. The very named of the 
department led by the Colonel Tygran Moiseyevich was announced at the "Military 
consultation": "...Strategic department fighting arms of massive destruction..." 
("Artsakh" paper. Khankendi, 2001, XI.28, p.1) 
 
Karabakh status and arms trade on one scale 
 
Everything from arms trade to terrorist organizations was registered 
officially in the territory of Dagliq Karabakh left uncontrolled. 
Everything was in accordance with an unwritten law. Concerning 
transportation routes and passages of the contrabandist arms, nuclear technology, 
uranium and plutonium materials and drugs, we have preliminary results on these. 
Let me remind that all in all, Armenia has 1254 km of border line in land. 787 km 
of this is the borderline with Azerbaijan including Nakhchivan, 35 km with Iran, 
268 km with Turkey and 164 km with Georgia. 
According to our investigations, only in 2001 14 incidents of theft and 
transportation of nuclear technology materials happened in the borderline with 
Georgia. In connection with these 14 crimes there started only 2 investigation 
processes. The results are unknown yet. On August 4, 2000 59 kg of heroine was 
revealed in the borderline of 35 km with Iran. On July 2, 2001 operatives of Iran's 
border forces arrested "a drugcourier" trying to move to Iran from the territory of 
Armenia" and confiscated 32 kg of different drugs from him. As a result, transit 
roads are uncontrolled and open up today" ("Iran" paper, Tehran. 2001, XI. 14, 
page 6) 
On October 19, 2001 Colonel Tygran Moiseyevich and lawyer V.Nazaryan 
paid a visit to USA. It was G.Braun Ardauny, the director of the American 
Armenian Assembly on relations with government who bore all expanses of these 
unofficial visits. On October 24 with the presence of Levon Avdoyan (executive of 
the library) the meeting between Tygran Moiseyevich, V.Nazaryan and pro-
armenian congressmen Chistopher Smith and Frank Polione took place at the USA 
Congress library. Two strategic issues were discussed. 
1) Status and future destiny of Dagliq Karabakh 
92 
 
2) Using Karabakh lands according to American National Security. On the 
basis of the bill the USA Senate adopted on the second issue a special assistance 
bank was founded under the veil of regulating the Karabakh conflict (The 
magazine "Political idea" that was published by Armenian Community in the state 
of California USA, 2001, XII, page 29) 
A new, but in essence an old strategic task was put before Armenian 
writers, armenian fanatics working at the Senate, the Congress, also at the State 
Department and mass media as well: Dagliq Karabakh should be propaganded as a 
"legalstate" among the world's leading circles, political unions and organizations. 
As to the occupied territory, they were to get world-wide references on its being 
under strict control of Armenian Community and the guarantee of people's living 
standards corresponding to the world's legal norms. 
Initial copies of the political document named "Original conception on 
Karabakh" were to be spread. The document, left aside for the present, but put to 
use whenever needed was in reality prepared on January 3, 200 ("Artsakh" 
Knahkendi, 2000, 11.21, page 2). 
Initial version of such a conception had already been discussed on August 9, 
2000 in Khankendi and handed over to Mr. Pol Gobi, USA politologist with a few 
amendments. (It was announced at the conference on the theme of "Guaranteeing 
regional security" held in Khankendi on August 14, 2000. "regional" - means the 
occupied Azerbaijan territory of Karabakh. It was major Artashes Nailyan, one of 
the senior officials of "Shusha territory intelligence service" who gave this 
information, Besides that, there's some material on pages 12-14 of the "Corpus-
national" bulletin published in Shusha on August 21, 2000 issued for Shusha 
military circles). 
The lawyer V.Nazaryan, some pro-armenian congressmen like Christopher 
Smith (co-chairman of the USA Congress Committee on relations with OSCE), 
Frank Polione, Braum Erdouni also took active parts in the preparation of "The 
Original Conception on Karabakh" about the region exposed to the occupation by 
Armenian terrorists (V.Nazaryan: "Legal document" on Dagliq Karabakh" 
Yerevan, MTIK, Publishing thouse, 2000, XI, In Russian, Englih and Armenian). 
To the esence of "the Original conception", government and state body, 
intelligence centres, international relations of Karabakh as an "independent 
republic" should be reestablished in the near future (as to the words of armenian 
ideologists, till 2005). 
Meanwhile, there was spreading firsthand information about a program-
document "New government structure" of Karabakh to be brought up for 
discussion. On the 13th paragraph of this strategic programm consisting of 24 
pages we read: 
93 
 
"... Well-known Armenians living abroad may take part in the government 
structure of Karabakh that will be established according to European standards set 
up within the framework of international legal norms..." 
 
Separatists views of Iran and Russia to Karabakh 
 
According to our investigations, lawyer V.Nazaryan, who played special 
role in making legally official and spreading the documents concerning Karabakh 
from October 1, 2000 to February 4, 2001 leaves for Tehran on February 16, 2001. 
At first the goal of the visit was kept in secret. But a separate department of 
representation status engaged in Karabakh problem operates in all the three 
embassies of Armenia to Moscow, to Tehran and also to Washington at his meet-
ing with "the representative on Karabakh" of Armenian embassy to Tehran 
V.Nazaryan notes that he'll meet the representatives of Armenien community left 
the territory of Karabakh, also different egions of Azerbaijan for Iranian Islamic 
Republic in 1988-1989. On February 21, 2001 lawyer V.Nazaryan receives the 
leader of "Shusha Armenian community" left Shusha for Iran on August-
September, I990 and presently living in Isphahov Olex Kazakhanyan. And on 
February 24 meets with the representatives of "Azerbaijan Armenian community" 
moved from Baku, Ganja and presently living in Tehran (Tolik Vardanyan working 
at the Azerbaijan State University till 1985, physicist Suren Chekoryan, scientists 
Dadun Saradeqbekyan, lawyer Aleksey Chitchiyan also took part at that meeting. 
These persons took part in the preparation of "legal documents" on Karabakh 
belonging to Armenia together with pro-armenian Iranian diplomats on December 
12, 1990, July 3, 1991, August 26, 2000, March 23, 2001 in Iran). As to the 
formula of "Azerbaijan community", its registration as a social organization has 
already been provided by the officials of Tehran. (July 5, 1992). According to the 
information, on February 28, (2001) lawyer, general V.Nazaryan, called "the 
Godfather" of Armenian Constution, tried to persuade Armenian representatives 
moved from Azerbaijan, that is Nakhchivan, Baku, Ganja and Dagliq Karabakh 
and presently living in Tehran, Isphahan, Tabriz and Ardabil unlike local 
armenians (Iranian armenians) to keep in close contact with Azerbaijanis who took 
refugee in Iran from Dagliq Karabakh in 1992-1993, also with people finding 
shelter in Iran for critisining the political course of Azerbaijan State. (Huseynabad 
square, Imam Khomeini Alley, Tehran). They should participate at the union 
named "Azerbaijan Government bounded by "the offended Azerbaijanis" and they 
have the right to do it. Because majority of them have not become citizens of Iran 
and have been registered in official circles, charity and assistance organizations as 
citizens of Azerbaijan ("Regan" weekly paper Gilan ... 2001, III.9, p.6). 
94 
 
To the confession of the Armenian jurist, IU of Such a false and so-called 
government are also in action in the territories of USA and RF (?) According to our 
investigations, a union named "Azerbaijan democratic government" acted in the 
settlement of Ahar from February 14, till March 24, 1999 (settlement of Reyhan, 
Ahar, Iran). 
This "shadow government" consisting of eleven persons doesn't accept the 
current regime in Azerbaijan. To their minds, the territory of Azerbaijan is 
seemingly independent. Its rules, reforms, also parliament... generally the 
government representatives have been subordinated to the interests of NATO 
member states having geopolitical and geoeconomical interests in the region. 
September 2, 2000 the "shadow government" was removed to the South west part 
of Rasht city centre. The false government has got 3 armenian, 2 talish, 2 kurdish, 
4 azerbaijanian members. 
Another information tells an independent union called "desert military 
court" acts within the "shadow government". This union has got 4 members. The 
members of the union hold conferences every fortnight, investigate legal changes 
taking place in the territory of Azerbaijan, discuss information and news they got 
of different people "Add to the list of people who'll be punished for their deeds in 
future". 
Each member of the union has business and commerce relations with 
Russian Federation, Middle East and Armenia, also Nakhchivan and Turkey and 
Azerbaijan. "The shadow government" has its account in Rasht International Islam 
Bank. Also according to out investigations some of the members of the union 
acting illegally against independence and statehood of Azerbaijan abroad - "The 
real national government" held review of the occupied territories of Azerbaijan by 
armenians from October 3 till 9, 2001. They met Naira Melkumyan in Khankendi 
after having visited the settlements of Zangilan, Qubadly, Lachin, Shusha... 
Afterwards "the members of the false government prepared report letters to USA 
State Department, the president of FR Vladimir Putin, Council of Europe and 
Armenian Security Council on socio-political, economical and military situation of 
Karabakh, settlement announced uncontrolled zone. But Iranian officials refused to 
stamp the report letters they prepared. According to the news the report containing 
16 pages was sent for discussion to Armenian Security Council on November 21, 
2001. On November 29, Tygran Moiseyevich was appointed the representative of 
"The real national government" to Karabakh (Program broadcasted by "Artsakh" 
channel in the territory of Khankendi November 26,2001). 
The content of the document brought up for discussion at the Presidential 
Office in Yerevan informs as if ... Everything is resolved within the framework of 
the law in the territory of Karabakh. This territory is far away from the policy of 
95 
 
violence and aggression..." ("Ran Armenian" (Novosti) Yerevan..., materials of 
2001.XII). 
 
"Shadow governments" against Azerbaijan 
 
According to our investigations, a second "Shadow government" against the 
independent internal and foreign policy of Azerbaijan was established in the 
territory of Russian Federation. Unlike Tehran officials, this government has not 
been registered as a union or as a charity organisation. This union, formed since 
July 2, 1998 and held the first meeting in one of the rooms belonging to the faculty 
of practical mathematics of the Moscow State University has got 17 members. 
According to the news, different members of the union got into contact also with 
plenipotentiaries of the Federal Security Service of RF and Presidential Office. 
The organization, illegally established in Moscow addressed with 
questionnaries to "Tabriz-Azerbaijan Organization" in Irkutsk (to be established on 
July 16, 1992), the organisation of "Khazar" in Hashtarkhan (established on June 3, 
1992), "Odlar Yurdu" registered in Ulyanovsk on May 12, 1990, the organization 
of "Ozan" established in Samara by azerbaijanian immigrants (created on 
September 4, 1994) ... ("Region" Moscow, independent paper of political news. 
1998.XI.4) 
"Azerbaijan National Government" formed in the district of Moscow also 
included professor Hacibay Amiryan who lived in Baku for a long time worked in 
the system of Ministry of Public Health, Qriqory Avakyan with the nickname of 
"Lyda" working in the public prosecutor organs... In another information it is also 
noted that doctor Vladimir Nazaryan who brought russian version of "The 
Constution of Garabag Republic" to Moscow on April 17, 2000 and organized its 
slight discussion at the Ministry of Justice of Russian Federation also organized 
meetings with armenian members of this union ("Armyanskiy vestnik", (Armenian 
news) 1999.1V.6) 
Unfortunately, we don't have detailed information about meetings, 
conferences and gatherings held abroad about Azerbaijan. But notwithstanding the 
fact that in the territory of USA such a union was founded on December 9, 1999, 
the union hasn't formed even up today (Lalayan Arutunyan: "Foreign relations of 
Karabakh"... M... "Legal literature" Publishing House 1999). It hasn't formed 
because different oil companies, pro-armenian congressmen and senator shave 
their interest circles in the "Azerbaijan National Democratic Governmentr" 
founded in Washington D.C. According to the information, during the last 3 years 
37 people leaving Azerbaijan were interrogated in these interest circles. We should 
note that the idea of power-opposition lasts till the Azerbaijan borders. After these 
96 
 
borders this nation is not understood in any western country. For instance, there's 
no power-opposition ideas, in official documents of America. There all the 
problems are approached from democratic prism. For now "Baku democrats and 
reformists" aren't wholly accepted. "Azerbaijan National Democratic Government" 
has got only core in Washington. Its members are namely in Azerbaijan, although 
scattered. As to financial aid members of the union get financial aid of twice and a 
half more from the members of the union in Tehran and thrice more from those in 
Moscow. The information tells, these aids are transferred to the addresses intended 
in private meetings, official gatherings discussions and conferences. 
Our investigations of shadow governments haven't finished yet. But one of 
the last informations we got was that prof.V.Nazaryan, one of the organizers of 
arms market "opened" in Karabakh, announcing openly that "Armenia will owe 
nuclear arms in future", creater of the state's Constitution, preparing versions of the 
so called "Constutional Karabakh Republic" (these versions are 4) committed 
suicide at 21.40 on June 20, 2002 by hanging himself... 
97 
 
 
 
Parliamentary Assembly-Report of debates:  
Thursday January 24 at 3 p.m 
 
Mr Ilham ALIYEV (Azerbaijan). - Dear Mr. Chairman. Ladies and 
gentlmen. 
After the tragedy of 11 September, the whole world and each country 
realised that no state is invulnerable. Everyone understands that it is impossible to 
fight international terrorism unless the entire international community unites in its 
struggle against this evil. 
It is very difficult to combat terrorism. You may know your enemy but 
sometimes it is difficult to find him and bring him to justice. You do not know 
98 
 
when and in what form terrorists will strike again. Therefore without international 
co-operation, without strong international control, the fight against terrorism is 
ineffective. 
In Europe, our common home, there are countries that have suffered 
severely from terrorism. Azerbaijan is one of those countries. 
As a result of military aggression by Armenia, one million of Azerbaijan's 
people became refugees, 20% of the territory of Azerbaijan is occupied by 
Armenian military forces and hundreds of towns and villages have been 
completely destroyed. 
Apart from that, the Armenian terrorist organisations have committed 
numerous terrorist acts on the territory of Azerbaijan. As a result of these acts, 
which have been carried out on the underground, buses, ferries and elsewhere, 
more than 2 000 innocent citizens of Azerbaijan, including women and children, 
were killed and tens of thousands were injured. 
I think that the Council of Europe must express its attitude to this issue as 
well as to the fact that one member state of the council, Armenia, continues to 
occupy 20% of the territory of another member state, Azerbaijan. 
How do we combat terrorism? This is one of the most important questions 
for the international community. One of the ways of combating terrorism is to put 
an end to the existence of lawless zones, which are the best places for terrorists to 
hide, to create their camps and bases and to conduct their terrorist activities. 
One of these lawless zones is the territory of Nagorno-Karabakh, the self-
proclaimed "Republic" which is not recognised by the international community. 
The territory of Nagorno-Karabakh has been used for a long time by various 
terrorist organisations, as well as for illegal arms' sales, drug growing and drug 
trafficking. 
The territory of Nagorno-Karabakh is completely out of control. This 
territory is a black hole in Europe and a place where the rules of international law 
are not working. 
This territory is a constant threat to the whole region. 
Therefore when we talk about combating terrorism, we should mean not 
only one particular terrorist organisation but all terrorist organisations in the world. 
The topic of today's discussion is combating terrorism and respect for 
human rights. First of all we should think about the victims of terrorists and their 
fundamental right to live that terrorists have deprived them of. We should think 
about the feelings of the families of the victims. We should think about the 
refugees and internally displaced persons and their human rights. As I have said 
before, as a result of Armenian aggression and terrorism against Azerbaijan, one 
million of Azerbaijan's people became refugees who have been deprived com-
99 
 
pletely of elementary human rights. There are hundreds of thousands of refugees in 
other countries of Europe as well. We should take care of them. We should fight 
terrorism together in all its forms until our complete victory. 
 
ARMENIAN'S INFERTILITY PROGRAM 
Hundreds of Azerbaijani pregnant women and children have become 
victims of majic 
 
Karen Baydasor Karuken (Karun Baydarosobich Karakhanyan-RN) who 
leads the bureau of "Sanasor-Bagdasar" Armenian religious community in Stocton 
settlement in south of California state, finishing "Grigorian"-SAEAM-Wicthgraft 
school got certificate with "AREV" written on it. He came to Yerevan on Jule 2 
1989, on 9-th to Khankendi. The first days he sprayed Varfolomet water on the 
youth people coming to the armed forces volunterally and joining to fancy of 
"Great Armenia", prayed them, makes them to drink sherbet he charmed and 
reminded... Great Armenia begins from church. Misfortune will come when the 
strangers occupy them..." ("Krua") newspaper 1989 N=9 from religious Society till 
missions). 
 
Laura's charms 
 
According to our investigations "Sanasar Bagdasar" has some lines in 
armenian mythology. One of the lines is that armenians marry their girls and 
women to the head of state leaders, influential officials and at result they posses a 
family tree, at last a family. One of the founder of "Artsakh" (Khankendi) bureau 
of the Society Laura Nalbandyan (granddaughter of the famous magician Arab 
Nalbandyan-R.N writes to "Stocton Bureau"; "..I took the way of independence 
because of disagreement with Karen. Refers the aids to me sent the contributions 
personally to me. I established my bureau. I am writing the results. I participated in 
the wedding party in Kalbajar on August 4 1991. There were guests from Baki. I 
married Elulane living in Akumevillage of Vardanes (settlement) with an 
Azerbaijanian in Kalbajar. It will sixth case that I did..." Bulletin "Willof Tigran" 
Stocton 10/1992 N=10p21.) 
Agalar Dunyamaliyev Amrah oglu (42) - One of the person whom Laura 
charmed writes in his letter (January 1982) addressed to MIA to Baki: "The 
armenian women engaged in magic play with our emotions confuse us. They burn 
weed and smoke the boys who do not yield draw the mad, make invalid. Some of 
them become blind. Some died prematually". 
 
100 
 
Pregnant women are the Victims of Magic 
 
According o our investigations, special programs were developed in 
Vardenis and Martuni region departments of Armenian Security Committee to 
systemize to work principles with magicians. For instance, Spartak Marjkaryan 
who headed the intelligence group of Vardenis region department from 1992 to 
1999, took the "Sanasar-Bagdasar" group under control and brought their work into 
order and developed special program for them. According to the program, the 
magician women should expand at first their activity in Kalbajar, establish 
relations with military group, armed troops, give information on social and 
political condition in the region, collect information. The task of some group 
connected with pregnant women. 
 
"Dadivang and Infertility" 
 
The main task of the program called "Dadivang and Infertility" was prevent 
to increase of the population to hinder it. At the result the magicians women find 
the adress of the pregnant women find ways to their families and establish relations 
with the mothers waiting the birth of the child. Then one part of the pregnant 
women with the child while giving birth go mad or give the birth prematually 
(undoubtedly, the children born dead). Aida Nersesovna Sakyan and Arina 
Yerenovna Arturyan who were doctors in Khankendi hospital. In their letter N=26-
214/9(16/021992) adressed to Baki to the Republican Ministry of Health informed 
"..Birth rate in Kalbajar increases twice. The weight of 70.5% of the children born 
is exceed the norm. Not any desease was observed. Death rate reduced 1.5 time". 
On April 16.1992, dying women and children during giving the birth were 
recorded under the name of "Anten-3" state channel of France. The films were 
serened on July 9, on 21 of that month. It was commented in the section of "world 
screens", "Los Angeles Times" newspaper published in Los Angelos. (Californiya). 
 
According to our investigations during 1990-1992 in Kalbajar Lachin 
43boys were invalidate 
Symptoms of invalidity: 
Loosing the eyesight 
Not having a speech ability /ruining of the speech/ 
Disability of the right arm 
Violation of the biological system /uglyness/ 
Insaneness. Absent-mindedness and loosing wit. ("things that I have seen 
within CIS" Los Angeles Report of the doctor Mayk  Colombon.1999p73) 
101 
 
One of the executers of "Infertility" program, toxicologist Lidiya 
Karapetovna Asratova's /Astaryan/ preparations that she made at home did their 
work. On November 14/1991 new preparations made by the doctor Martuni region 
epidemiological station Romic Rubenovich Bagdaryan, were added to the 
Karapetova's program. According to the information only during two months of 
1992, 23 pregnant women in Kalbajar region subjected to the moral-
psylogicalterror of armenian magician. 16 fellows of 18-20age died of a calamity 
which was not possible to reseach. 
Death cases among the girls of age 18, 19, living in Zeylik Village of the 
region inceases constantly. For instance from August 1991 to February 1992 in the 
village 13 girls died on the ages that we indicated. Also in Gilijli of the region 6, in 
Agjakend 11, in Nadirkhanli village 9, in Agdaban 14 girls died. All were put the 
same diagnosis "Poisoning.." 
According to our investigations, from 1990 to 1992 in Kalbajar region 19 
families were extinct. For instance Javad Aligulu oglu Sadigov,  Alikram  Baba  
oglu  Gulamov,  Avazaga  Huseyn  oglu Dadashov have no longer family. 
However, according to our estimations Amirali Baba Gulamov had a family 
consisting of 76 people. 
The relations that Armenian intelligence office established with the women 
trained magecian in America, was the beginning of moral - psycological terror in 
the region, Armenian writer Silva Koputicyan called such women "The 
undiscovered bullit of Armenian People". Silva Kaputikyan writes: "These women 
started the first national Liberation War ibn Karabakh. Without cannon and bullit 
they had the power to occupy a whole village" (Black Paper-essays. S.Kaputisyan. 
Yerevan 1996.p29) 
Child Kidnapping 
 
The region intelligence department in Sisiyan settlement  of Armenia plan 
this work together with the militiary intelligence Office of the MD. At that times 
the members of "Saint Sultan Karapet" dealing with the child kidnapping and their 
trade entered Lachin from Gorus. Abramiyan Leon Kustavivich who served in 
HDQ in Hashtarkhan from 1989- to 1992 and retired in connection with his health 
condition was appointed the head of the head of the group consisting of 6 people. 
"The order" on the appointment came from the general headquarter of "Grella 
armenian religious community located in Marsel city of France. On August  16  
1992  France  politologist the director of National Scientific Researches Center, 
professor Juil wrote: "... In each word of these people scattered to separatecities 
and regions, the priests wearing religious clothes has an aim and attempt. These 
102 
 
people  establishing  their aims  on  their attempts  governed and financed from 
more serious and secret place" "Reseasch" J.Kend Paris 1998p 79. 
On February 24, 1992, priest Leon Abramyan in civil clothes established "A 
Charity" Center consisting of ancient armenian families. Till the end of February 
the members became 11 in this center. According to the information the first 
charity meeting was held in Yngiim in, the frontier village. But some days later 6 
of armenians understanding the aim of the Center left making protest."The Saint 
Sultan Karapet" group. 
On February 28 a special detachment belonging to the group and having 
worked in Yerevan intellegence service comefrom Gorus to the center in Lachin 
and on March 1 scattered in the south direction. The members of the organization 
had to implement the following the tasks: 
Propoganding the greatness of Armenians 
Using the local people and financig them to achive the dissemination of 
rumours 
Gathering the littleboys and taking them to Gorus 
Inciting hostility among the families 
According to the information there was a bureau in Verashin settlement in 
north west part of Gorus where the kidnapped children were kept. The Lebanon 
journalist Mohammed Salim Muslim who describes Verashin bureau writtes:".. on 
the eve of war such cameras were a lot in the frontier region of Armenia with 
Azerbaijan. Though some of them were empty I saw children mainly in the 
cameras located in Gorus and Gafan area. As I was interested in them, they 
prohibited me enter the zone. But at nights I could hear the dangerous screams and 
noise of the children. 
They were frightened there "...From frighting" tale to frightening truth 
Beirut.1997 "Ash-Shaig (East) "publishing house p.104. 
Undoubtedly, fear and stress affects easily the gene of human being, change 
him /her or destroyes. There are valuable researches of Israil doctors about it, 
according to the investigation the scientist in Yerusalim Jews Institute and Beer-
Shever revelations . 
According to them human organism has build "awe" from nerve tissue-
neurons. They inform about any irritation to the brain center and this pain is 
transferred to all parts of organism. There are special signal while blood tissues in 
the organism for normal function of neurons and they provide the nerve. If any 
terror act, death, toture happens before the eyes of a percon, especially children, 
dramatic changes "trammas" occurs. The researcher of this work professor 
Khermon Soren has learned a gene called "ASNE". The scientist states at which 
103 
 
stress and fear changes this gene in children. It causes unsubstitutable bad changes 
in organism. After additional injections, these changes become for ever. 
Let us see the result on March 10 2boys from Zabuvillage of Lachin, 3 from 
Aji;ar, 2 from Pirjahan, 3 from Ahmadli, 1 from Gushchu.. were kidnapped. And 
only region prosecutor Office knew that the kidnapping happened on same day. 
The Armenians released them after realizing their operations. I must remind that 
the kidnapped boys aged 7, whose genes were invalidated now are 18-19 years old. 
This children have no gene of Gachag Nabi, Gachag Karam, Javadkhan... 
Shikhlinski, Mehmandarov. 
According to our investigations armenian doctors meeting with the leaders 
and idelologists of religious communities coming from abroad, mainly from 
France, Suriya, Lebanon, America and Russiun Federation to the frontier zones and 
establishing directly relations with intelligence service. 
Armenian doctors coming from abroad, mainly from France, Suriya, 
Lebanon, America and Russiun Federation to the frontier zones and meeting with 
the leaders and idelogists of religious communities having established relations 
with the intelligence service, established "field laboratories" on the children 
kidnapped from the Lachin, Gubadli and Zangilan. For example, an operation 
called "the children of the sun" was carried out between the members of "Gretta" 
armenian religious comminity in Gubadli direction and the doctors of the hospital 
named after Nekker in Paris. 
Though it was introduced in the official documents as the "charity 
marathon", its essence was diferent. French doctors are seriously engaged in 
transplantation of sculpture against genetic immunity weakness in children who 
can serve in France army in future. It is realised approximetly in 10 year program 
framework. According to our investigations, this work is directly carried out by a 
group headed by Alen Fisher the professor of the hospital named after Nekker. 
The operations were mainly carried out in two directions: 
a) transplantation of the sculpture (in extreme cases), 
b)  operations of white blood tissues. 
Generally, this abnormal operations of the Armenian doctors did not give 
good results. The armenian doctor Jon Arekelyan who established his laboratories 
in refugee and tent camps on the ophan children within CIS, especially in 
Caucasus, doing work resulted in death, left hurriedly Armenia in 1994 and was 
arrested in Washington on July 14, 1996. ("Tribune" newspaper. California. 1996 
N=26. p.4) 
According to our investigations, in 1991-1992 in the territory of Lachin 
region 17 families were extinct. For instance, from 46 family members of the 
Abbasguliyevs there is not one person alive. "The Governmental Institute dealing 
104 
 
with the Environment and Health problems" USA investigating the families 
subjected to the depression in the war and conflict zones within CIS their loss or 
disappearing reasons, has serious results. Azerbaijan being subjected to the 
misfortunes, its occupied territories by Armenians is among these results. 
The director of the institute, professor Kennet Olden reminds in 1997 in the 
report addressed to the "White house" .As to the results of war of Armenia in the 
direction of Azerbaijan, the balance between the nature and human being broke 
down. Together with dying of flowers for preparations, rare plant and animals, 
gold soils in the war areas in Karabakh, great families were killed and destroyed. It 
is one of the ugliest wound of war. (Ssiense Digest journal 1997 p 14). 
 
Armenian Magicians in Frontier Regions 
 
According to our investigations, the first stage of the secret program "Ethic 
viruses" that the armenian magicians and military doctors implement in the frontier 
stripes and occupied territories, completed on May 21, 1996. It would be better for 
Azerbaijan officials look for the lost and captured women and children in the 
experimental institute and labaratories where the Armenian doctors of the west and 
east work. Especially, Armenian doctors as well as physicians whose nationality 
are unknown, thinking over the ethnic groups in Azerbaijan territory, obtained 
researches with serious results. 
From 1986-to 1992 four girls from the south region of Azerbaijan 
especially, from talish villages of Lankaran, Masalli, married and moved to 
Khanlig village. But 12 people were sent to work there. 6 brides from Astara 
moved to Minchivan Shusha. Today not any of these talish families, also their 
children is alive. 
According to the information, those years in these regions and the south 
regions where talish people densely live not any desease in connection with blood 
relation one was registered. 
Physician Ago Ali Mahmudi one of the famous scientist of Iran healh who 
researched ethnic groups in Azerbaijan in 1968 wrote in his report addressed to 
Rza Shah ".. Blood group of talish ethnic group, densely living in Azerbaijan 
destroyes our thinking. Marriage of people with blood relation gives dangerous 
results in Ganja, Nakhchivan, Karabakh zones. In the families with the blood 
relation 55% of the children born, are ill or invalid. It is noted as an ordinary case. 
But in talish ethnic group it is not observed up to now. For instance in 65 talish 
families established on blood relations all the children born are healthy. I refer it to 
the marrages between couisins" (A.E.Mahmudi "Ethnic Miracles" book. Tehran 
1971 p 86 "Keyhan publishing house"). 
105 
 
At the result since 16 August 1998, the old generation of Armenian families 
settled in some countries of the world were moved to the occupied territories. The 
first moved family was Gabriel Tel Grigoryants and his children living in France 
since 1935. They settled in Shusha.The physician Gabriel Tel Grigoryants opened 
his clinics in Lachin. 
 
Armenian Criminal Physicians 
 
They had sold the organs of Azerbaijani children to foreigners  
 
THE AMPUTATION ROOMS 
 
Next day politologist Jirak Albertyan, a French adviser working at the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the self-proclaimed republic, presented US $28 
thousand to Segro Ovanesyan, one of the leaders of "Advantis" known as 
Armenian's charity organization in Khankandi and he joined the group taking part 
in sending "the cargo" to Yerevan (Yerevan "Advantis" collection of charity 
organization. 1999. XII-29. page 14. Review is published in four languages). 
On the 21st of February Armenia's President Robert Kocharyan's notes were 
heard. President gave instructions to ministers of National Security and Defense, 
Minister of Internal Affairs, the head of the Military Special Office... Minister of 
Foreign Affairs and the mayor of Yerevan to treat seriously to "Advantes" 
International cultural and charity community and to its representative, 
S.Ovanesyan ("Armyanskiy Vestnik" III - 3. P. 9) and to render any assistance to 
him. One of the generals of Armenian Ministry of Defense Avik Khachaturyan was 
authorized to control all these affairs. The children were provided with food, 
transport, warm clothes and beds by the line of Ministry of Defense. It was only in 
appearance. Because S. Ovanyan himself controlled everything, he determined 
from financial problems to the talks. Four persons from Yerevan military hospital 
were appointed for invalid and cripple children. A middle-aged, physician-surgeon 
called Leila Bagdasarovna was appointed the head of the circles. A wage was 
alloted to her $75 per day (A. Khachaturyan "Armenian generosity" - 2000.III-26 
Moscow "Soviet Russia" newspaper page 2.) 
Next, the children who lost their rights to return to normal life and to live as 
a man were waited for Leila Bagdasarovna's "amputation rooms". Without doubt, 
many people haven't realized it yet, so I'd like to explain: - "Amputation" is a Latin 
word. It is one branch of the operation. Cutting off finger, hands, arm, leg, ear from 
the body... Performing unnecessary but aimed operation at any part of a body... 
The word "amputation " embraces all these matters". 
106 
 
Events followed one - another. "Cultural programms" were prepared for 
Leila Bagdasarovna. On the 4th of May work was stopped on the second floor of 
the military hospital. Invalid and cripple children passed through "amputation 
rooms" in turn. Introducing himself as a member of association "Vatan"  in 
Armenia,  55 Alik Mansyrvich Arsenyan, emissaries having come from France and 
Syria, a doctor nickname, 63 Jan Fransis Klod, Saleh Yasim Abdullah being busy 
in urban building (on the business sphere) took part in this process. Documentation 
was made again... Because the number of the children reached from 22 to 38. The 
age of 16 (sixteen) children joining that group in Yerevan was between 9to12. 
These children were those who with the illegal Armenian organizations "Ararat" 
and "Armenian Crescent"  having joined  their  parents  and  escaping  from war, 
Armenian bullet fled four Gubadli, Zangilan, Fizuli, Cabrail, Agdam to Galeybar 
settlement of Iran some years ago. Some of these children lost their speech and 
mind. Some of them were bitten while crossing the frontier; some of them became 
very weak from starvation and thirsty. During the first years they begged, cadged, 
rambled, and earned money for their living together with their parents in the 
Eastern Azerbaijan's settlements of Hurand, Khumarli, Tazakand, Varzacan, Ahar, 
Germi (Iran). Those who had lost their parents addressed to local mosques and 
sheltered there in order not to die. Sixteen of those  children  have  been  brought to 
Yerevan  now  (Tehran. "Iran" newspaper 2000. III-4.page 3) One of the 
interesting facts is that the letters about Armenians' strange and "humanist" 
interests for Azerbaijani  invalid  and  cripple  children were written to various 
addresses in Azerbaijan on the 26th of March, 2000. 
The letters were signed by Ayyub Xatirnecat, Firdovsi Marandi being 
engaged in small household. After this both of those businessmen were not allowed 
to trade with Yerevan and Baku. 
 
Azerbaijani children being crippled 
 
As a result of our investigation we got some of the names invalid and 
disabled children being passed through the amputation rooms' in Yerevan: 
1.    Hasanova Zahra Murshid gizi(Gubadli) 
2. Gahramanov Elchin Babayar oglu (Gubadli) 
3. Zehniyev Hasan Almurad oglu (Zangilan) 
4. Safarova Aytakin (Gubadli) 
5. Nagiyev Khurshid Aflatun oglu (Jabrail) 
6. Balabayov Janishin Ahmadaga oglu (Zangilan) 
7. Mammadova Zarnitaj Sakitaga gizi (Zangilan) 
107 
 
The illegal "Armenian Crescent" and its leader, former military man Yego 
Saakyan showed special interest to gather and to collect these children. (Isfahan. 
The newspaper of the Armenian community. "Ararat.2000.IV-3). The fate of these 
children being passed through "amputation, rooms" whose faces and bodies were 
made unrecognizable, who lost their speech, seeing and listening skills and had to 
crawl in the invalid carriage the end of their life still remains closed. According to 
other information we have obtained by us there are slave-markets for selling and 
"giving as a present" our girls, women, children taken prisoner before (in 1992-
1993) some years ego made invalid and cripple, confined to invalid carriages to 
foreign businessmen in the territory of Nairy region (approximately 1,5 km 
towards the north, in Lusovker settlement near the lake of "Sevan") and in the 
territory of Diljan.. 
Still everything slipped attention, everything passed in peace. Azerbaijani 
officials demanded the rest of the captives. Armenian side insisted on not having 
any prisoners in their country and returning all of them to Azerbaijan. On February 
16, 2000 an expert by Armenian side Afik Ashotyan gave such an interview to 
"Artsakh" (Khankandi) radio that there was not any document and evidence in 
Azerbaijan's demands. The press secretary of the Defense of Ministry, Colonel 
Seyran Shah Sevaryan claimed in the newspaper "Mond" (France) that the topic 
"Azerbaijani captive" needs to be forgotten... (2000, IX-24 page 3). On March 19, 
2000 in "Novruz" holiday evening, General Avik Khachaturyan together with 
Sergo Avanesyan visited and gave presents to the invalid and disabled children 
who were placed in the mental hospitals of Yerevan. The idea of "Novruz" holiday, 
spring holiday for these children long ago who forgot the world lost their names, 
took unnecessary medicines preparation three times a day, whose brain was 
pricked thousand kinds of injections. After same days of spring then children were 
sent to Paris by "Yerevan-Paris" evening airliner. General Avik Khachaturyan 
physician-surgeon Milla Bagdasarovna, the employees of the Yerevan department 
of "Advantis", the delegates of illegal Armenian Crescent and "Ararat" "Charity 
organization" took part in this event. 
According to our investigations the children weren't allowed to go to Paris. 
At the airport they were divided into four groups according to the rules decided 
beforehand. (This work were done by the "Echniadzin" group, illegally worked in 
Paris). At the same evening 23 of those children took start in the direction of Syria 
under the leadership of a businessman Saleh Gasim Abdullah by the Paris-Damask 
airliner. In Damask the children were divided into Turkish and German group. In 
February the newspaper "Criminal chronicle", published in Moscow. Wrote: ... 
"Hundred thousands of children lost their parents, homes, family hearths during 
national conflicts. They became alone and orphan. In the territory of CIS the signs 
108 
 
of this tragedy are mainly met in Azerbaijan, Tajikistan, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, 
Moldovia, Geogia and Kirghiza. These abandoned or captived children are taken 
by different groups and unities, "were amputated" and they became the sources of a 
real income and profit, either in the business of begging" or in operation room 
functioning in the field of cutting and selling the organs of human body. 
Every body each of the invalid and cripple children "working" in the 
'business of begging", whose nationality is unknown gives "his earning" 200 
dollars or 400-450 thousand additional rubles in Moscow and Krasnodar. Their 
"amputation rooms" are in the sanatoria of Chekhov region ..." ("Criminal 
chronicle " newspaper, 2000. February, 4.page 2). 
 
Armenians have sold the organs of human body 
 
On the 16th of November, 2000 The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) 
of Geramny gave the account of six paged to the head of the state. In this account 
beating the "agitation drum" it is shown: 
"...We have got information's and documents about the" physician-
criminals" belonging to the Russian Federation and other countries of CIS in the 
territory of Germany. These groups are engaged in selling and buying healthy 
organs of children and aged people in the forbidden ways. Armenian, Georgian and 
Chechen "businessmen" brought some of these children to Germany. They are the 
missing and captived persons during the war... Federal Bureau of Investigation and 
other CIS countries demonstrate weakness and feebleness in this case"...(Germany, 
Berlin. "Morgen" newspaper.2000.XI-6.page 4) 
According to our investigations, after these materials, on December 13, 
2000 "Joint operative group" was established in connection this work in 
Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan and Moldavia. 
The commissions of the parliaments being engaged in the problems of 
national security, passed special laws. The Security Council of Uzbekistan held a 
special meeting with regards to this problem and made a decision... 
As to Azerbaijan its invalid and cripple sons and daughters under the name 
of "Abdullah's children" crawl in the hand-carts, begged for charity and hand out in 
the side-streets and blind alleys, went begging and earn money for Abdullah in the 
streets, curves, squares and markets of Damask. 
We met a very strange sight while investigating the illegal "Armenian 
Crescent" organization. "Armenian Crescent" acting in Zelevanon, Damask, 
Shusha, Ankara, Isfahan, Collogue and Marseilles...took its perpetual collaborator, 
halabian by nationality Abdullah 470 dollars for each boy, and 530 dollars for each 
girl alloted by him. But Abdullah takes 75-90 dollars from each child every day. 
109 
 
As to his groups, two of them act in Beyrut, one in Baku and other one in 
Diyarbakr under the name of "Abdullah's children", and with the help of local 
assistants arrange their business. Abdullah's deputies gave 110-120 dollars to each 
assistant. 
 
Child speculation 
 
In the daily newspaper "Al-Gamahir-Al-Arabiyya" printed in Arabian in 
Halab an editorial named "Halabian Abdullah's children" was published. This 
leading article says: 
"...Sheykh Abdullah hasn't got a child". But from the colorful markets of 
Damask to the streets of Halab there are a lot of invalid and cripple children spread 
there that they have got one name: 
"Abdullah's children". Some of them sleep just in the handcart, open their 
hands whose fingers were cut to passers-by, some of them showing his cut arms 
and legs beg for help. It is impossible to pass easily and silently by them. Like it or 
not you want to help them... (Halab..The Al-Gamahir-Al-Arabiyya newspaper. 
1994.XII-20 page 4). 
Felix is a rare name in Turkey. To research this name doesn't demand such 
great effort. If you ask master, nickname Ashraf Ipakchi, who passed himself to the 
two-storied building, number 16, which was a bit apart from the Ataturk part 
(approximately 100-500 meters to the South) and cleaned shoes he will whisper 
without raising his head: "He is very cruel man. When I ask all the policemen to 
arrest him, nobody listened to me. (The master spends very much part of the day to 
serve the policemen walking in the port). All of them laugh looking at me. I don't 
say a word for laughing. He beat up my brother to death..." 
The shoemaker wrote these sentences in the letter which he gave to the head 
of the guards of the airport on February 11, 2000 at 13.00 (at 11.00 by Baku time). 
Then, he addressed one of those letters to Azerbaijan's ambassador to Turkey, 
mister M. Novruzov and wrote: "Mister ambassador! An Armenian by nationality 
Felix Agayan is engaged in child speculation. Some of those children were 
mangled and sent for beggary on the ways and in the streets. You never ask who 
those children are. They are invalid and cripple children closed one Armenian-
Turkish police, taken hostage from Azerbaijan or bought by one cruel man..." 
The letter addressed to the diplomatic corps was not got an answer. 
Grandson Felix Agayan's way of life was also interesting. Ones he listened to his 
grandfather's dreams and read "My nation ... my conscious (published in Damashk 
in November, (1908) it speaks about Armenians). According to our investigation 
grandson Felix Agayan's grandfather Felix Agayan was elected as the delegate to 
110 
 
the parliament of the country as the delegate of Armenian community in Iran in the 
seventieths years. The first conviction and insult against Azerbaijan were said by 
him from the tribune of the parliament. 
Grandson Felix Agayan was born in 1946 in Isfahan. He was at the head of 
the Armenian association "Fraternity" in 1974. As the organization acted illegally, 
its headquarters in Isphahan was destroyed and it is activity was banned (with the 
help of the security forces of Tehran) In 1983 F. Agayan (grandson) was sent to 
work at the Istanbul affilation of construction company called "Babayan and his 
company". But when he went to Istanbul he had already been one of the chairman's 
of the "Armenian Crescent" which acted illegally in the eight countries of the 
world and regularly took financial assistance. 
In its turn this organization signed a treaty on the joint program with the 
"Advantis" Armenian center in 1992. The main aim of the Agayan -Ovanesyan 
relation was clear "Azerbaijan and Azerbaijani people". As it is informed, grandson 
Agayan created business relations with proarmenian officials in the state and 
governmental officers in Turkey with the help of one of the active employers of the 
Armenian community in Tehran and began to function. 
Behind all these stood grandson Agayan's security stayed. On the 26 June, 
1999. Agayan created separtist organization "Armenian Crescent" in Diyarbakr, 
Istanbul in Adana, which keeps its goals and objectives in secret. 
One of centers (Diyarbakr) was headed by Gleb Danilovich Badalyan, a 
former major, having worked at the department for work with juveniles and 
teenagers of the militia office in Yerevan from 1983 to 1986. The former officer 
participated in the scientific-theoretical conference (by the MDA's line) held in 
Baku in 1984. The person knowing Azerbaijan is also a well-known ideologist of 
"Great Armenia" organization. 
At present "Badalyan branch" of the "Armenian Crescent" is widely 
functioning. On November 2, 1999. G. Badalyan met a woman Fazila Sadigova left 
Baku in 1989, settled in Diyarbakr and stayed there for work.. At that time Fazila's 
illegitimate daughter was born. But financial difficulties, straitened circumstances 
and moral depression destroyed Fasila's all hopes and made her go begging. 
Turkey's curves, blind alleys, streets made her unrecognizable as she was beaten, 
insulted, her hair was cropped, her face and neck were knifed. (She often met those 
who came from Baku, opened her hand for begging and pleaded for returning to 
her homeland ... But she was driven away) 
In November, 1999 Gleb Badalyan bought Fazila's child (two-aged Nigar) 
as a kind man. At this time Armenian Badalyan gave her only 20 dollars and told 
her if she born a child again he would be ready to buy it. (Diyarbakr "Police folder" 
on the persons who came from other countries during 1999-2000 years. Page 114). 
111 
 
After that day Nigar joined Armenian Badalyan's orphans. Today one can often 
meet Badalyans orphans in Istanbul's Ankara's streets. They don't need to be 
looked for. Because they themselves meet you, some of them in the hand-carts, 
some of them crawling and some of them leaning against the crook, cry for money 
and beg in order for surviving. 
 
The Children being forced to be beggars 
 
According to one of the Istanbul Municipality Office employees' 
information for June 14, 2001. Gleb Badalyan's, leading "Armenian Crescent", 
orphans begged only in 19 places of the south part of the city. Twelve of them are 
Azerbaijanis, five of them are Chechens and two of them are Russian children. (On 
may 2, 2001 the information, prepared on the basis of businessman Yavuz 
Yapinchi's complaints letter to the Istanbul Municipality Office). Many of these 
bought children were passed through Turkey's private "Amputation rooms". The 
diplomatic corps in Istanbul was informed about "Badalyan's orphans"-being 
invalid, disabled and crippled, unable to speak, to pronounce a word-living 
corpses". Turkey's Ministry of Foreign Affairs made inquary about this case thrice 
by the RF's embassy (2001), twice by the Germany's embassy (2001), 4 times by 
the Khazakhstan (?). 
"Begging business" increasable Armenian officer Gleb Badalyan's sum 
greatly in his bank account in the "Impash bank" in Turkay. It is informed that on 
January 5, 2000 Gled Badalyan transferred 13 thousand 680 dollars, in December, 
2001 17 thousand dollars to the departments in Tehran and Artsakh (Khankandi" 
with the line of "Armenian Crescent". 
During three months (November, December, 1994), (January, 2001) Gleb 
Badalyan drew in the women having gone to Turkey for profiteering, jobbery, 
earning for their lives and then morally not having right to come back any more, 
involved to petty larceny and that was why being registrated at the police-office 
Asmat Suleyman gizi Javadova's two-aged son (Shamkir) Zemfira Gulammirza 
gizi Abishova's six-aged daughter (Tovuz), Afsana Dadash gizi Dadashova's three-
aged daughter born with defects (Lankaran), Arifa Sabutaqy gizi Shiriyeva's five-
aged invalid son (Imishli), in to "Armenian Crescent". Which was known as a 
philanthropic and charitable organization in the documents of Municipality and 
press. At that time Gled Badalyan wrote to the "Advantis" organization that he had 
spent 1.890 dollars for all these. 
According to the information, on January 21, 2000, Damir Osmanoglu, 
Turkish, origination having served, at the Turkish Navy and then retired joined 
Gleb Badalyan. He took part in transporting the children from one place to another 
112 
 
and controlling internal discipline. But Gled Badalyan was busy with gathering the 
charity collected by invalid, crippled dumb, deaf children pushed into the hand 
carts by pleading, crying and begging. Every child had to give pay from 80 dollars 
to 85 dollar. It was the payment for their living. Those who couldn't give it they 
were insulted and beat. 
On February 24, a half-naked woman corpse photo printed in the 
"Yamanak" newspaper published in the Armenian language in Turkey. This dead-
body was fount near one of bus-stop for the buses working among the blocks. The 
newspaper informed that dead woman seen in the photo was Fazila Amirkan 
gizi(?) Sadigova who had come to his brothers' for a job and food from Baku. Then 
that photo was printed in ugly form in Yerevan. On March 20 that photo was given 
to the newspaper "Aztag" in Beirut.. One life was put an end in such way. 
 
 
LACHIN: PAIR OF GALLOWS 
 
9 little girls were killed only in a village 
 
Specialists of the Biotechnology Institute under the National University of 
Mexico have proved that every tree and bush, or plant has a peculiar security 
system. 
Informing this, director of the Molecular Biology Department Federiko 
Sanches Rodriges writes: "... The plants have a security mechanism. We explored 
it. We studied every reaction in plants and bushes, in different parts of them. It as 
clarified that there is a molecular base, or immune system in every part of plant". 
 
Lachin residents were inconceivably tortured 
 
The immune system of Azerbaijan is Karabakh and today this system has 
been paralysed... Both from the economic-political and moral-psychologic 
viewpoints. 
According to the investigations, a group of physicians, listed below, had 
experimental tests in paralysing the immune system in the territory of Karabakh. 
First it was tested in Lachin region. 
 Aida Nersesovna Saakyan (pysician) 
 Ariya Avanesovich Grigoryan (physician-psychologist) 
 Arina Yeryomovna Arutyunyan (physician-toxicologist) 
 Michael Gevendovich Arutyunyan (physician-surgeon) 
113 
 
 Lidiya Karapetivna Asratyan (physician-microbiologist) 
 Ruben Ayrapetovich Baziyan (physician-surgeon) 
 Elmira Surenovna Stepanyan (infant physician) 
 Georgi Aramovich Narinyan (infant physician) 
 Romik Rubenovich Bagdasaryan (infant physician) 
 Laura Monovna Ishkhanyan (infant physician) 
It was a mere thing for these physicians. For example, Latif Abdulali oglu 
Gasimov, a kid of 9 years, who was paralysed by both feet, was given to the 
physician by name Aina Yeryomovna Arutyunyan... According to the 
informaitons, these physicians had their own share of "kid" and "mercy" in the 
occupied territories of Azerbaijan, in particular, in Lachin region. 
In October 19, 1993, in Sonasar village of the occupied Lachin, the house of 
Najaf kishi was made an itinerant hospital. Servicemen of the military unit #216/01 
VE from Gorus (captain A.D. Babayan) repaired and reconstructed the half-ruined 
2-storeyed house. From October 21, the children captured in the war areas, were 
sent to this house. Cars with special signs took the children there. On October 28, 
the cars with # 03-09 VRE and 21-93 OVR, GAZ-69 were driven to Gorus in 
Armenia. 
According to investigations, during a week, 16 disabled and invalid kids 
were taken to the Sonasar camp. On November 14, the children were distributed 
among the physicians: Arina Arutyunyan, Laura Ishkhanyan, Ruben Baziyan and 
Lidiya Asratyan. On November 22, five gun-men of Arab national appeared in the 
region. Near the graveyard of Lachin, in the open field, they bury two Arabs, who 
were killed in the battles. On November 28, two of the captured kids died... They 
could not bear hunger, disease and pain... They were buried under th efeet of the 
Arabs... (Iran. Tikmadashli Sayyah Huseyn. "Diary of Lachin", Tabriz, "Murtuza 
gardashlari" publishers, 1995, p. 47). 
Since March 26, 1994, the concentration camp in Sonasar was known as 
"Sonasar Bazari" ("Bazar of Sonasar") in Yerevan, Gorus and Razdan. But this 
"Bazar" was closed for representatives of the Medicines sans Frontieres, Red Cross 
societies, human watch international orgnaizations. Entry to Sonasar was only 
possible by the written permission of the miltary commandant of Lachin, colonel 
Gran Amiryan and seal of the military unit #209/10. V.O.X.). 
 
Arabs in Lachin 
 
The first Arabs appeared in Lachin in 1989. In that year, the regional 
newspaper "Lachin" published an article, whereby informed its readers that certain 
114 
 
Saleh Momun (21, Sudan), Jabbar al-Farah (Egypt), Yahya Muhammad (Lebanon), 
Huveys Zeytun (Jordan) ... had visited Malibeyly and Chagazur villages. The 
"visitors" were intersted in acquring permanent residence in Lachin. They also 
were in the museum of history of Lachin, spent a night Gulabird and Jijimli vil-
lages. 
In June 12, 1990, in Al-Ubeida settlement of Sudan, was established a 
"Union for struggle of the Armenian communities" (that were in Jordan, Egypt, 
Libya, Algeria and Sudan). It was clarified that these Armenian communities were 
in close touch with the security or secret services of those countries. Also were 
defined the coordinators from the local secret agents to control them. 
According to the investigations, the above-mentioned "visitors" Saleh 
Momun "represented" the intelligence service of Sudan, Jabbar al-Farah served the 
military intelligence of Egypt, Yahya Muhammad was the member of the special 
service of Lebanon, Huveys Zeytun was the agent of the security center of the 
Kingdom of Jordan. This was noted at the meeting of ideologists of the "Armenian 
Society" Aram Yasaulyan and Harry Marat (Ambarsumyan) with the chief of the 
security service of Jordan Said Beno, held in "Jordan Press" Fund in oman on 
November 21, 991. The Fund's "Al-Rai" ("The Opinion") published an article by 
Harry Marat. The article was headed as "Our Caucasian relations". It says: "...We 
have an opportunity to render moral, economic and military assistance to our 
Armenian brothers in Karabakh. On this purpose, we established the Alliance of 
the union for struggle of the Armenian communities and Arab communities in the 
Arab countries in Oman on October 26, 1991. The Aliance has bank accounts in 
the 11 world countries...". 
It was registered as an Armenian international organization under the 
instruction of the King Huseyn just in October 29, 1991 in Oman. This was the 
second Caucasian organization, registered under the personal instruction of King 
(the first was "Friends of Chechen-Ingush" Society, the leader of which is Sheik 
Abdul Jamo). 
 
Banks were keen in the invasion 
 
One of the bank accounts of the Armenian organization was opened in the 
"Caucasus Investment Bank". As the bank was engaged in fuel and energy deals, it 
arranges the trade links between the Caucasian countries and Europe and the Near 
East. As a result, in May 14, 1992, Armenian Harry Marat pays visits to Baku, 
Ganja and Nahkchivan as representative of the "Caucasus Investment Bank" (the 
Bank is headed by an Armenian national from Lebanon, millionaire Adnan 
Nolkoyan (Hashoggi). In Baku, Harry Marat meets with the officials at Parliament, 
115 
 
President Administration... The key goal was to study the basic economic-strategic 
points, infrastructures, banking system of the fighting country. On the other hand, 
Harry Marat Anbarsumyan tries to keep their bank accounts in Baku by replacing it 
in numerous banks. Because these bank accounts were necessary to work within 
Azerbaijan. 
The annual (1996) report of the "Caucasus Investment Bank" confirms that 
it has made grants to some democratic media outlets, societies and organizations in 
Yerevan, Baku and Tbilisi. On August 12, 1996, the bulletin "Caucasus Invstement 
Bank: annual report for service use", published in Beirut, runs: "Note: We have 
invested much in the Caucasus. But it is not enough. We gained foot-holds to 
establish our strategic links in the regions (p. 14)". 
As stated, in contrast to other banks, this Bank keeps and preserves its 
strategic data on links up to 2006. That is to say, it is possible to acquire the Bank's 
materials connected with its activity in the territory of Azerbaijan, including 
Karabakh region. 
According to the investigations, on January 14, 1992, the Bank opens its 
Gorus and Gafan offices of the "Union of the Armenian communities" with the 
bank accounts in Gorus: Ol: BO11421-BANK.AR. and in Gafan: OL:B244001-
BANK.AR As a result, the foreign Armenians rendering assistance to their terrorist 
brothers in Karabakh, were registered in the banks in Gorus and Gafan. According 
to Halonis Arakelyan, a local bank controller in Gorus, the Bank assisted in 
numeous fields. There also appeared businessmen from Iran and Russia... They 
were registered in the "Union of the Armenian communities". Thus, as provided, 
on March 28, 1992, the following organizations tried to establish their secret cells 
in Lachin. 
 "Saint Armenian Motherland Union" organization (Sudan, 3.12.1989). 
 "Katalikos" organization (Egypt, 26.06.1989). 
 "Karabakh Aid Center" (Lebanon, 02.08.1990). 
 Organization of "Ararat c Araz" (Jordan, 26.02.1990). 
 "Great Armenian idea" (Syria, 21.04.1989). 
According to investigations, the organization "Saint Armenian Motherland 
Union" was founded by the initiative of a businessman, an Armenian emmigrant 
Emin Aydinyan, in Khartum. There is another information, which confirms that 
this Organization has functioned among the Armenians in Azerbaijan still in 1989-
1990, under the name of "Union". It had branches in the Nasimi and Sabayel (then 
it was called after 26 Baku commissars) districts of Baku. The Organization, 
headed by Emin Urabekovich Aydinyan, an engineer of construction, creates its 
radical wing in November 4, 1991. Makes amendments to its By-Laws. In 
116 
 
November 20, 1991, a group, comprising 12 volunteers, led by Aydinyan, en route 
0121 flys from Khartum to Beirut, on November 23 they arraive in Yerevan. On 
November 26, he meets with the foreign minister of Armenia Raffi Ovanesyan and 
internal minister, general Vanik Siradegyan. Documents or passports of the 
personnel are given to the consulate of ministry. On November 28, the group was 
included to the internal troops of Armenia. On November 29, Emin Aydinyan 
returns to Beirut. The volunteer emigrants were headed by Mark Ovsepyan, 
colonel of the internal troops of Armenia. As stated, on April 1992, the armed 
group deploys in the Hajilar village of Lachin region. 
 
The shot kids 
 
The Armenian ideologist E. Aydinyan writes in his book "Letter to 
General... Salute to Siradegyan..." (114 pages): "I do not care whom the Lacjin 
territory belongs to. I am ever keen how I will be remembered in the Armenian 
history of the XXI century... I am certain, the armed groups of our Organization are 
enough strong to create the new pages of the Armenian history.." (Beirut, February 
1996, p. 42). 
According to the investigations, on May 13, 1992, the armed group of 
colonel M. Ovsepyan prepares attacks to Lachin. And this was informed by the 
"Front" newspaper issued in Armenian and Russian languages (1992, # 26). On the 
eve, the international Reuters Agency spreads an information, sent by its 
correspondent Vanori Bennet from Lachin region: " terrible area of war in Lachin 
roads ... It was stated in Yerevan that the Kurds of Lachin let the Armenians to use 
the road as a corridor for humanitarian assistance untill it is used for food and 
medical equipment... 
But the corpses remained on the ground when I came back the same way 
after two days. "Do not look", said Meci, the local journalist. "There are things you 
must not see, and there are questions not to utter..." (Information of "Reuters" on 
May 19, 1992. 2 pages, additonal information: Moscow, "Nezavisimaya Gazeta", 
p.2). 
Roads and passages of Lachin were filled up with the killed, shot down 
people... The English journalist V. Bennet writes that he was "prohibited to look at 
the tortured, disfigured corpses. "Some of them were beheaded". V. Bennet 
promises never to return to these areas and remember these atrocities, these 
inhuman treatments. 
According to the investigations, at 13.50 p.m. on May 18, 1992, in the 
village of Garigishlag in Lachin, 8 little girls of 9-11 years old, were shot down. 
Four of them were from the neighboring village Hajilar. They say, the happenings 
117 
 
were filmed by V. Bennet, too. But on his arrival in London, the film was 
confiscated by the "MI-6" intelligence service. 
On March 13, 1992, the organization "Karabakh Aid Center" joins the 
military unit #2101 in Sisyan region of Armenia. On March 16, a group of 9 
militants moves to the Khatsakh border point. On March 22, they arrange military 
trainings in the "North" training center located in the area between Khnatsakh and 
Verishen. On May 15, 1992, under the commander of the military unit, major 
Abram Arshakyan, the group attackes to the village Sadinlar. On May 16, 13 
residents of the village were captured. According to the informations, some of 
them are still kept in prison of the Security Sevices of Armenia. And press 
secretary of the National Security Ministry of Armenia, colonel Araik Melkonyan 
still denys all these. 
On May 19, 1992, the remained 7 POWs were sent to the Sonasar camp. In 
this camp, everything was sold... III and exhausted soldiers were deprived of 
treatment. In Sonasar camp, the wounded kids had to die in the hands of physician 
Aida Nersesovna Saakyan, a physician-terrorist, who killed the children by 
poisonous injection and preparations. Such children were buried separately. The 
Armenian hirelings called this graveyard "Canyon", where 36 corpses were buried 
in a day. The information first was obtained by the diplomat Franchesco Vendrell 
and passed to the UN Children Fund on May 27. (UN, "Children Fund's Report", 
09.09.1992). 
 
 
Even the women were hanged 
 
According to the investigations, there are enough documents and films, 
exposing the inhuman treatement, crimes, atrocities and genocide of the Armenian 
terrorist groups in the territory of Karabakh region of Azerbaijan in the state 
archives of England, United States, Iran, Germany, Russin Federation and France, 
in private archives, in the files of special services and separate persons. But we do 
not seek. Those states should be officially addressed. I do not see any illegal act in 
the allotment of a certain sum to acquire these films, documents. 
On June 16, 2001, we obtained the films about Armenian atrocities in the 
occupied territories in Karabakh. And we could not find the required sum to pay 
for them. The authorities rejected us... 
I think, this documentary of 17-minutes would be enough to show Armenia 
as an agressor to the world, expose the Armenian terrorism... 
According to the informations, on May 19, 1992, there was installed 
gallows in six villages of the Lachin region. 
118 
 
The Iranian journalist Sayyah Huseyn writes:"... I was terrified by the 
gallows... Two women were hanged on gallows in the Alkhasli village. They could 
be mother and daughter, I knew not... But the scene was striken, called the men of 
sense to think over and over. Because of our incapacity to help them, we prayed for 
them, asked pardon from the Heavens...". In Iran, nobody published these shots. 
(Sayyah Huseyn. "Diary of Lachin", "Mortaza Gardashlari" publishers, 1995, p. 
52). 
The women, hanged on the gallows, as was clarified in 1993, were Amirova 
Hijar Azhdar gizi (1948, passport # XI-UQ-469214) and Abdullayeva Rabiyya 
Aslan gizi (1950, passport # XI-UQ-312612). 
In 1995, names of these women were specified: 
1. Amirova Hijar Alaskar gizi 
2. Abdulova Rabiyya Aslan gizi 
The Armenian terrorists published these documents and photos in the press 
- "Zartunk" (Lebanon), "Ararat" (Turkey), "Vestnik" (Russia), "Araz" (Iran), 
"Variety" (US), commenting them as the chronicle of the happenings (1992-1993) 
from their vewpoint. They tried to prove that these were allegedly the Armenian 
women, hanged in Khankendi by Azerbaijanis. The place, analyses and collected 
materials, however, led to other side. In 1995, the Armenians were awarded with 
silver medal for such "shots of amateurs" at the festival, held in Kalifornia. In 
1997, at this festival, in this time in Paris, Armenians "won" gold medal... ("San-
Fransisco Chronicle". 1995, 26.09). Kalifornia, "Le Monde". 1997, 13.04., France). 
119 
 
120 
 
 
Parliamentary Assembly-Report of debates: 
Thursday June 27 at 3 p.m 
 
Mr I. ALIYEV (Azerbaijan). - Dear Mr. Chairman. Ladies and 
gentlmen. 
First of all I would like to express my disagreement with the title this issue 
is put in today's agenda - "Political prisoners in Azerbaijan". On becoming a 
member of the Council of Europe, Azerbaijan accepted the commitment to release 
or grant a new trial to persons who are regarded as "political prisoners" by human 
rights protection organisations. The words "political prisoners" are put in quotation 
marks (in paragraph 1 of the draft resolution), but there are no quotation marks in 
the agenda, so it may be understood to say that there are political prisoners in 
Azerbaijan. 
That is a small example of how inaccuracy, to put it mildly, may change the 
whole picture of an issue. 
I would like to stress that all the obligations undertaken by Azerbaijan a 
year ago upon accession to the Council of Europe are being implemented, 
including those relating to prisoners. Therefore we in Azerbaijan do not understand 
why we do not discuss the implementation of the commitments of Azerbaijan in 
general, and pick one of them - relating to prisoners - which, as I said, has been 
fulfilled. 
There are no political prisoners in Azerbaijan. The persons who are 
presented here as political prisoners have committed various crimes, including 
terrorist acts and murders, or have committed acts of aggressive separatism. They 
have never been engaged in political activities and are not politicians now as 
well. Most of them worked in the police, national security or army. According to 
the legislation of Azerbaijani, people who work in those organisations cannot be 
members of a political party or engage in political activities. 
Among those who are presented by various non-governmental organisations 
as political prisoners are plane hijackers, killers, terrorists, separatists, those who 
committed economic crimes or traffic accidents and so on. 
If we consider them political prisoners, that will lead us all, not just 
Azerbaijan, to disaster. If those criteria are applied to Azerbaijan today, they will 
be applied to any other country tomorrow, and we will demand that terrorists be 
freed so that they can commit new terrorist acts. 
With regard to criteria, there is in the entire world no definition of political 
prisoners. We must work out a universal definition, and only then can we apply it, 
otherwise, the confusion will continue, as in the case of Azerbaijan. Those whom 
121 
 
the rapporteur prefers, he considers political prisoners, and those of whom he 
disapproves, he does not consider to be political prisoners. One person, even a 
rapporteur, cannot undertake the enormous responsibility of deciding who is and 
who is not a political prisoner. 
We may be setting a very dangerous precedent. When terrorists commit 
terrorist acts and say that they did it for political purposes. Thus they will be 
beyond the reach of justice or If, after committing a crime they join a political 
party, they will be untouchable. In Azerbaijan we observed many such cases. 
The controversial report that has been presented today has already caused 
tension in Azerbaijani society. It does not help to ensure future co-operation 
between Azerbaijan and the Council of Europe and it may undermine the efforts of 
the government of Azerbaijan aimed at deeper integration into the European 
community. 
Taking all this into account, and also the fact that this controversial and 
unfair report and draft resolution lead not to co-operation but to confrontation, I 
ask my colleagues to vote against the draft resolution. 
I ask my colleagues also not to take into consideration the speeches of the 
representatives of Armenia, first because Armenia is in a state of war with 
Azerbaijan, commited millitary agression against Azerbaijan and occupied 
20% territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan, so their view cannot be objective. 
Secondly, the representatives of Armenia, the country where political 
opponents are killed either in prison or in parliament, they had better keep silent 
when such issues are discussed. 
Thank you for attention. 
122 
 
123 
 
124 
 
125 
 
126 
 
127 
 
128 
 
129 
 
130 
 
131 
 
132 
 
133 
 
134 
 
135 
 
136 
 
137 
 
138 
 
WHO HAD TO BE ON THE HELICOPTER, AND WHO DIDN'T 
 
No doubt, the very first step in every matter is truth. Truth that can be 
perceptible or imperceptible, and sometimes we simply aren't able to realize it. We 
have seen and still see the truth called "the helicopter". However, there's also the 
truth called "the helicopter", which we haven't been able to see and understand yet. 
The reason is many people still consider it as a crash. I would like to remind the 
names of those who were on board the military helicopter Mi-8 N-72, crashed on 
November 20, 1991 and died: 
 Tofig Kazim oglu Ismailov - state secretary 
 Ismat Ismail oglu Gaibov - Prosecutor General 
 Mahammad Nabi oglu Assadov - state advisor 
 Zulfu Saleh oglu Hajiyev - Deputy Prime Minister 
 Vagif Jafar oglu Cafarov - member of the parliament 
 Vali Husseyn oglu Mammadov - member of the parliament 
 Osman Mirza Husseyn oglu Mirzayev - head of the department in the 
Presidential Office 
 Gurban Husseyn oglu Namazaliyev - deputy minister 
 Igor Alexandrovich Plavsky - Prosecutor of Nagorny Karabakh 
 Vladimir Vladimirovich Koralyov - Head of Nagorny Karabakh Home 
Affairs office 
 Sergey Semyonovich Ivanov - National Security Ministry official 
 Nikolay Vladimirovich Jinkin - special zone commandant 
 Saylala Dasumovich Serikov - Deputy Minister of Home Affairs of 
Kazakhstan 
 Mikhail Dmitriyevich Lukashev - general 
 Oleg Nikolayevich Kocherov - general 
 Rafig Mammad oglu Mammadov - state secretary's assistant 
 Ali Mustafa oglu Mustafayev - TV journalist 
 Arif Ismail oglu Husseynzade - AzTV light master 
 Fakhraddin Ibrahim oglu Shahbazov - cameraman 
 Vyacheslav Vladimirivich Kotov - commander of the crew 
 Gennadi Vladimirovich Dolgov - pilot 
 Dmitry Borisovich Yakovlev – pilot 
It's all true. But this truth is mixed up with lies. I have read the files and 
investigated the materials concerning "the helicopter" tragedy since 1994. A 
program called "Undisclosed crimes" was shown on the state - run TV channel. 
139 
 
From the editor: according to "Olaylar" information agency the author of 
the program was fired without being given any reasons after these disclosures (a 
week later from the day the program was on the author R.Novruzoglu was 
dismissed from the Special Department by the Presidential Office). 
Investigations revealed that Gurban Namazaliyev, Tofig Ismailov, Saylala 
Serikov, Rafig Mammadov, Vali Mammadov, Mahammad Assadov and Zulfu 
Hajiyev didn't have to get on the helicopter which was flying in the direction of 
Garakand. The list of the passengers was made by Vladimir Ignatyevich 
Kurshanin, who was the Special Zone Commandant Nikolay Jinkin's and known 
among armenians as "posol"(ambassador) and agreed with Baku (?) on November 
18, 1991. That list included Emil Balayan "the hero", the chairman of the cattle 
farming community of the kolkhoz "Ashanak", Vladimir Kushnarin himself, Oleg 
Ovanesovich Yeseyan, one of the ideologists of the organization "Krunk" in 
Nagorny Karabakh which is financed by the international diaspora (mainly by 
armenian churches in France and California), Leonard Avakumovich Petrosyan, 
financial manager of the society "Yevkpara" and it's coordinator with Lebanese 
armenian diaspora, officer Tatavis Bagramovich Bagramyan... and it was decided 
that the leaders of Azerbaijan Khalg Jabhasi (Azerbaijan National Front) Agdam, 
Khojavend, Fuzuli, Jebrail, Khojali and Askeran branches and their spokesmen in 
Baku would be included in the list. Meetings were supposed to be recorded and 
shown in the television news program "Gunun ekrani" (the day's screen). However, 
at 13.40 some news came to the Agdam airport and... the above mentioned didn't 
get on the helicopter (!). 
 
Dolgov "Died" Twice 
 
On November 20. 1991 at 12.57 two helicopters of Mi-8 type (number 69 
and 72 helicopters) were filled up at the Agdam airport. Two pilots were to operate 
the helicopters: captain Lantev Yegorovich Mamontov, who had taken part in the 
war in Afganistan in 1981 and captain Pyotr Ignatyevich Babushkin. 
The second Mi-8, N-72 helicopter had to escort the first one. But at 13.48 
the second helicopter took off instead of the first one without being accompanied, 
which means it's safety wasn't secured. 
Note: speaking of the identification of the helicopter Mi-8, N-72 pilot called 
Gennadi Vladimirovich Dolgov, he was shot down and killed while operating the 
helicopter Mi-8, N-26 in Jalilabad, Afganistan on March 26, 1984 by Momin 
Jamalkhan's guerrillas (?). In fact investigations show that Gennadi Dolgov who 
was flying the helicopter on January 20, 1991 had been killed on March 26, 1984 
(?) (Uzbekistan, Tashkent Military Area. From the letter number 216/051 
140 
 
addressed to the Headquarters of Defense Ministry by colonel V.I.Gurin on 
December 12, 1984). 
 
Why Was Communication Broken? 
 
On the eve (at 14.05) the communication between Mi-8, N-72 and radars 
controlling the flight from Agdam airport and the ones rigged on the military cars 
in Gulabli and Yenikend direction was broken. 
The communication failure was first reported from Khojavend direction. 
But the terrorist act, the tragedy was reported six hours later (5 hours 47 minutes). 
Agdam, Khojavend and Khankendi military commands-in-chief were keeping 
silence. 
It was figured out that Mi-8, N-72 flying 300 meters above the land (with 
changing speed) was shot down at 14.42 on November 20, 1991. The Presidential 
Office was informed about the tragedy at 19.55. 
Surprising thing is, as investigations showed, the armenian side reported the 
tragedy at 15.30 in the radio program called "Motherland and Citizen", which was 
broadcast from Khankendi. At 16.15 the same day the Yerevan radio commented 
the tragedy as "crash". At 16.40 the Tehran (Iran) radio, and at 17.00 the Moscow 
(RF) informed about it. 
Note: military helicopter Mi-8, N-72 can take 4 tons cargo. It's fight speed 
is 250 km per hour and flight distance is 465 kilometers. It can take 40-45 men 
(80-90 kg each). 
 
The Mother of the Prosecutor Who Was Conducting the Case Was 
Armenian 
 
The military prosecutor of the Russian garrison in Khankendi colonel 
Lazutkin (he was given the colonel rank after this case) started the case according 
to article 248 of the Russian Penal Code ("Flight operating failure and casualties"). 
Colonel Lazutkin (mother Emilya Arustanovich Bagdasaryan. Akhalkalaki 
borr. Worked in Javakhetiya untill 1989.) compiled the materials of the preliminary 
investigation in such a way that it's rather difficult to understand anything. IN his 
interview to Yerevan TV on 24 November 1994 he insisted that "the armenians 
were the first to render aid to the dead azerbaijanians..." (?). Colonel was coldly 
commenting this terrorist act, this tragedy as a common accident. 
 
 
 
141 
 
The Black Box Flight Recorder 
 
Speaking of the helicopter's black box flight recorder Colonel was the first 
person to get it. It was strictly prohibited to touch the flight recorder. The 
information was spread that "heat and explosion had destroyed the black box", that 
it "had melted"(?). The black could only be disclosed and read in Moscow (his 
words). Specialists were kept away. In fact the black box could have been 
disclosed in Ganja helicopter repair plant. On the other hand colonel Lazutkin was 
perverting everyone. The flight recorder was undamaged. It could have been 
damaged or melted if only there had been 3000°C (?). 
 
"ASALA" in Karabach 
 
As our investigations were moving forward the events of those days and 
vague documents became clearer. 
On 21 April 1990 Iragui "Jerusalem Soldiers" radical islamist organization 
founded its branch in Beirut (Lebanon). On June 10 the Beirut branch of the 
"ASALA" held a meeting with the Baghdad armenians that were active members 
of the "Jerusalem Soldiers" (note that besides   Lebanon   this terrorist organization 
has centers in Washington, Tel-Aviv, Moscow, Bosnia, Iran, London, Kabul, 
Kuwait, Paris, Malaysia, Mecca and Bahrain and in the republics of Middle Asia. 
Altogether these centers have 15 thousands soldiers.). 
One of the ideologists of the "ASALA" Beirut center Malik Pashayan 
(Gukasovich) presented his partners the idea of "Great Armenia". Later "The 
Power of lerussalim" radical islamists signed an agreement on mutual assistance 
with "Hamas" (16/07/1990), "Jihad" (25/10/1990), "The Group condemning the 
non-religious" (10/11/1990). A training program called "From the Black Sea to the 
Caspian Sea" was adopted. As to "ASALA" leaders they could manage to find 
partners among these radical islam fundamentalists. For instance, Aziz Surenovich 
Agayan from the group "Jihad", "the clerk" of "Hamas" Murgab Odabashyan... 
became "ASALA" members. On 4 December 1990 Malik Pashayan, Murgab 
Odabashyan and Aziz Agayan went to Tehran and later they came to Kelbajar. On 
December 12 the group set off in Zangilan-Gubadli direction. On their way some 
local armenians joined the group. 
According to investigations, the "ASALA" members went farther on 
December 16 and reestablished relations with the local armenian armed groups. In 
the meantime an officer Safur Alamzaryan came from London to Yerevan to 
conduct training. On December 26 he came to Khankendi. And December 29 
officer Alamzaryan joined the "ASALA" branch headed by Malik Pashayan. It's 
142 
 
worth noting that officer Alamzaryan worked for "Sakina Security Services" 
fundamentalist center in London (1999). There he got acquainted and established 
friendly relations with Fazlur Rahman Khalil, who headed "the Fives" and issued 
death verdict for Israel and the United States. 
Beginning from March 21, 1991 the "ASALA" members started active 
operations in Khojavend, Muganly, Agdere, Khankendi, Fuzuli and Jebrail 
directions. 
One after another murders happened in Muganly, Garakend, Malibeyli, 
Khanoba and Amiranlar. On November 17 Malik Pashayan arranged a party for 
Russian colonel Kushnarik in Gulably. They drank a toast to "Great Armenia"... 
 
Mi-8 Was Forced to Land and Then Shot 
 
According to investigations Mi-8 N-72 was shot by the American make 
"Barret M81-A1" and "Barret M82- A1", which are widely used by fundamentalist 
groups and Islamic terrorists. 
Note: this American make 50 caliber sniper supplied weapon has a warhead 
and can destroy planes, helicopters, as well as armored military vehicles from 2 km 
away. This weapon has been classified by the American Congress as an arm of 
mass destruction. 
We also found out that "Al-Kaida" Islamic organization has also purchased 
these weapons. The middleman in this deal was an arm-trader Issam Al-Ridi who 
got the missiles for 6000$ each. By the way, Issam Al-Ridi and Safur Alamzaryan, 
who is a member of the "Sakina Security Services" (London) have known each 
other and contacted for a long time. Issam was born in Egypt. In 1994 he became 
an American citizen. Before that he was trained in the "Course for Young 
Terrorists" in Egypt (?). 
Note: It has been found out that 25 items of "Barret M81-A1 and 82-A1" 
are currently owned by Islamic terrorist groups in various states of America and 
they might be used to commit new terrorist acts or shoot planes down (?). This 
weapon causes strong fire when it hits the target, which is called "nuclear fire". 
The blow power of the fire throws the parts of the object, for example the wings of 
the plane 500-600 meters away. 
Strange things come out when we compare the helicopter shot by "Barret 
M81-A1 and let's say the "Hercules" type plane which was shot down while flying 
over Nagorny Kakabakh (1996) with 17 Iranian diplomats on board. Experts claim 
that when "Hecules" was shot it was immediately in fire. The parts of the plane 
were thrown away within 500- 600 meters radius. The people were so badly burnt 
143 
 
that they were impossible to identify. Mi-8 N-72 wasn't shot in the sky. It was 
forced to land, then shot and burnt. 
 
Polyanichko Had to Be on the Top of the List 
 
State Advisor Mahammad Assadov and Osman Mirzayev were told to make 
the list. The chosen people had to be representatives of the power ministries and 
Security Council high rank officials (on the other hand if the crew and TV workers 
excluded, the number of the rest was the as the number of the participants of the 
previous Security Council meeting). 
Victor  Polyanichko  who  was  appointed  a  an   advisor  in  the 
Presidential Office had to head the list. Because the kazakh general Saylala 
Serikov, generals Mikhail Lukashev and Oleg Kucherov, sent to Baku by the 
Kremlin, Had close personal contacts with Victor Polyanichko and each of them 
had fought in Afghanistan war. 
However for some reason Moscow strongly insisted on State Secretary 
Tofig lamailov's and Prosecutor General Ismat Gaibov's presence (?). This 
information was passed on by Georgi Ivanovich Shenta (It's strange that Moscow 
didn't contact Baru directly but called Nagorny Karabakh Security Services colonel 
instead. In the files we couldn't find any interrogation records related to Goregi 
Ivanivich). It was not surprising. 
On 19 November 1991 at 19.05 the list was ready. The initial list was 
discussed under Tofig Ismailov's chairmanship. The Parliament members Vagif 
Jafarov and Vali Mammadov were excluded from the list. Instead officials of the 
power ministries and high rank military people were included (?). Victor 
Polyanichko had to head the list. 
 
The Terrorist Act Was Planned in Advance 
 
The armenians didn't plan the terrorist act within one or two days. Terrorist 
acts like this are necessarily prepared at least ten days or even a month before. This 
terrorist act wasn't an accidental shot. It was the result of the thoroughly and very 
carefully planned plot. 
But the Intelligence Service was keeping silence. The security problems of 
the people leaving for Karabakh remained undecided. 
On 19 November 1991 after midnight the list was rewritten once more (?). 
Victor Polyanichko's name and the names of high rank officials from the power 
ministries were written off. This time Tofig Ismailov stood at the head of the list. 
The Security Council meeting was to be held in Agdam (?). 
144 
 
Moscow was deciding all problems with it's vassal in Nagorny Karabakh 
colonel Georgi Ivanovich Shenta who was jew. In fact Georgi lvanivich;s transfer 
to Nagorny Karabakh was blessed by Moscow. This candidate pleased the 
armenian side, too. Moscow didn't believe Azerbaijan National Security Ministry 
any longer... and preferred working with certain individuals. 
So the new list was confirmed by the Commander-in-Chief Ayaz 
Mutallibov at 23.00 on Novenber 19, 1991. The copies of the list were  sent to the 
Nagorny Karabakh authority, to Agdam airport, to military commandant and one to 
Moscow. 
A strange trio was controlling the group activity in Nagorny Karabakh 
territory: colonel Georgi Ivanovich Shenta the chief of Nagorny Karabakh Security 
Service, deputy military commandant colonel Vladimir Ignatyevich Kushnarik and 
colonel Oleg Osenov(yan) the chief of Khojavend militia. 
"The Bermudas Triangle" arranged by this trio was the beginning and the 
end of the plot. 
As to the crew of the helicopter Mi-8 N-72 major Vyacheslav 
Vladimirovich Kotov, captain Gennadi Vladimirivich Dolgov (?), lieutenant 
Dmitry Borisovich Yakovlev arrived in Nagorny Karabakh on 17 November 1991. 
All three were born in Alma-Ata. They were "suddenly remembered" on 
November 19 and joined the staff of Agdam airport (?). But for some reason 
deputy military commandant Kushnarik didn't want them to fly the helicopter. The 
colonel wasn't interrogated about it. The fact is when Mi-8 took off the machine 
guns, "PTURS" type missiles meant for security purposes were dismantled and 
taken away(?). The military helicopter started the flight as a common cargo 
helicopter. 
 
First There Had Been Shooting on the Helicopter 
 
There had been shooting on board the helicopter Mi-8 N-72 which took off 
on November 20, 1991 at 13.48. Let's assume that the first shot was made by 
Gennadi Vladimirovich Dolgov who was flying the helicopter with false 
documents. Because there are bullet holes on the parts of the destroyed and burnt 
helicopter which clearly show that they were shot from inside (inside the 
helicopter-R.N.) (from investigation materials). The helicopter was forced to land 
in Garakend. Only after that Malik Pashayan and Safur Alamzaryan's "ASALA" 
group disarmed the passengers (the reason why the guns, cases, documents 
disappeared, why the shoes and plastic water bottles were neatly put together hasn't 
been investigated yet). Finally Mi-8 N-72 was shot by "Barret M81-A1" at 14.42 
on November 20, 1991. Then strong nuclear fire started. 
145 
 
 
Who Are Those Whose Names Were in the List But Didn't Get on the 
Helicopter 
 
When summarizing the investigation materials a question arises: how could 
the state officials, political and public figures, the republic's potential power have 
possibly been gathered together and placed on the helicopter? How did they 
become 'volunteer terrоr victims"? 
In the list of passengers we don't see colonel Goergi Ivanovich Shenta's 
name who was the chief of Nagorny Karabakh National Security Committee then. 
It was the Shenta who was working in the Personnel Department of the Committee 
not long ago the tragedy and who put the "approved" resolution on the personal 
files of the applicants that were Armenians. Today Georgi Ivanovich owns a 
country house in Stavropol District and enjoys his share in the Armenian business. 
When Baku is mentioned he says angrily: "...I don't know such a city..."(21 August 
2000). 
So Georgi Ivanovich who managed to avoid the terrorist act and neglected 
the operative information received by the department isn't in the list. The 
Prisecutor of Nagorny Karabakh is, the Chief fo the Home Affairs Office is, but 
Mr. Shenta isn't. 
Or the official of the Russian Defense Ministry Headquarter Intelligence 
Service is in the list, but Azerbaijan Defense Ministry Headquarter spokesman 
isn't. And Deputy Special Zone Commandant Vladimir Kushnarik isn't (?) 
Looking through the files I didn't come across the materials of the days 
proceeding the terror day. There was nothing for previous 3-4 days. Everyone was 
definitely unaware of the meetings held by armenians concerning the terrorist act, 
of established relations and telephone calls, ...arrived "guests" and training. Shenta 
was keeping silence and Defense Ministry Intelligence and Counter-intelligence 
Services were paralyzed. 
Comparison and verification of the investigation materials allow us to arrive 
at certain conclusions. So on 18 November 1991 Mikhail Gorbachov's assistant 
called from the Kremlin (Moscow) to the Presidential Office in Baku. And the 
Nagorny Karabakh was requested to hold the next Security Council meeting in the 
territory of Nagorny Karabakh (either in Khankendi, Shusha, Agdam, Askeran or 
in Khojavend). Because the local armenian leaders having territorial claims and the 
Moscow officials were expected to take part in that meeting (?). 
After that phone call a list was made in Baku. 
 
146 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF THE RUSSIAN 
COLONEL 
 
"The Armenian armed forces with the support of the infantary guards 
regiment #366 shot even the pregnant women". 
 
"Asala" and "Haydad" in Khojali 
 
Colonel Savelyev's Confidential Reports 
 
Head of the press service of the National Security Department of Armenia, 
colonel Armaik Mamukyan claims that there is no a single Azerbaijani POW 
neither in Khankendi, nor in Karabakh and Yerevan. But Colonel of the Russian 
Federation Main Intelligence Department (MID), Mr. V.R. Savelyev, in his letter 
to the United Nations, dwels with the number of POWs in the territory of Armenia, 
the POW camps. 
Colonel V. Savelyev was the chief of the counter-intelligence department 
#02270. As one of the first witnesses to the Khojali tragedy, the colonel has 
collected the data on the massacre and on the base of them, in November 26, 1992, 
in March 19, 1994, in August 22, 1998 and in July and December 2000, presents 
his "Confidential Report" to the United Nations, Council of Europe, later to the 
Main Intelligence Department. His last reports were signed with the signature 
"officer Pugachov". 
We have obtained and acquainted with the text of this report. 
 
The Disgraced Russian Honour 
 
The colonel, following the military operations implemented by the 
Armenian terrorists in associate with the Russian armed units in Karabakh, by 
means of facts and documents, obtained with the help of secret service, comments 
all the events, and acknowledges: "...I can not but write these... I can not forget the 
bodies of peoples, kids and pregnant women, who were brutally shot and 
annihilated. I apologize for my weakness that I could do nothing to prevent these 
bloody atrocities. The only thing I did, was that I sent my confidential reports both 
to the Kremlin and the generals of MID to warn them: look, how the Russian 
military honour was disgraced...". 
The colonel goes on: "I was following the developents in Baku as well. I 
felt all was upset and confused. The President could not realize what was 
happenning in Khojali. Everybody in the Headquartes (HQ) of Azerbaijan Armed 
147 
 
Forces considered him as the Chief. In the units of the Fourth Army there was a 
strain to the limit... Everything was against Azerbaijan in these military units. As to 
the counter-intelligence of Azerbaijan ... it was paralysed. Situation was out of 
control. The officers fell into dispair....". 
 
Contacts of "Asala" and Regiment 366 
 
We were told that there was a cleavage between the President 
Administration and force ministries in Azerbaijan... Goals and views did not 
coincide. Everybody played in his hand. As to distributors of the "cards", they 
partily supported the Commander-in-Chief of Azerbaijan, others were backing 
opposition and some disappointed and narrow-minded generals without certain 
position... 
The French-based "France katalikekklezia" monthly has published the 
arricle by the Armenian journalist Berain Sirajyan, whereby he writes: ".. I was 
eyewitness of Khojali. Everywhere smelt blood. I was terrified of the dead bodies 
on snow and frost in the abondoned field. I was afraid that the future generations in 
Azerbaijan should demand responsibility for this blood..." 
Today the Russians are with us. And tomorrow? We can remain alone 
(March 12, 1992). 
In January 1992, however, a group of Armenian terrorists, comprising 26 
militants, located in one of the Asala's training camps near Paris, led by the major 
Asim Simonyan, have visited Khankendi. They could easily set their "cells" in the 
undisciplined Regiment 366. They also "donated" $36 thousand to the General 
Zarvigarov (The "Krunk" bulletin, 1992). As stated, commander of the 23rd 
division, MG Boris Budeykin accused colonel Zarvigarov for this and demanded 
the Fourth Army commanders to release him for "betrayal of the offcier's honor". 
But nobody took care of these claims and accusations. The laws  were 
invalid. 
Colonel V. Savelyev writes in his "secret report": "In fact, the problems are 
very acute around the 366th regiment that was involved in the inter-ethnic conflict. 
In the military operations, the regiment has supported the Armenians and 
annihilated the Azerbaijanis, gave the hard equipment and weapons to the 
Armenians, so, the issue acquired a political sense...". 
 
Azerbaijan officials kept silence 
 
The colonel writes in his letter, sent to the Defense Ministry (DM), dated 
April 12, 1992, that he has sent 46 of the identity cards of the killed and disfigured 
148 
 
persons to the Defense Ministry of Azerbaijan, President Administration. "I was 
answered that they were considering those documents. I was in Tbilisi then and 
sent the letter from there. I did not understand what the military intelligence service 
was studying". 
In February 19, 1992, at the Theater square of Yerevan (Iravan), an 
Armenian emissary from Lebanon, by name Firdos Arabyan, was reading out a 
letter, signed by 13 rich Armenians at the "Garagin" Armenian center, known as 
the "economic source" of the world Armenians:"... Glory to the awoken people! 
Welcoming the Armenian heroes who inflamed the ashes of our ancestors, realized 
the wisdom and self-consciense, I extend the greetings of world Armenians to 
them. The Armenians ... arising in Paris, Kologne, Marseilles, Rome, Kwait, 
Washington, London, Moscow and Ankara, Tehran and Latin America are with 
you. We stand ready to help you...". 
These "national heroes", embroiling the two nations, did not realize that 
there is a respond for everyhting. Responsibility for the unprecedented crimes, 
rested neither on Washington, nor on London. Responsibility for these atrocities 
rested on Yerevan. It had to be merely understood. 
 
Colonel Zarvigarov joined the terrorists 
 
Intelligence agent V. Savelyev understood it either. He wrote: "Colonel 
Zarvigarov and other officials, with the order of the army and division 
commandment to silence the fire, shooting at the regiment, in the   miltary  
operations   near  Khojali  joined  the  Armenians.   49 Azerbaijanis were 
assembled and deadly shot". 
On the order of chief of the headquarters, lieutenant-colonel Sergey 
Karaulin, commander of the first infantry battalion, colonel Arkadi Moiseyev, 
commander of the second battalion, major Sergey Ohanyan, commander of the 
third battalion, major Gavril Nabokikh, capitain Ishag Likhodeyn subjected 
Khankendi to gun-fire, also discriminated in favor of the Armenians in removal of 
the peaceful population in the area. During the removal 58 Azerbaijanis were 
killed..". 
According to the investigation, the killed Azerbaijanis were not buried 
traditionally. They were merely pushed into the trenches and filled up with sand. 
They were defamed and disfigured.. According to the colonel, in the evenings they 
"were terrified by howl of the dogs and jackals", walking around these trenches. 
Everywhere smelt blood and corpse. 
 
 
149 
 
"Artsakh" Aid Fund 
 
One of the radical leaders of the Armenian "Ramkavar" Party in Lebanon 
Rafael Messayan (Grigoryan) writes in the Beirut-based newspaper "Zartunk": "To 
forget the fighters in Khojali (Karabakh) is not Armenian-like. We must help them 
- the Armenian heroes. We know that the Armenian businessmen from 24 world 
countries have created an "Artsakh" Aid Fund. The Fund will also give its tributes 
to our future generations. An Armenian businessman in London sells his 
properties, another Armenian in Washington (Ariz Suleyman) donates a yearly 
profit of his trade center..., members of the Paris-based "Armenian Language" 
society send their donations... for the heroes of Khojali" ("Armenian Aid", March 
24, 1992). 
 
Cameramen shot the burnt corpses 
 
The damned days were in progress. On the eve, a group of cameramen of a 
private French TV "Operative-II", arrived in the battle area around Khojali and 
shot the burnt corpses. "It was in the northeast of Khojali, in a field with small 
hills", reminds officer Ivan Karabelnikov, who fought in the 2nd battalion of 
Russia in those days. 
47 journalists from 32 countries came to Khankendi to "cover" the Khojali 
events (Armenians call this a "heroism"). They watched the area from the 
armoured troop-carriers, provided by General Zarvigarov, took notes, shot 
"operative" films.. They shot the completely destroyed and ruined area and with 
Armenian-like "regret" showed them to world, sighing: " ... Azerbaijanians kill the 
innocent Armenians...". Silence encouraged the Armenian propaganda. The 
Armenians republished and spread every material, fact or document related to 
Khojali to accuse Azerbaijan in the "bloodshed". Armenians have published the 
photo-report "Azerbaijanis burnt Khojali..." in the world press 49 times. It is a part 
of the Armenian-like information technology. 
Khojali assault by Armenian armed forces and Russian regiment was 
predetermined by strategic location of the city. 
As a result, chief of the 1st battalion, major Abram Chitchiyan, major 
Nabokikh and captain Likhoday directly partook in the military operations. 
According to the information of officer I. Karabelnikov, A. Citchiyan killed 13 
members of the "family of Babyevs" for which he was given $150 thousand and 
the "Church awards" by the French Armenian lobby in 1993. A. Chitchiyan 
emigrated to France in September 2, 1994, and now lives there. 
150 
 
According to the informaiton, provided by the serviceman of the 366th 
regiment, signaller Afik Isbeliyev, on 24 February 1992, he was battling in captain 
I. Likhodey's machine-gun squad and participated in the invasion of Khojali. 
Responding to the question "How did you fight?", he has replied: "We, at 
the same time, were afraid. Afraid of death. We annihilated what we met on our 
way. Every rustle behind the trees, every quvering bush frightened us... I don know 
whether the people of Azerbaijan will pardon me or not. My mother rejected me 
for I fought against Azerbaijanis together with the Armenians... I can not go 
home... everybody rejects me... I was obliged. I was ordered. We were under the 
command... Nobody forgives me ("An Armenian grave", author: Abdul Fateh, 
"Beirut", 1994, page 96)". 
 
$1500 for a sub-machine gun 
 
Signaller A. Isbeliyev reaffirms that the Armenians have paid for the 
Russian military hardcore. A Kalashnikov sub-machine gun costed $1500... 
Over the night from February 25 to 26, 1992, Khojali was burnt, and 
occupied. But the troops were not silent. Colonel V. Savelyev writes in his 
"Confidential report": "...The 3rd battalion was withdrawn from the battle area, but 
remained near the city. The 366th regiment was still there. The troops were only 
disarmed. The officers broke their oath. Weapons were given to the Armenians. 
Instead, the Armenians would pay money or give gem. As to fighters for the noto-
rious and disgraceful plan of "Great Armenia"... the issue is still in progress... 
Further colonel Savelyev writes:" Look, who participated in withdrawal of the 
troops and who gave the weapons to the Armenians: 
 colonel-general Gromov, 
 lieutenant-general Grekov, 
 lieutenant-general Ohanyan, 
 I. Andropov, deputy, 
 colonel (general) Zarvigarov, 
 colonel Kraule. 
The 23rd machine-gun division of the Fourth Army was also partly 
involved in the military operations in Khojali. Assistant commanders of the 23rd 
machine-gun division A. Babunov and K. Yermolayev demanded the military 
hardcore to be returned. Nobody listened them... 
 
 
 
151 
 
Baku was unaware of the happenings 
 
On March 19, 1992, (in Moslem calendar this day is a holiday of Novruz, of 
spring) there was made a little grave-yard for the victims of Khojali tragedy. 
According to the eyewitnesses, there were buried 54 innocent Azerbaijanis. On the 
same day in the evening, the host of the "Armeni-4" telechannel of the French 
Armenian lobby Sursek (Suren) Sagsnyan televized the event to the private 
telecasts of Iran, Turkey, Moscow, Yerevan, Washingnton, London, Paris, Bonn, 
Argentina... as the "respect and considerations" to the corpses of Azerbaijanis, 
casted the burial ceremony... 
In Baku, still nobody could assess the reasons of the tragedy and the events, 
on the whole. From the newly set-up deputy commission up to the oppositional 
parties behind the "4th microphone" at the Parliament, all were paralysed, the 
government was confused. An unprecedented tragedy happened in Khojali. There 
was no analogous ones in the history. And we were incapable to bring all these to 
the world community. Because there were some among us even worse than 
Armenians... just thinking and acting as Armenians, and living as Armenians, who 
are obstacles on our way. In those days, the A. Mutallibov Cabinet was politically 
invalid both in power and soceity. 
 
Premium for Russian officers 
 
Former chief of the RF military counter-intelligence, colonel V. Savelyev 
commenting the happenings, writes: "After the cantonment was subjected to 
"Grad" fire in February 23, 1992, colonel Zarvigarov decided to withdraw the 
regiment from the permanent dislocation to the reserve area. The decision was 
implemented by no resistance of the Armenian militants. Replacement of the 
dislocation was not necessary. Part of the armament was left there. On that day, 
lieutenant-general I. Ohanyan (there was another Ohanyan, major) came to 
Khankendi and insisted that the artillery division, tank company and their 
armament be left there. As a result, the Armenians owned 23 armoured troop-carri-
ers, 3 ZSU-23-4, 8 D-30 and many ammunition...". 
On the same day, Illarion Alaverdiyan, an Armenian militant, also known as 
the head of the Khankendi cell of the Asala terrorist organization, announced the 
names of the 24 Russian officers and soldiers, who received premium. For 
example, according to the provided information, the Russian officer Yevgeni 
Golubev (Arganovich) was conferred with an order, made of 25-grame gold and 5 
thousand US dollars. Or, on the same day, soldier Anastas Sarvarovich Ivanov was 
presented documents for a "Hunday" car and 10 thousand US dollars... 
152 
 
At that time, in the meeting at the "Theater Square" in Yerevan, (April 19, 
1992, in the evening, 15.00 p.m. Baku time) it was clearly stated: "... the Armenian 
propaganda has a certain reliable position in the diplomatic centers in Baku, among 
the journalists, in the political environment...". It was worth to think over.. 
 
KHOJALI TERROR 
 
89 misiles were shot to Khojali 
from the Helicopters 
 
Chkhinvali and Telavi (Georgia) helicopter bases closesy took part in 
bombing Karabakh, to say it more accurately in destroying the settlements. 
According to the order which the general Transcaucasian military district Valeri 
Pasrikyev signed on November 2, 1992, 16 pilot Armenian by nationality who 
would control the militiary helicopters were trained. According to information the 
expenditures of the"pilot" courses were paid by "Sevan" department (Adler 
settlement 93 Adler street) of Armenian National Liberation Movement 
functioning illegally in Krasnodar. The head of the department "Doctor" 
nicknamed, Frunze Hazaryan gives a strange information in the bulletin of the 
same title: ...The enrolled armenians were informed beforehand that they would 
fight for "Great Armenia" on January 9 1992 Rafik Agabekovich Graynyan /he 
emigrated to Lebanon in 1988/ began to work as a teacher in the course training 
"pilot". 32 years old Zahid Al-Mahammad /Nahiz/ arabian by nationality who was 
dismissed from "Hamas" organization appeared in the course. Though he spoke in 
Armenian very bad, he did not spare his love and regards. He was committed a 
helicopter N=45. We already were ready for the battle (Adler: "Sevane" bulletin, 
1992, 1-19) 
February 12 and 16, 1992 Russian President B.N. Yeltsin gave an 
instruction to the general -major Reut (General Commandor of the saventh army) 
on giving "Mi-24p" of helicopters having an accurate military flight, to armenian 
pilots finishing the course in Telavi helicopter base (Telavi: "Eskadriliya" 
newspaper. February 20 1992 N=8) Two "Mi-8" helicopters were sent to Ganja. 
Helicopter plant under the leadership of Colonel Leonid Kapralov to bring them to 
readiness for action. The foundation for militiary preparation in Khojali direction 
laid in this way. 
200 tons fuel was sent from Baki (?) for the helicopters ready for action in 
Karabakh. Colonel Ragib Mohammed Madjanov was asigned for the distribution 
of the fuel among the helicopters. More  accurately, he was sent on business trip 
from the Transcaucasian General Headquarter. 
153 
 
 
Which Helicopters bombed Khojali? 
 
On February 17, 1992 the writer Dashnac Zori Balayan turned over the 
pages of his book "Ojag" and explained the armenians armed to fight, that those 
who fights for "Great Armenia establishes history-" the history of new generation . 
According to theorder N=201/4AK" dated February 17 signed by general 
A.N.Kovalyov and the one that general Reutin got from Moscow on February 19, 
1992, 9 different make of /mainly "MI-24p"/ militiary helicopters were alloted for 
16 armenians "On February 22, the helicopter Squardon was transferred to the 
component of 366 regiment (for a unique command)" 
So, I compiled the list of helicopter squardon drawing its militiary plan on 
Karabakh sky on February 25, 1992. Mainly the following helicopters bombed 
Khojali: 
-Helicopter N=39 Pilot: Galagchiyan Romb Arutunovich. /Lebanon 
Armenian. He was an engineer on speciality/ 
-Helicopter N=29 Pilot: Zahid Al-Mahammad (Lebanese muslim "Hamas" 
organization) 
-Helicopter N=17 Pilot: Ararat Qrekovich Sarajyan (Yerevan: militiary 
man) 
-Helicopter N=45 Pilot: Pirimyan Suren Alekseyevich (Yerevan, 
militia/polis). 
It is only the list of helicopters bombing Khojali. It was also known that on 
February 25 from 1600 to 2400 o'clock rockets were shot to Khojali area 89 times. 
The first helicopters which shot rocket in Khojali direction was N=29. (In 
Muhammadcanov's report to "I.Zarvigarov" February 28 1992. Archives Zakuo 
folder N=467) 
The wages were divided among the militiary pilots. For instance, Lebanese 
muslim Zahid Al-Mohammad was alloted 4.550. "Our muslim brother" was given 
280$ bonus for every rocket he shot to Khojali area. 
On February 28, 1992 Zahid Al-Mohammad and Pirimyan Suren 
Alekseyevich were awarded with "Golden Cross" order for their activity in 
thebattle. On March 3 a fire breaks out in the cockepit of the helicopter N=29. At a 
result the pilot Zahid Al-Mohammad dies. His body was taken to Yerevan on the 
instruction of the Minister of Difence Serj Sarkisyan. He was buried in Erablur 
militiary cemetry laid not far from Zvartnots airport. 
It is the fate of a pilot who ruined Khojali...They took start on February 25 
at 19:15 from Transcaucasion militiary district. So the helicopter attack to Khojali 
began. In the report of general lieutenant Yuri Grekov it was indicated that, Khojali 
154 
 
area had been cleaned from Azerbaijani "militant" and "Grad", "Uragan" missiles 
were used for it. 39 of this missiles were shot in Khojali direction. That time such 
an interesting telegram was sent from Armenia to Kremlin, to B.N.Yeltsin "To the 
president B.N.Yeltsin "High ranking officials of the security service assert a big 
consontration of Turkish army along all the borders of Turkey with Armenia has 
been noted lately. According to him the third field army of Turkey consisting of 4 
full divisions and 7 separate brigades, have expanded till the headquarter of the war 
time, including its field headquarters. The army is ready for action, which was not 
observed from the time of the second world war. 
According to the information, that telegram was prepared for the meeting 
held on February 26, of the Security Council headed by B.N.Yeltsin himself. Ashot 
Manucharyan, the adviser on security affairs of Armenian president was invited to 
that meeting: "One of these days Turkey could come to help Azerbaijan on its 
request to settle the Karabakh conflict. It is possible only through 9 km area with 
the body of Azerbaijan, not breaking the borders with Armenia. Furher invading 
through Armenian territory is possible (See: 1992, 26 February Archaive document 
of RF HGS; US - p. 11). 
 
Gukasyan activness 
 
Our investigations show that the work of military intelligence and military 
counter intelligence service which was under subodination of MD was organized 
unproperly. The intelligence centers lived their paralysis period. 
In the issue of appointment of the personnel, the relationship of God parent 
to parent, benefiting and flattering were the main critera. As a result the work 
dropped to nil. There were cases when an ordinary employee of the communal 
utilization office was granted a major,military rank and appointed a chief of 
division to the department. Or the people who have just been released, enployed in 
the military intelligence. If we turnover the materials of 1992 we can come to the 
conclusion that there is not valuable information. While a part of instructor - 
advicers of military intelligence sercvice of Armenian MD came from France. That 
is these people were engaged, at times, in security and intelligence works in AF of 
France. Today the military intelligence sercvice of the fabricated republic of 
Karabakh has its special strategical program ("Garajanyanprogram"). On August 
2001 the designers of the program submitted "a special military intelligence 
program on Goranboy to the terrorist leader of Karabakh, A. Gukasyan for 
discussion. The Colonel Matevos Matevosyan in his interview (16.09.2001) to 
"Royter" agency touches upon a curious and serious question: "..Our establishment 
(i.e counter intellegence service) knows well the social and political processes 
155 
 
going on in Shaumyan region territory (Goranboy) the military condition, 
psycological moments of the soldiers. Even we know the people who are to work 
in future Shaumyan region. We have given the preliminary information about 
them. The adminstrative building of the region the people, who are to work there 
have been determined. We do not violate any legal norms. Contrary, we are 
gathering the torn pieces (?) of "Great Armenia". 
 
Chemical weapons in Khojali 
 
The Khojali people (surviving) who were driven out, burned and killed 
received the first humanitarion aid from the "The International Christian 
Cooperation" organization. And behind this this stood other problems. Pro 
armenian English Keroliyan Koks was interested in legal issues to be given to 
armenians. 
We simply reminded this facts. Because we have no any program (though it 
would be military or economic) in defence of our lands. Without having these 
programs neither life no protection of "a notion" called freedom is possible. 
According to the information we got one of the members of the terrorist 
organizations "November 17" which has alls in some cities of Greece fighted in 
Khojali area. The army troops, armenian by nationality -"Tigranists" widely used 
the chemical weapon "Fosgen" in Khojali. According to the international 
comments the use of chemical weapons are prohibited. For instance, the use of 
Zarin, Zaman Fosgen that were used in Khojali has hurted seriously not only the 
people, but also the fauna of the nature. The leader of the group Faina Mebikyan is 
coming to Khankendi on July 14, 1996 from Yerevan toxic center notes in her 
letter (169/024-1002-9.1) sent to the defence ministry S.Sarkisyan (translation): 
"...The results of scientific researches we carry out, investigations area are not 
satisfactory. As to the captive children taken from Khojali almost 9% of them liver 
and spleen have been destroyed. The use of toxic gas paralyses the function of 
brain of the children". Among 9% which the armenian physicians notes the fate of 
16 children (girls) of age 9-10 is not known. Though it is bitter, let us reveal these 
facts. The girls confined to death were decided to be sent to microbiology and 
vizusology institutes or department of the world's scientific researches institutes. 
According to the information four of these girls were taken to France, 6 to 
Argentina, 2 to Siriya, 1 to Yerevan, 2 to Germany.. 
The physician Faina Melikyants writes to Armenian MDGH, to colonel 
Tigran Lazarevich Adamyan: ".. I funfilled the task I undertook.." (See: the 
corespondece between Moscow toxicological center and Yerevan toxicological 
center "Vestink-Zdorova"-1996 N=6 p40) 
156 
 
From our investigations it also becomes clear that Faina Melikyants's group 
consisting of 6 people tested "L-Z-21A" and "L-Z-19A" vaccines in the body of 
captive girls taken from Khojali. At the end four girls of 8 years old died. Nobody 
could survive the test.. 
The newspaper "Bundesver" published in Bonn, publishes the information 
got from Yerevan in May 1992 issue. On May 7, Russian Federation spreads that 
information "...Armenian officials of Khankendi (Stepanakert) at last admitted the 
existance of chemical weapons in Karabakh. There is 500 tons chemical substances 
in the store houses left by the CIS army. Before Russian and Armenian sides 
refused the fact on keeping in Karabakh chemical weapons. Whereas on February 
25, the Azerbaijan city Khojali was shot from the side Khankendi with 122 mm 
shells, filled with ionide.." ("Izvestiya" newspaper1992 05.-7,13) 
All were helpless before all of this. Nobody wanted to speak. At a result a 
statement of the European community was adopted in connection with Upper 
Gatrabagh (03.XI.1993). 
It is noted in one part of the document: "...Statement of European 
Community on Karabakh.. Community and its member countries denounce the 
attack of local armenian forces of Karabakh, whicn more deeply invade the 
Azerbaijan territory. They note with pity that such actions expands the limits of 
military conflicts occuping more Azerbaijan territories and create very serious of 
refugees in Azerbaijan involving with it, the neighbouring countries with constant 
increase of danger for regional security"..But nobody give reaction to it. 
 
The Infants might be killed 
That Night the Moarning of Khojali children 
was rising to heaven 
 
The XX century which took many-many years, days, unforgottable 
recollections of our life, though left us in order to fill bitterness that it legt legacy, 
terrible tragedies, losses, it would not be enough to live many such centures. Our 
tragedies that begin at the beginning of the century going on along it, reached its 
top with unprecedented, shaking the land with its horror Khojali tragedy. It was in 
our fate to experience this tragedy and carry this grief burden. It would never occur 
to us that in the end of the century we could witness the Armenian brutality which 
we heard from the lips of our grey haired grandmothers, grandfathers and got 
terified when heard it. 
10 years ago in a paradise called Karabakh, there was a city by name and its 
residents living far away of the grief. For the residents of this place reminding 
paradise, the beginning and the end of the world started and ended in Khojali. It is 
157 
 
pity that Khojali is remembered in the memories of its residents in the grandparents 
talks, that have become the epos and in sweet dreams. In order to remember the 
tragedy happened, 10 years ago, to recollect the events happened, to meet with 
Zohra an old woman, who witnessed that terrible night and has been carry that 
grief with her for 10 years. I went to the student hostel N=5 of Baku State 
University where she found a shelter. We met with her in a small room where she 
lives with her 8 family members. 65 years old Grannie Zohra has totally 16 grand 
children and 4 great grand children. God condemned her to live a refugee life in 
thelast years of her life. Her two sons participated at the Karabakh war. Her elder 
son Bahram Ismayilov became martyr before a month of Khojali tragedy. While 
going to Kosalar village for help their helicopter with his 4 police collegues in it 
was shot. 8 months before his death Zohra married him with a girl whom he loved 
very much. Bahram could not live his bridegroom life at his hearts concern. On the 
40th day of his death, his son was born. They named him by his father's name. 
Granny Zohra prayed God and thanked him. She will find consolation in her grand 
son Bahram. But as if God was trading with her on a year anniversary of his son's 
death Granny Zohra lost the only remembrance of her son. She furied both of them 
in Barda. As if these sufferings were not enough, her daughter in law left her and 
married another person. Following it Granny Zohra experienced the Khojali 
tragedy. That day she lost many relatives. According to her from the first day of 
the war all the men, able to hold arms stood for defence of Khojali. Khojali 
population did not live their homelands: "How could we live all that we had built 
with so much difficulties? Running away was not characteristic to fortitude." Zohra 
Ismayilova says that as there was frequent shooting they had used to it. They 
addressed to Agdam, Baku for help for times. So they promise to help, they were 
left alone on difficult days of Khojali. "The people thought that our people would 
not leave us in the difficulty, would send us weapons and drive the civilians, 
children, old people women of the city. But all our hopes dashed! We did not 
expect such treachery from our administration. At night of February 25 to 26 a 
sudden attackbe-gan to the city. Bullits, fire from all direction were poured as a 
rain. According to Grannie Zohra when Armenian tanks entered Khojali they 
thought that our army had came to help them: "We thought our people came to 
help us. We ran with hopes towards the tanks. They shot all the people running 
towards them. It turned out that it was the Armenian's who invaded the city. The 
shot, the helpless people running here and there in the nick of time. They tampled 
down the armless people with tanks. The attack that began from the evening con-
tinued till the morning. That night thousands of elderly people women, children 
became the victims of Armenian unprecedented brutality. Justice, fairness kept 
158 
 
silence before the brutality Armenians who enjoyed torturing their historical 
enemies - turks. As if, God closed his eyes to this brutalities. 
Grannie Zohra said that night 6, 7 people from each family been in Khojali 
were killed. Ten of families were killed in their own houses: "We left our houses 
and scattered to streets, forests in the frosty night. Everybody tried to escape. They 
captured our young girls, boys, shot their relatives before their eyes and killed 
torturing them. Who fell in their hands they cut his/her ears, skin their heads and 
pull their eyes out. They tied some people not to let them run away and shot. 
Mother was abondoning her child, the child was abondoning her/his mother and 
running. Before the eyes of fathers, brothers they encroached the honour of girls, 
their daugthers, sisters." 
That night Khojali soil was covered with the innocent people's blood. That 
night moarning of Khojali in fants rose to heavens. It was the end of the life for 
them:" for 3-4 days a part of hungry, tired, frozen people could scaring escape 
going through forests, roundabout ways. A lot of people died of cold and hunger on 
the way. Hundredthsof girls, brides were taken captives. The innocent infants were 
killed in their cradle and speared". Grannie Zohra says that, that night they lost tens 
of close relatives. They were brutally killed before her eyes. So, 3,4 days they went 
through the forest. First they settled in Agdam then in Barda: "We do not believe 
that we have survived that doomsday. When we think that we managed to escape 
that misfortune, I am surprised at our power, stolerance". 
Grannie Zohra speaks about the Armenian brutality which she from the lips 
of her parents: "My parents would say that at the beginning of the century.the 
Armenians perpotroted unprecedented brutalities against us. They tied boiling 
"somovar" to the back of Turks put the children women into the tube and welded 
both sides, spreaded the infants and lined along the road, burried the people alive. 
As we have no evil, haterid we forget everything easily. Armenians are very evil 
people. They accept turks as an enemy, introduce turks to their infants as an 
enemy". Granny Zohra says that she often sees Khojali in her dreams and visits it: 
"I wish it were those times" We fancy it: "I should not be here in my age. We use 
to live in spacious places, in the nature. Now it is very difficult to live in so 
cramped, dirty place. We suffer from the struggle for power". 
Every year on February 26, she visits the graves of her son and two grand 
children. Every year that day she goes through the past days, one more time. She 
suffers very much. She says that after every visit she becomes ill for ten days. 
 
 
 
 
159 
 
Iran Markets are Meeting Places of Missionaries 
 
The center also notes that not any financial documents are in order in those 
regions. The thefts conspiracy to Beytumal worries the center.... 
This time a new form was selected for strengthening and expanding the 
islamic ideas belonging to Iran. "Iran markets" were opened following one another 
in frontier villages and regions. So these markets arranged the sale of industrial 
products and food made in Iran, on the basis of "Free market orders", one of the 
main purposes were the sale and propoganda of religious literature. 
From the strategical viewpoint, "Iran market" were the consultation center 
of Iran Secret Service employees. Private Publishing Houses - "Islam in Ardabil", 
"Reyman" in Tabriz, "Gumru" in Germi, "Ilahiyyat" in Parsabad publishing mainly 
religious literature, drawing pictures and portrets... were opened in connection with 
the activities of "Iran markets" opened in Lankaran, Masalli, Jalilabad, Bilesuvar, 
Imishli. Each publishing house provided the neighbouring regions in the planned 
way with the religious literature. On October-December month of 2000 a new 
publishing house named "Sirah" was opened in Julfa. Here the books under the 
name "islamic rules" for AF of the country started to be published. The book 
"Some words for islamic fighting" (in Azerbaijan) was published here to be spread 
and propogandized among Azerbaijan AF, troops, the internal forces. Presidential 
Guard. We must remind that the first variant of this book was published on 
September 1994 in Gum city (Theology) Illahiyyat University printing house 
edited by Ayatullah Majid Ansary. 180 of these books published in 500 copies 
were sent to Nakhchivan, 150 to Goranboy-Tartar-Agjabadi zones. 
According to the information a part of those books are presented free of 
charge to Azerbaijanis in customs of Bilasuvar, Astara, Imishli, Julfa.. 
The purpose of this book is commented by the most popular militiary men 
and religious figures. 
 
A way was laid from the Dead Bodies 
 
Among the materials we investigated the book "For Cross" published in 
"Ash-Sharg" (East) publishing house-Beirut and written by Daud Keyriyan who 
wrote about the Karabakh war, caused curiosity the author devoted the part from 
page 19 to 76 to the battles for Khojali. On page 24 he writes: "Some times we got 
confused and walked putting our feet on dead bodies. In order to cross the bog. In 
Dashbulag side we put the dead bodies together and laid away. I did not want to 
put my foot on dead bodies. Colonel Ohanyan hinted me not to scare. One of the 
laws of war is this. I pressed my foot on the breast of a girl aged 9-10, whose face 
160 
 
was covered with blood and stepped forward...My feet, camera were in blood." 
Gentlemen do not forget that it is written by an Armenian journalists Daud 
Kenyan. He goes on: "On March 2 Armenian "Gaflan" group (this group was 
engaged in gathering the corpses and buring them) gathered more than 100 turkish 
corpses and burned approximately in a kilometre west direction from Khojali.. I 
saw a girl about ten years old in a last lorry. She was wounded in the forehead and 
arms. The girl with bruised face was still alive. Despite the hunger, cold, the 
wounds she was alive. She was breathing slowly. I can not forget the eyes of this 
child struggling with death. Sometime later she would also be burnt in the "field" 
death fire of Gaflans. This child lying without motion and with bleeding nails, was 
taken by a soldier called "Tigranyan" and thrown on the piles of dead bodies. Then 
they fired. This time it is seemed to me that someone was crying among the burned 
bodies and begging for help... After all of this I could not go ahead. But I wanted to 
see Shusha.... I returned. But they were continuing their fight for cross..". (See: op. 
cit. p 62-63). On March 10, 1992 a letter signed by Viktor Yerinin Minister of 
Internal Affairs, was put into the mail box of Boris Yeltsin, the president of 
Russian Federation. (In the letter it was noted that he would reveal the content of it 
in the personal meeting. It was asked to watch the video cassette presented with the 
letter). In that videocassette there were frames on the activities of 366 regiment 
which has 1.890 staff anf Khojali tragedy. General V.Yerin wrote to the president: 
"In Khojali the women, children, elderly were shot, the heads of dead bodies were 
skinned. The films shot by Azerbaijani screen documentalists testify it. Camera 
shot some children with cut off heads. The left part of the face of an elderly woman 
was cut. The heads of themen were skinned. The corpes were robbed. A lot of dead 
bodies were in more disfigured condition. According to the information of the 
militiary intelligence some Mustafayef-screen documentalist speaks about it. He 
accuses the 366 regiment of RF in Karabakh.." (See: N.Gavrilov: "Voennie 
vedomosti" publishing house: S.Pet 1998.p.96) 
 
Khojali people were burned alive 
 
From our investigations it is also becomes clear that the president 
B.N.Yelsin after watching the video cassette signed a special order (02/19/21-OD-
1992/03/12). 
He puts a task before the military intelligence on preventing the shooting of 
such frames that disgraces honour and dignity of Russian soldiers. The first of 
those tasks was the organization of activeness of secret services on the war zones 
and territories. 
161 
 
The world was watching the burning corpses of Khojali. There were 
enemies and friends among them. But nobody spoke. Nobody wanted to look 
towards the smoke of the burning corpses. On March 14, 1992 the France Minister 
of Foreign Affairs Rolang Deuma and the Turkish Minister of Foreign Affaires 
Hikmet Chatin decided that there would be a ceasefire..on March 15, at 19.20 
Hikmat Chatin asked James Baker the then State Secretary of USA to help this 
issue "Using the interest of USA to Armenia. Everything kept to be lie. The pen 
was writing lies. Though His Excellence Roland Deuma called the parts to stop the 
war he raised glasses to the Health of Academician Agambekyan and Zori Balayan 
who caused these misfortunes, welcomed all steps made for "Great Armenia" 
(Bablunyan. "Pokazivaet antenna-3". Essays. Armenian Republic. Yerevan 1996 p 
91). According to other information we got, on March 18 1992 the head of 
helicopter squadron in Askaran, major Leonid Ivanovich Kravtiv wrote in  his 
letter addressed to Baku  Supreme  Soviet: "Deputees!... I saw myself about two 
hundred killed, scattered on the slope. Among them were people wandering with 
gun,… we tried to take the corpes.. I saw a four year boy with shattered head and 
lost my mind. Another child whom we managed to take before they began to shoot 
us, turned out the head to have been cut off. I saw every where the totured bodies 
of women, children, old people. I want to address to you: Wake up! Help to your 
people..." 
Major Kravtsev not receiving answer to his letter addresses to "Izvestiya 
(RF Moscow) (See newspaper izvestiya 18/03/1992)". 
From our investigations it also becomes clear that that times Armenians 
staying in Baki were busy with conveying weapons in Shaumyan kand direction. 
That time an officer Aleks Garunovich Egizaryan who rented one of the residents 
of Central Committee, established relations with air defence regiment and 
developed a program with the officer Aleg Deyguchov on purchasing and 
transportation of weapons. Officer Aleg Deyguchov was the radio engenieer of the 
regiment. That is why the chief commander of air defence, general major Valeriy 
Chirkov comes to Baki. It becomes known that 29 "AK"  guns   and  7  thousands   
bullits,   40   bullit  proof vests  that O.Deykuchov sold was given to A.Yegizaryan 
and those weapons were conveyed to Khojali on February 19. (See Baki city the 
folder of documents of military of Procurator Office: the investigation materials of 
1992: Refference for case officer O.D.Deykuchov. But the investigation folder was 
not prepared.) 
 
 
 
 
162 
 
Armenian and Russian Confession 
 
According to the information the first field of "death seats" were laid on 
February 28, 1992 at 14:00 in the Khojali area, to say it more preciously, between 
Khanabad and Dashbulag villages. First time 46 corpses were burnt. Next day 
bonefire was made from 28 dead bodies of children and women. Akop Arakilev 
physiologist by speciality living from 1988 to 1989 in Chuvashya in Cheboksare 
city, Chapayev settlement and  working  in  the  office of  military plant named 
after V.I.Chapayev, (this plant was dealing with the sale of "Alazan" missiles to the 
armenian military terrorist troops in the direction of Karabakh. Only in 1992-1993 
this plant sold 98 "Alazan" missiles to Khankendi), in his book "Karabakh Notes" 
published in 1998 in Paris he writes: "I had no idea about burning the corpses. 
When I was working in the plant, the people coming to me were speaking that 
there was not any cemetry for the people died in Khojali. Jackals and dogs were 
borrowing the graves and taking the burried people out. On the commitment of the 
militiary physician Sambat Mirzoyan, it was decided to gather the corpses and 
burnt them. I asked the officer coming for Alazan "to the plant: what about the 
wounded? What about the captives? The officer named Chebotaryan explained to 
me that the wounded were also thrown to fire without being killed. After it I could 
not stay in the plant...I left not to see Armenian and Armenia, Karabakh any 
more.." (Paris "Mazorin" publishing house 1998 p.42). 
According to our investigations the soldiers and officers headed by colonel 
Yuri Zarvigarov the commander of regiment 366, also participated in burning the 
Azerbaijanians and insulting the captives. On May 26, 1992 Nikita Kazaryan one 
of the officials of permanent representation of Armenia to Moscow stated that it 
was not possible. Armenian people is the people who loves its "Lands and Nation". 
Following the colonel of Transcaucasian Military District Aleksandr Luki informs: 
"..The regiment which is located in Khankendi allegedly demobilized fully... The 
regimentis engaged in planned military training and there can not be any speech on 
demobilization. It does not participate in the military action of any sides. 
There is different scene in our investigations. For instance, Ozbek serjant 
Imidjan Ziyautdinov, Karimbayen Sadullayev, Aleksey Bondarov drafted in Tenza. 
Pavel Zuyev came from Sverdlovsk, Yuri Lyaxovich drafted from Crimea in their 
letter addressed to Kremlin and Baki state that they assisted all the work of the 
Armenian terror groups in the component of 366 moto infantry regiment". For 
instance, Umidjan Ziyautinov writes: "..Armenian fighters (They are called there 
fidainami) felt themselves in our detachment as at home. They came easily to the 
dislocation place of the regiment and were in very friendly relations with our 
batallion commander, major Oganon. Practically every evening our armoured troop 
163 
 
carrires and BMP were rented to the armenian fighters. It was done on the 
permission of the regiment commander. The fighters fight Shusa with the help of 
our armoured technics, under their cover Armenian armed troops occupied 
Meshali, Malibeyli, Karkijahan... Khojali". The junior warrant officer Shukrat 
Tangirov gives revelations as the following: "..Our machines were used not only 
by the Armenian fighters, but also by the warrant oficers from the detachment of 
the regiment. Special activties showed captian Michael Arturyan, whom my 
fellow-soldiers called for his cruelty and toughness "Captain Jackson".. Many of 
the wounded and killed remained there near the village. We could not take 
themout, but we should have saved them. The fact was: At nights they took BTR-s 
with complete action set and went to so called, "night roster". In the morning they 
came "empty" - all the action set was used: (The letters of soldiers and officers of 
the regiment 366, to the Security Committee of Dashkend April 16.1992.) 
From the information, facts and documents we got, it becomes clear that the 
investigation materials on Khojali tragedy will be reviewed. 
According to the letter written on April 19, 1992, Marius Yuzbashyan, the 
head of the "Consultation Board" of Armenian |Security Committee who worked as 
the chairman of SSC of the republic from 1978 to 1988 and Rudolf Grigoryan who 
was the head of the first department, addressed to MD (to Moscow) and State that 
the agent "Ruben" allegedly warned the people in the region, about the results of 
Khojali massacre. (According to the investigations and information, that letter is 
kept in the Archives of RF MD M.., MD OS-216/1.A.F..PAP.N=216). It is an 
Armenian claim. Because the Armenian colonel Rudolf Grigoryan writes in the 
book "Armenian theory" ..published in France.. Armenians were fighting for their 
lands. For being relatives with Turks some Armenians warned in advance the 
separate families, villages that fighting is for nothing. We did it in Khojalii in 
planned way. We made the turks understand that they could not play with us. We 
game them a good lesson (R.Grigoryan the book "Armenian theory" Paris "Stock 
Publishing House 1995.p37-38"). 
In order not to be asked a part of witnesses were burnt by the terrorist, 
another were as exiled. And the other part, though it is bitter, conceal the truth. It is 
pity that a part of the officials (the then region officials) surviving the Khojali 
massacre, think of them as heroes. But do not hurry. It is early to put your 
monuments! Our investigations directed us to different addresses. From other 
source (we are investigating this source) we got information that before a Khojali 
tragedy a lot of wealth-gold things, money and soon were gathered from the local 
people to buy weapons. But the result was regretable. The Khojali people were 
decieved and insulted. All the exist doors were closed to the local people who last 
their fortune. It is great sin to accuse the dead extinct families. There will be time 
164 
 
for the officials of Khojali and republic who had no any strategcal and tactical 
programs for saving at least the survived people to be accused. Nobody is a hero. 
There can not be any hero of the land which lost the war, fired, destroyed and 
ruined. Only for Khojali all the heroism orders pined to the breasts should be 
opened and put asside. It is my deduction. But Armenians should have been 
reminded that there are growing people. I think, the hero is not a man who fighted 
in Khojali, but the one who died, burned. 
 
The Hired People in Khojali 
 
According to our investigations assistance was to 4 million 1368 roubles 
were sent in 1992 from January 10 to February 4 to the Armenian militiary terrorist 
troops fighting in Khojali on behalf of Armenian diaspora living in CIS countries. 
A famous American investigator, journalist Thomas Golds who writes 
articles for "New York Times" and "Sunday Times" published in London, 
states:"..."One of the truth is that, do not think that Armenian are strong...No, you, 
Azerbaijanians are weak and powerless in information war.." 
The journalists in his letter addressed to the UNO on February 12, 2001 and 
to the president of RF in connection with 366 moto infantry regiment, which 
actively assisted the Armenian terrorists in Khojali, writes: "...I am an American 
journalist, I give information about Azerbaijan not considering Armenian channels, 
it affects them very irritating. So that a group of Armenians in their letter to the 
Commission of USA Congress on human rights expressed perplexity concerning to 
the commission's taking my information about the events in Azerbaijan into 
consideration. The arguments were pecular: allegedly I am a muslim, I am in 
friendly relation with the president of Azerbaijan. Of course they did not pass over 
that my wife is turkish... the commission of course, rejected all arguments "taking 
for the justice". I think in order to establish an objective picture about Azerbaijan at 
the residents of my country, it is necessary to use all the channels and possibilities. 
If they do not exist=it should be created, because today America needs the truth 
about Azerbaijan..". 
From the materials we investigated, we got such information that on March 
29, 1992 the generally major Aleksandr Chindarov coming to see Ballija village 
with his own eyes in his letter addressed to marshal Shaposhinikov, the Baki 
commander of the general Armed Forces CIS, notes: translation "...In Karabakh, in 
Khojali field the hired soldiers coming from Azerbaijan countries participated 
together with Armenians. Among the dead people I came across with corpses of 
terrorists of arabian origin. They are the people fighting on the side of Armenians 
against Azerbaijanis. According to the documents as well as the information of the 
165 
 
militiary intelligence, a part of these hired persons are the volunteers coming from 
Palestinian National Liberation Organization (Al-Fatah, Al-Fat, Harakat, Al-
Tahrir, Al-Vatani, Al-Filastini). The real name of this group is the "Black 
September". 
According to the information got the members of this detachment were 
active in passing to Lebanon 3 kg uranium gathered from RF militiary industrial 
complex with the help of Yuri Zarvigarov, the commander of 366 regiment. They 
use it the territory of Iran... "Pisma, Glavnomu. OVS.SNG marshalu aviotii t-u. 
Shaposhnikivu.E.I 1992,V-3. general major A.I.Chindarov:  Archives   "OVS"-
SNG Moscow. 1992-N-1201-V)". 
From other investigations it becomes clear that Armenia raised a problem 
which was discussed at the meeting of the Armenian Secutity Board held on 18 
August 1992 on creating a separate volunteer detachment consisting of 520 people 
for protection of Armenian influence in Karabakh. 
166 
 
167 
 
168 
 
169 
 
170 
 
171 
 
172 
 
173 
 
174 
 
175 
 
176 
 
177 
 
178 
 
179 
 
180 
 
181 
 
182 
 
NEW FACTS ON "ASALA" AND "HAYDAD" 
 
Morton Abramyan fulfilled the mission before armenian terror 
organizations. 
 
Most of the terror acts have directed towards USA. 
 
It is known that 43% of terror acts in the world has been directed towards 
USA. It was the information dated to November 19, 2000. According to the 
information of July 22, 2001, this figure has reached to 56 percent. So, USA has 
not avoided terror plans yet, on the contrary, the willingness in 8 radical forces to 
realise these plans has increased. It turned out from our investigations that, USA 
Central Intelligence Office gets 1400 information in connection with terror acts. 
800 of them are connected purely with terror, 600 other information got, i. e. 42% 
is connected with those who are going to perpetrate terror acts, 24% of this 1400 
information belongs to Armenian terror groups functioning in USA territory. Ms. 
Leyton Marian, the employee of CIA writes in the bulletin of International 
Investigations and Strategical Research Center - in Washington "Post Soviet 
Prospects": "...Before terror was far away from us. But now, it is inside of our 
home..." 
 
Terror group named "13"-s 
 
There is such terror group in America: "13"-s (In California, New Jersey 
States). This terror organization was set up on 24 May 1989. According to the 
information one of the leaders of "13"-s, the lawyer Sims Badamchiyan by name, 
established collaborations with "Vadi-Al-Kaid" company. The employees of FBI 
have already discovered that "Vadi Al-Kaid" company towards which Armenians 
attempt and establish relations with, is financed by Usama bin Laden. As to Sirus 
Badamchiyan he participated in the occupation of Azerbaijan lands and was 
awarded with "Golden Eagle" Armenian order (March of 1992). 
That year in Khankendi the address of "13"s (USA) and "ASALA" (Erevan) 
to "The Fighting Nation" was spread. This address was signed by Tigran 
Hovanesyan and Sirus Badamchiyan. 
The ideologists' of "ASALA" - Aram Galustyan, Birma Saljugyan, Varin 
Adamyan... who perpetrated terror acts in the territory of Azerbaijan, being 
awarded with "Vachagan Bareposht", "St. Georgi", "Andranik"...and "Great 
Armenia" medals and orders was pitiful and intriquing. 
183 
 
Such a statement of Upper Karabakh "defense minister" was spread that 
year: "These persons will always remain in the memory of the history for 
extraordinary heroism in liberating Khojali from turks (?) with "13"-s in USA..." 
 
"Asala" and Khojali 
 
During the investigations, it turned out that USA press published during the 
last 8 years (after some time it will be 9 years) only 3 materials about Khojali 
tragedy. In each material Khojali tragedy was not described as genocide, but as 
liberation of "native lands" of Armenians from enemies (?). Whereas there were 
people in Azerbaijan who met the 11 September American tragedy with tears. We 
almost made this tragedy to be the nationwide one (?)...Weren't the people in 
Khojali who were shot and poisoned by chemical weapons human beings? ... 
According to the information and our investigations there is not any 
material on "Khojali tragedy" in the library of USA Congress (But already 
museums, photo-stands in connection with American tragedy are being created in 
Baku schools. There is a separate "catalogue" on it in Akhundov library...) There is 
not any material because the Transcaucasian section is headed by Levon Avdoyan, 
armenian by nationality. Here the principle of justice that demanded ex-president 
Duet Eyzenhauer is violated. 
 
Morton Abramyan's assistance to "Asala" 
 
We all noted the revelation of names of 43 terror organizations by USA 
State Department on Aprel 21, 2001. This list was prepared by the chief of 
"Intelligence and Investigation" Office of State Department, colonel Mr. Morton 
Abramyan. He was the head of this office till October 18 of this year (2001) and 
then was dismissed from his post as Morton Abram(ovich). Colonel Morton 
Abramyan (Abramovich?) fulfilled his mission before 
"ASALA" and "Haydad" that get aid from international Armenian diaspora, 
show interest to USA State, govermental and security organs and sometimes 
penetrate them and "make nests" in those echelons. He could remove the names of 
"ASALA" and "Haydad" from the list of the 43 terror organizations. 
 
"Turkish Blood"Organization 
(Instead of epilogue) 
 
Terror Centers "Turkish Blood" and "Azerbaijan (?)" by name, establishing 
their Headquarters in Berd, Chil, Chovak, Dashkand, Tekh, Tatev, 
184 
 
Aldora...settlements of Armenia till 1992, dislocated their headquarters beginning 
from July of 1999 and settled in Kalbajar, Lachin and Shusha. We must remind 
that both organizations were new and the founder of them was the Argentina 
bisnessman Armen Mikhitariyan. In 1969, the musician Artyon Mikhitariyan going 
to France among the Art and Cultural workers from Baku didn't return. After 37 
years he was heard from Lachin. He came to Lachin with the program of "Turkish 
Blood. Then this troop increased and expanded. 
The Operation Plan of "ASALA" terror organization against Azerbaijan. 
1."ASALA" - General Headquarter (Iravan - Karabakh center) 2.The First 
group (Coordination group with "ASALA") 
3.Control on orders, decision. 
4.The Second group (Coordination with "IBDA-s" group) 5.The group 
which establishes links with opposition leaders in frontier regions of Azerbaijan. 
a) An operative coordination group with known persons, dissatisfied 
groups with the government (in all periods) 
b) A group that investigates the access to the people of Armenian origin 
6.Working group with Armenians moved from Azerbaijan  
a) "Ideological group " against Azerbaijan  
b) Organization of little centers 
c) Investigation of the press (press published in Baku, listening to radio 
and television broadcasting) 
7.Coordination group with the political organizations of minorities living in 
the region 
a) "Sadval" lezghin separatist organization, 
b) "Kurdish" seperatists, 
c) "Islamic organizations", 
d) Russian community (church), 
e) Jewish community (sinegogue), 
f) "Hamas" organization (Lebanon), 
8. The operative group investigating strategical centers 
9. The group investigating army and power structures 
10. Analytical military information group 
a) Preparation of Bulletins (Prepared monthly with "Secret" signature 
stamp) 
b) Information in connection with oil policy of Baku 
c) "Frontier" information bloc 
11. The Third group (Coordination with "Hizbullah") 
12. Secret group (Coordination with Armenian community living in CIS 
and abroad) 
185 
 
13. The fourth group (Coordination with "Dev-Sol" group) 
14. (?) 
 
Provocation Plan of "Haydad" against Azerbaijan 
 
1. "Haydad" General Headquarter (Iravan-Karabakh center)  
2. The group that researches the diplomatic corps of Turkey in 
Commonwealth 
Independent States. 
a) Work places 
b) Compiling the action schedule 
c) Oil companies 
d) Links 
e) Coordination with oppositional radical groups of Turkey. 
3Azeribaijan bloc 
f) Learning group of the well known people 
g) Gathering anti materials against them 
h) Creating information bloc against Azerbaijani Intelligentsia (writers, 
academicians, inventors, politologists, political public figures, journalists, art 
workers, high ranking officers, bussinessmen) known in foreign press. 
Opening cods about them in Internet d) Compiling "Struggle catalogue" 
against Azerbaijan. 
4.Intelligence group: 
a) In military structure 
b) In governmental and state structures 
c) In Scientific centers, education system, research laboratories. 
5.Distribution center of decisions got from General Headquarters. 
a) Control group on orders, decisions made (Discussion with church) 
b)Work group on coordination with Armenian community abroad. 
6. Investigating the links of Azerbaijan Ministry of Foreign Affairs with 
diplomatic corps 
7. Implementory armed group 
8. Militarized control group (Including equipments of publishing house) 
9. Implementory armed group 
10. Computer center (checking the information) 
11. Control on implementation of decisions (secret group) 
12. Computer center (checking the information) 
 
 
186 
 
Members of "PKK" and "ASALA" in Shusha 
 
According to our investigations, Bank of Camil, one of the leaders of the 
separatist Kurd organization "Gaflan" founded in Syria and nine members of the 
group "Gara gartalin akopu", a branch of the Armenian terror organization 
"ASALA" arrived in Yerevan on may 12 and from there in Sisyan. On May 14 
they held consultation in the Armenian village of Khnatsak near Lachin. According 
to the information, six persons` group of General Investigation Office by Russia 
(Chief colonel Alexander Ivanovich Alexandrov), responsible expert of Yerevan 
Ministry of Defense Arkadi Agayan who served in frontier troops of Azerbaijan 
during 1980-1986 took part in the consultation. That night the first armed 
Armenian troop broke in the villages of Malibayli and Cagazur (territory of 
Lachin) from Khnatsak. On May 15 the Kurd separatist organization "Gaflan" was 
founded both in Lachin and Shusha. The Armenian historian, observing all this 
situation, by name Serj Orduyan ( Armenia Institute of History ) writes the follow-
ing in his 58pages` book "Those who renew the history": ... We returned to Shusha. 
Shusha was given a new life. It was impossible to stop the soldiers. It was their 
right. They ruined, burned everything remaining of Turks. It was difficult to 
confront the soldiers who had longed so much for their country. But my soldier 
brethren acted truly. It was time to make Turks forget Shusha..." (S. G. Orduyan: 
the book of "Renewal of old history", Stavropol, page19 ) 
According to the information, there were 197 captive azerbaijanis in Shusha 
prison on May 11, 1992. According to the information of radio Tehran (1992. -14. 
at 9.00) this number changed into 83. No information was given about the rest 114 
captives. 
According to our investigations, on May 13 of 1992 documentary films, 
recorded by producer Yadigari who was Persian by origin, were displayed in the 
assembly hall of the Armenian community in Isfahan. Those films told about the 
fate of 114 azerbaijanis who were killed in different ways. On May 14 Tehran 
officials prohibited to display those films. On May 14 at 10.00 P.M by Tehran time 
producer Yadigari sold those documentary films to a diplomat by surname Gudev 
in Tehran embassy of Russian Federation. ("Keyhan" newspaper, "Interview", 
1992 214, page 6) Yadigari also writes that he was shocked by what he had seen in 
Khalfali settlement in the west of Shusha. Producer Yadigari writes: "I told about 
all this to "Lur" information agency of Armenians and Russians who were insulting 
the killed in Shusha... But they didn't stop. They were skinning and torturing the 
killed. I decided at least to send the film of Shusha to Turkey. 
187 
 
Note: On April 19, 1993 the following advertisement was put up on the 
eighth page of newspaper "Keyhan". The young, 37 years old producer by name 
Ahmad Bagir Yadigari has died in catastrophe... 
18 minutes documentary film that the ambassador of Russia in Tehran 
Vladimir Gudev got from Yadigari is given to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and 
then to the archives of General Investigation Office. 
On May 16, 1992 Vartan Vartanyan, one of the leaders of the Armenian 
Community put up an advertisement on newspaper "Keyhan" and on magazine 
"Cinema " about the late Yadigari. It was advertised that Armenian Community 
planned to buy all the films of Yadigari who had shoot on "national freedom 
movement" in Upper Karabakh. The Armenian Community was ready to pay any 
amount for a shortest film on Upper Karabakh. 
Today everything has changed in Shusha. Shusha, losing the status of being 
scientific and cultural center, has changed into a military town. On the whole, six 
soldier barracks, a plant making spare parts for heavy military technique, a 
medicine fabric specified in military was built in town. "D-r Amiryan"s scientific 
research center on nuclear technology in Dashalti has been also specified in 
military aims. 
 
Iran knew beforehand the invasion of Shusha. 
 
On May 17, 1992 investigation colonels of Russian army Valeri 
Alexandrovich Kozlov and Valeri Yegorovich Malinov put up the article justifying 
invasion policy of Armenians on newspaper "Times" (USA). After three days V. 
Kozlov and V. Malinov was presented as members of Kurd separatist organization 
"Gaflan" on the fourth page of the newspaper. On May 22 the joint treaty was 
signed in Zarisli (Shusha) between the members of "Gaflan" and separatist 
organizations named "Gara gartalin akopu". (Shusha, newspaper "Shusha", 1995, 
Russian version. 16. Page 2) 
The first "Unique Front" of Kurd-Armenian terrorist troops against the 
territories of Azerbaijan in Upper Karabakh was founded in this way... According 
to our investigations, Shusha was the result of a deliberate plan. And this plan was 
started in the city of Leon in France. Disgraced author Zori Gaykovich Balayan 
confessed it in the interview given to "Antenna" TV channel of France in 1994. He 
noted in his short interview to newspaper "Progress" ("Le Progress"): "...Our first 
plan about Shusha was realized in Tehran (Iran) on May 12, 1992. On May 3 we 
already knew that Shusha would be ours in a few days. (Look: newspaper of the 
same name.1994-19) 
188 
 
Another our investigation shows that mass media in Tehran already knew 
that. For example, newspaper "Izvestiya" writes on the issue of May 16, 1992. 
"...The Government of Iran informed IRNA agency that negotiations in Tehran can 
lead to the end of the tragic conflict... The advisor of the president of Armenia 
Vagan Papazan considered the plan of Iran to be constructive, positive and 
acceptable. 
At that times deputy minister of Armenia Foreign Affairs Armen 
Navasardyan noted that he was unaware of all this. But the diplomat openly 
confessed in his interview to the correspondent of "Armen-Press" in Tehran on 
May 18, 1992: 
"...Question: (A.Arshak) 
How do you feel in Tehran? 
Answer: 
Very good. I met a lot of people here. I met Huseyn Ocalan, Abdulla 
Ocalan's brother who helped our national freedom movement. I talked to Armenian 
deputies. 
Question: 
Do you have information about the" Gaflan" and the "Akop" fighting in 
Upper Karabakh? 
Answer: 
Yes I have. Some of them have already come to Tehran with me... These 
people, such as Kurd general Abdul Asian and Armenian general Yefim Akopyan 
have taken part in negotiations. They have also taken part in negotiations 
concerning Shusha. I don't consider it to be serious..." (Tehran. Armenian 
newspaper "Araz" (not to be confused with the same magazine) 
189 
 
190 
 
Parliamentary Assembly-Report of debates: 
Tuesday 
 
Mr Ilham ALIYEV (Azerbaijan). - Dear Mr. Chairman. Ladies and 
gentlmen. 
As a result of the Armenian aggression against Azerbaijan, more than one 
million Azerbaijani's have become refugees, including 250 000 Azerbaijanis who 
lived in their native lands within the boundary of todays Armenia, 60 000 refugees 
from Nagorno-Karabakh, almost 700 000 from the seven regions surrounding 
Nagorno-Karabakh and tens of thousands who were living on the border with 
Armenia. In addition, 50 000 Mesheti Turks became refugees in central Asia and 
came to our country in 1990. Thus the policy of military aggression conducted by 
Armenia against Azerbaijan, the policy of ethnic cleansing, and the occupation by 
Armenian military forces of 20% of Azerbaijani territories led to the creation of 
more than 1 million refugees and internally displaced persons out of a total 
population of eight million Azerbaijanis. This is the highest such ratio not only in 
the Europe but also in the world. 
900 cities and villages, 7 000 industrial and agricultural sites and 700 
schools were completely destroyed by the Armenian occupants. I would like to 
underline that the Government of Azerbaijan does everything that it can to 
improve the living conditions of those refugees. It introduced a national 
programme with regard to the refugees and IDPs which was adopted by 
presidential decree. Every year, $100 million is given in direct payment to refugees 
and IDPs, and other assistance is provided from the budget of Republic of 
Azerbaijan. More than $70 million was recently allocated by presidential decree 
from the Azerbaijani state oil fund to construct new houses for refugees and IDPs 
and provide them with land and equipment  for  agricultural   production.   
However,   the   government's resources are limited, and some humanitarian 
organisations are reducing their aid or cutting it completely, which may create 
more great number difficulties for refugees and IDPs. In this connection we 
think that the Council of Europe must use its influence and ask those 
humanitarian organisations not to reduce their assistance. 
In general the main reason of emergance of the refugee problem is 
hostilities. In the case of Azerbaijan, it is the result of military aggression, ethnic 
cleansing, terrorism, aggressive separatism and occupation of Azerbaijani 
territories. The country which committed these crimes against humanity is 
Armenia and it is stange that the delegates are sitting here as members of the 
Council of Europe. How long will the European Community close its eyes to the 
191 
 
fact that one member of the Council of Europe - Armenia - continues to occupy 
20% of the territory of another Council member - Azerbaijan. 
How long this black hole in Europe - the lawless zone of Nagorno-
Karabakh, where international terrorists of various origins, not only Armenian, 
have their camps there and local authorities create ideal conditions for cultivating 
drugs, drug trafficking and the use of drug money to buy new weapons and commit 
crime will exist? 
In conclusion I would like to underline that alongside with discussing 
the refugee problem, we must consider seriously why people become refugees. We 
must demand that the Armenian aggressors withdraw their troops from the 
occupied territories of Azerbaijan and strongly condemn the Armenian occupants 
for their crimes and the sufferings that they have inflicted on more than one million 
Azerbaijani refugees. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
THIEVES OF URANIUM 
 
Nuclear theft by Armenian terrorists in Gumri 
 
The resolution on "Equal shares for Armenians", adopted by the All-
Armenian Church Board in Beirut (Lebanon) in June 25, 2000, begins with the 
words: "We completed the distribution of share, respectfully envisioned for the 
great soldires of "Asala", who are fighting against the enemy in Karabakh - 
Artsakh (Khankendi) for the Great Armenia, for liberty and love of Motherland. 
We say, soldiers of "Asala" are the "Knights of Vartan". The "Knights of Vartan" 
are the beating heart and fighting hand of "Asala". They are the brain, the ear and 
the eye of "Asala". (Beirut, Lebanon, "Aztag" Armenian newspaper, publication of 
Dashnaksutun Party, supplement to the issue, dated June 27, 2000, p. 2). 
On February 4, 2001, coordinator on the foreign relations of the Board's 
secretary, with passport registration in Sumgait from 19964 to 1985, an engineer, 
Gurgen Mateskhovich Seraganyan sends a letter to the member of the Academy of 
Theology in Rome Khose Luis Shane, requesting to promote in making contacts 
between the "Knights of Vartan" - "fighters for the Armenian faith and moral" and 
the secret army of Catholic Church, "ORUS DEI" ("Order of God"). 
"...There is no such a nation on the earth as Armenians who would act under 
the order and command of the God...", he writes in his letter. 
 
 
 
192 
 
"Asistance act" of "Asala" 
 
As a result, on March 9,2001, in the religious center in Sayda, Lebanon, 
there was signed an "Assistance Act" between the secret army of the Rome 
Catholic Church "Order of God" and the "Knights of Vartan" of the Armenian 
terrorist corps "Asala". The jointly adopted Declaration included the words: "... If 
we want to shine as stras, own the Earth and Heavens, we must neither believe 
anybody, nor befriend with anybody. Let all be our friends. We must fight for our 
faith and land without expressing our love and intention...". 
"Summary", the bulletin of the secret "Army of God" writes: "...Our 
greatest ambitions sparkle in the political, religious, economic and cultural firelds. 
We regard all questions in a civil way...". (2000, #2, p.11). 
In fact, the Catholic Church in Rome was well aware of commitments of the 
"Knights of Vartan". The "Knights" were already known as "vanguards" of 
"Asala". For example, the feet, breast and faces of Azerbaijanis, killed in Khojali, 
were branded with signs like "V", "A", "S", "M" (in the Archives). All them were 
"written" by the blunt Armenian knives. 
On the other hand, it has to be noted that there are enough informations in 
the CIA (US), "MI-6" (England), MOSSAD (Israel), MIT (Turkey), BND-5 
(Germany), RSS (Russia), "Ettelat" (Iran), confirming that the "Knights" is a wing 
of the "Asala". Despite these, signature of the terrorist organization, who founded 
its secret HQ in Beirut and Paris on July 4, 1986, appeared in the White House. 
The first letter, connected with Karabakh, sent by the "Knights of Vartan", 
was presented to the then US president Bill Clinton (Jan.7, 1998). The letter was 
signed by the Armenian businessmen and representatives of Diaspora (O. Babayan, 
S.S. Soleymanyan, T.S. Badamciyan, G. Grigoryan, L. Sgagen, F. Petrosyan...). 
The letter was re-newed on March 12, 2001. The "Knights of Vartan" re-sent the 
same letter to the US pPresident George Bush, it was also connected with the 
notorious "Section 907". The "Knights" wrote in the letter: "Mr, President, there is 
no alternative to the right of self-determination of Karabakh. There is no peace 
without freedom of basic right. The people of Karabakh has gained this right on the 
account of inconceivable victims. The United States should support the people of 
Karabakh, who want to peacefully enjoy this fundamental human right. 
Therefore, basing on this principle, the United States should not justify the 
government of Azerbaijan, who strenghtens and deepens economic blockade 
against the neighboring country, pursues a racial discrimination towards the people 
of Armenia and Karabakh. The Congress has many times expressed its protest to 
the policy of aggression by Azerbaijan. Government must support the position of 
193 
 
Congress. Azerbaijan and other states of the region should be told that the only 
guarantee for security of Karabakh is the right of choice of its future...". 
After this, the "Knights of Vartan" made alterations in their program, 
adopted in April 5, 1998, named: "Karabakh: military and psychological-strategic 
program". 
 
Directions of terrorism in Karabakh 
 
According to the investigations, the 28-page "plan of strategic actions" of 
the terrorist organization in Karabakh, was supplemented by another 16 pages 
(1998). The directions were defined as below: 
1. Nuclear terrorism (Hasanriz, Agdaban, Kuropatkin, Khanabad). 
2. Biological terrorism (Kish, Ashagi Veysalli, Istisu). 
3. Chemical terrorism (Havisli, Venanli). 
4. Computer terrorism (Shusha, Khankendi). 
In regard with the nuclear terrorism, experts of the CIA (US) - the "Near 
East and Southern-Eastern Asia Committee " - have defined that Afghanistan, as 
well as th teerritory of the CIS countries are the "bridge" for trafficking of 
narcotics, weapons, nuclear materials. As a result, the US President issued an 
executive order #13.129 in respond to this anxious challenge. (Presidential 
Documents, Executive Order 13.129. Property and Prohibiting Transactions with 
the Taleban - Federal Regiser. Vol. 64, #13.129). 
Nuclear terrorist group was led by Stepan Bagdasarovich Amiryan, 
collaborator of the Institute of Physics in Yerevan (1986-1992). Biological terror 
was governed by chemist and doctor Tamara Saatovna Leopardyan, who worked 
for years in the #4, 8 and 12 drugstores in Yerevan. Chemical and computer 
terrorism were assigned to the HQ of the military units in Karabakh. 
Since August 3, 1999, the militants of 9 assistant groups, set in the territory 
of Karabakh, registered their arms in the Defense ministry of the self-proclaimed 
Republic. These groups were instructed to organize terror acts in the occupied 
territories towards Azrebaijan (in the Khalfali residential area at 2 km of Shusha, in 
Khorovlu area of the Jabrail region, in Gubadli, eastern side of the center) to 
realize the plan of physical, moral and economic terrorim... 
It was ascertained that just in these years - in 1999-2001, the high-rank 
officials of the International Agency for control over the atomic energy and nuclear 
wastes, claimed that there was a "Nuclear Mafia" in the territory of the CIS 
countries. The expression "nuclear army", thus, was admitted for the first time in 
the history and political life. 
194 
 
And,   to  our  surprise,  there  was  an   Armenian   by  name  Atom 
Abramovich Melkonyan, well-wnown in the CIS space. 
In 1998, the Armenians with the association of the Russian specialists built 
a store-house for nuclear wastes in the Chaikand residential area of Kalbajar 
region, Azerbaijan. As strange, the storehouse was guarded by a group of Afghan 
and Pakistani citizens, who came to Armenia on May, 19, 1999. In fact, there was 
not any living or economic reasons that urged these people to come to Armenia and 
then to the occupied territory of Karabakh. One of these peoples, Muhammad 
Murad, who, in the Afghan group came to Armenia and appealed the "Motherland" 
Society to promote him to study at one of the Institutes of Physics in Armenia, was 
invited by a high-rank security service official "to have a talk" at the 59th 
appartment, 5th floor of the "Armenia" hotel in Yerevan. As clarified, on 
September 17, 1999, afghan Mahammad Murad was interviewed by the "Wagt" 
("Times") newspaper in Lahor, whereby he reminds the name of Serzh Samvelyan, 
colonel of the Yerevan security Service. He hints that the security colonel is in 
touch with the ceratin group, named "Yusuf oba" in illegal sale-purchase and 
traffick of nuclear materials. Muhammad, who has served in the intelligence group 
of the Afghan Arabs in Pishavar, Afghanistan, since 1989, also confirms that he 
has visited Armenia and Karabakh to acquire nuclear materials. During three 
months, under the control of this colonel and in the "Yusuf oba" group he used to 
take 239-isotopes of nuclear (plutonium) to Iran, Iraq... 
The "Afghan Arab" also notes that nuclear materials were transported to 
Yerevan by special air liners among the computers and other military hard core. He 
ends with the words: "... There is a group of nuclear thefts with large opportunities 
and contacts in Yerevan. Up to August 28, 1999, their Headquarters, where they 
assembled for consultations, was in Yerevan. All our secret talks, orders and offers 
took place at the Defense Ministry, in the 14th apartment. Since September 4, 
1999, a part of these consultations were usually held in Artsakh (Khankendi.). The 
International Agency for control over atomic energy and nuclear wastes, in its 
Vienna conference stated: "The obtained documents prove that Usama Bin Laden 
has acquired the technology and materials necessary for nuclear weapon...". 
As to the security colonel of Yerevan Serzh Kevorkovich Samvelyan, he is 
in the same row with Stepan Bagdasarovich Amiryan, who heads the "nuclear 
terrorism" group of the "Knights of Vartan". Because hands of the security colonel 
easily reach the nuclear store-houses of the Russian Federation. 
 
 
 
 
195 
 
"Typhoon" rockets in Karabakh 
 
The leading Armenian companies, engaged in the "nuclear issues" (say, 
nuclear mafia) are "Razdanmash", "Jak-Mak Metals", "Arshavir", "Akopyan" 
(there is also a clothing factory under this name), "Vartanoil". "Jak-Mak Metals" 
and "Akopyan" companies have opened their secret research laboratories in 
Karabakh (relatively in 1947 and 1998). "Vartanoil" even has worked out a 
"Uranium exploration program" in Nakhchivan (?) for 2002-2005. 
"Jak-Mak Metals" plays the role of mediator or coordinator in Daglg 
Karabakh. According to the provided informations, in November 16-20, 2000, the 
Company mediated in the secret sale-purchase and transportation through the local 
customs stations of 650 herescopes for the rocket technology, 146 steel covers and 
brakes, necessary for the "flight mechanism" system, delivered by Ukraine to Iran 
and Iraq. (Remember: the border stations in the occupied Zangilan and Jabrail 
regions). On the other hand, secret trilateral studies are carried out for 
modernization of the "S-300" and "Typhoon" rockets that were delivered to 
Karabakh. And, on July 23, 2000, there were held the Moscow-Beijing-Yerevan 
trilateral talks on rocket technology. The same issues are being discussed by 
professor Kim Jen Sen (China), Victor Mikhailov (Russia) and Ter-Avakyan 
(Armenia). Kim Jen Sen is a Chinese specialist in the field of nuclear and laser 
studies, works at the research department of the Defense Ministry. Victor 
Mikhailov is a leading specialist at the nuclear center in Saratov (Russian 
Federation). 
According to the investigations, on July 9-12, 2000, collaborators of the 
"Shua" industrial concern of Iran also appeared in Karabakh and Yerevan to make 
bargain in this field with relevant companies. Because, Yerevan, Moscow and 
Tehran are said to be strongly keen in laser energy production. They study the 
program on laser application in the US rocket technologies as "ABL", "Alpha", 
"Thel". As a result, they worked out a joint program, named "High-Power lasers 
and Energy Engineering", signed an agreement. 
On the other hand, since 2001, Moscow's 'VPK MARO" Studies Center has 
opened its affiliate in Khankendi. Also set relations with the company and 
industrial center "Razdanmash". It has to be mentioned that the "VPK MAPO" 
center is engaged in design and pro-duciton of the jet passenger air crafts. Just this 
Company last year has sold a $145,000 license in Baghdad (Iraq) for jet engine 
production. The engine is widely used in rocket technology. 
Currently, the issue of construction of a new medicine factory in Daglig 
Garabag is on the agenda. The government of Yerevan has made certain 
suggestions yet in 1996, but the item remained incompleted. Another cooperation 
196 
 
of Yerevan, Tokio and Tehran envisions the construction of a medicene factory 
with the cost 14 million 650 thousand US dollars at the occupied territories. The 
agreement on cooperation came into effect on December 24, 2001. 
 
Nuclear labs of Armenians 
 
According to the investigations, there is another agreement on cooperation 
between the Defense Ministry (DM) of Armenia and State Atom Control 
Department of the Russian Federation, signed on December 4, 1998. The 
agreement also envisions to allot land areas in the occupied Karabakh for the 
scholars and specialists engaged in nuclear technology. For example, according to 
the agreement, reached on April 3, 1998, one of the labs of the Peterburg Nuclear 
Physics Institute had to be moved to Khankendi. There, "professor Sumachev and 
Dr Ter-Akopyan's group" would carry out joint researches on peaceful use of the 
nuclear wastes in medicine and economy. Or, on December 1999, it was decided to 
built a 2-storeyed research center in the Lachin forests for joint studies of Minsk 
(Belarus) and Khankendi scientists. On May 22, 2000, members of the "Silenko 
research group" of Research Institute of nuclear problems under the Belorus State 
University conducted a survey at the building. On June 13, 2001, the first labs were 
insatalled there. On September 6, 2001, in Zabukh area south of Lachin, was 
opened a research center for "Pr. Averyan group" of the Kurchatov Institute, the 
head department of which is in Moscow at Kurchatv square number 1. Because of 
the Institute had no money, all expenses of the Center ($120,000) were covered by 
the chief of HQ of the "Knights of Vartan" in Khankendi, biologist Karen 
Karpovich Sevastyan. 
According to the investigations, 9 "afghan Arabs", 3 alumnus of Bagdad 
University, 6 Pakistanis, 2 mathmeticians from Isfahan (Iran), 17 Armenians and 4 
Arabs from Saudi Arabia and Syria, continue to work at the nuclear research labs 
and centers at the territories, occupied by the Armenian terrorist corps and units. 
It was also clarified that the Armenian and Russian scientists have acquired 
the first conclusions of their tests. On May 14, 2002, departmemt chief of the RF's 
State Atom Control Agency Yuri Volodin stated at the conference in Moscow that 
tens of events related to theft of the nuclear materials occured in the Russian 
Federation and other CIS countries in 2000. As a result, part of the nuclear 
materials were stolen, transported to foreign countries. Head of the RF Defense 
Ministry's chief department, colonel-general Igor Volinkin (he is responsible for 
security of the nuclear objects) condemns the Afghan Arabs, Iraqi and Pakistani 
businessmen, who appear in the RF, Armenia and Kazakhstan, and the local 
officers, who joins them.. He says: "..Russian officers have two times prevented 
197 
 
the attacks to the nuclear objects..". A logical question: "Where?" Let us make an 
excursus back. 
 
Nuclear theft 
 
On October 21, 1994, there was signed a military treaty between the ex-
president of Russian Federation Boris Yeltsin and ex-president of Armenia Ter-
Petrosyan. According to the treaty, Moscow had to station its military base in 
Gumri. On April 18, 1997, State Duma ratified the treaty. 3 thousands military 
servicemen came there. Later were delivered "Su-27" aircrafts and air-defense 
systems, installed rockets of "S-300" type. Then the Chinese "Typhoons" were 
"welcomed". The first nuclear theft was just committed in Gumri. 28 gr uranium 
was stolen from the nuclear store-house. On June 4, 2001, citizen of Afghanistan 
Gul Ahmadkhan Sahib and an Armenian naitonal by name Hamburg Arakelovich 
Ayrmyan were detained while crossing the border to Iran. Nothing was stated... 
But on August 7, 2001, we asceratined that Gul Ahmadkhan was given to the 
disposal of security colonel Serzh Gevorkovich, while Hamburg Arakelovich 
Ayrmyan sent to the Dag-Tumas military camp of the "Knights of Vartan" at the 
territory of the occupied Jabrail region of Azerbaijan. 
On October 10, 2001, the RF Security Council representative Raisa 
Vdovichenko said at a meeting:"... The Taleban emissaries have offered the 
collaborators of the Institute of nuclear problems to sell them nuclear technologies 
at high costs. Or, at high wages to work for them. Three of the Institute 
collaborators agreed and went. To what country, we did not know...". 
Ms. Vdovichenko, however, knew. She knew that two of them were 
Armenian nationals, the third was Russian. Thus, Aftandil Abakumovich Ter-
Petrosyan, coolaborator of the Nuclear Engines Research Institute after Kurchatov, 
Grigori Martirosovich Baralyan, cooperator of the Laser Physics Institute after 
academician Lavrentyev, and Boris Ivanovich Shestakov, specialist of the "Polyus" 
Research Center after M.F. Salmakh in Moscow..., on March 26, 2001, went to 
Iran, then to Afghanistan. (No need to continue). 
It has also to be noted that on April 2, 2000, the HQ of the "Knights of 
Vartan" in Khankendi sent a letter to the All-Armenian Church Board in Beirut, 
whereby informed: "We have been organized. We received your donations. We 
help our sisters and brothers. There is no reason for concern. We are welcomed 
everywhere". ("Report" Rome, "Bulletin", 2000, #16, p. 14). 
 
 
 
198 
 
Commitments of the "Knights of Vartan" 
 
Saying, "We have been organied", the "Knights" did not mean the condition 
they had. They meant: "we are ready for every assignment". As a result, the 
"Knights" began to prepare their plans for collection of information on the strategic 
objects in Azrebaijan, including Nahkchivan, engaged in microbiology, chemistry, 
guantum physics and nuclear studies, get video-cassettes, documents and schemes. 
Generally, it was clarified that still in the 1994-1995, the "Knights of 
Varatan" have estabhished their information buearus in the airports of Kennedey 
(US), Domodedovo (RF), Charles de Gaul (France), as well as in Turkey and Iran, 
Germany and Japan, China, Swiszerland and England... These bureaus were staffed 
by people who know Azerbaijan language, lived in and knew Baku well. In these 
bureaus, they sought and welcomed the Azerbaijani intellectuals, who visited the 
country, in particular, discontented with the Azerbaijani authorities, made contacts 
and "by chance", assisted them. Only in 1995, in the airports of the United States, 
the "Knights" have spent $74,000 for all these tsaks. Instead, the "Knights" have 
made "friends", got props and addresses for further acquaintance. I came across 
such a note in a "Bulletin", published in Beirut: "We have such contacts that with 
the mediation of any democratic, or, say, human rights NGO, we can invite them to 
any country we want...". (1995, 04.10., Rome, "Bulletin", #20, p. 4). 
 
"Nuclear Mafia" 
 
It has to be noted that the "2001" will be remembered as the year of 
"Nuclear mafia". Because, according to the investigations, in contrast to previous 
years, there were stolen much nuclear materials and transported to the third 
countries... In this year (2001), nuclear thefts have increased by 20 percent. Last 
time, 12 kg uranium disappeared in the CIS space. Another 6 kg uranium-235 was 
stolen. In third case - 8 kg of "3D20" plutonium was appropriated... 
In the documents of CIA and RF's secret services, the territories of 
Kazakhstan (Aktau), Ukraine, Armenia... are mentioned as free-of-control zones 
for nuclear thefts... 
The "Knights of Vartan" in Armenia and Karabakh were mainly involved in 
the terror acts of "Asala" since 1991. Their participation in the invasion of Shusha 
(May 1992), in the commitments and inhuman treatments towards the POWs and 
hostages, is undeliable. 
According to investigations, Karabakh was not only the arena of physical 
and nuclear terrorism. Cruel and terrible moral terrorism was tested on the people 
there. 
199 
 
On January 16, 1994, in his speech to Senate, the US ex-minister for 
energy, Mr. Heysley Awly stated: "By radiation, we can treat for numerous 
diseases. It is enough to make a plutonium injection to the human body". The 
Minister also stressed the existance of about 200 programs on the topic. The 
programs also included the territories of the uncontroled zones of the CIS 
countries. (The United States had such a program still in 1947). The project-
program was called "Manhatten" then. One of the groups, working on this project, 
was led by Dr. Arabel Vakhtovich Akopyan at the California University (San 
Fransisco). 
Arabel Akopyan mainly treated his cancerous patients with the plutonium 
(radioactive chemical element) injections and he died from cancer in his 76. 
We were provided with informations on the past and present of Dr. 
Akopyan among the oncologists of Kalifornia. 
Thus, the grand-dad Dr. Akopyan was substituted by his grandson Dr. 
Archun Akopovich Akopyan. 
And in September 1994, the grandson Archun Akopyan supplements the 
project that remained uncompleted. He appeals to the atomic energy bodies of the 
country. But they do not accept the "Akopyan Project". In conclusion, lin 
November 5, 1994, Dr. Akopyan appeals to the Russian Federation, then comes to 
Armenia. He opens a lab in the military hospital of the Defense Ministry. Tersting 
the impact of the radioactive injections inside the veins, Dr. Akopyan, with certain 
scientific conclusions, in June 3, 1995, comes to Kahnkendi... 
In September 15, 1997, Dr. Akopyan returns to America. He lectures at the 
military hospitals and reserach centers of the country, engaged in radiobology, in 
eluding in Chikago, Oak-Ridgey, Kalifornia, Washington and New York... 
Ability and opportunities of our law-enforces to collect information are 
weaker than that of the professional technology and technical chances of the 
criminal and terrorist groups which act in Baku. Terrorism in Baku is not registered 
as a planned and pre-organized phenomenon and has no any scenario. The terror 
acts are implemented by the "Klerman" method. There are two lines in the essence 
of the Klerman method. One of these "as a telecommunication line, passess 
through the state and government structures... the other-through the pre-determined 
prison.." (Prof. Kobzer). Unfortunately, there are no questions related to this item 
in the investigation and judicial materials on terror acts. Touching the terror acts in 
Almaty in 2001, professor Kobzer writes: "Some 70 percent of the terror acts 
happened in Almaty, are not revealed. Bcause, they aviod from the questioning, 
necessary for investigation. Because, the law-enforces are close relatives ...and are 
corrupted..." (p. 76)". Despite some of the accessories were detained, imprisoned... 
the case will be reconsidered. Otherwise, new terror acts are inevitable. In fact, it 
200 
 
needs not a great courage, or a group to reveal the terror acts in Baku. Simply, it 
needs acute independent wisdom, high intelligence data, prosecutor will, fair court 
logic... 
All the misfortunes and happenings could be uprooted by obtaining the 
necessary data. According to investigations, all the politcal assaults and terror 
atatcks in Baku have the same goal - to shatter the power. Because, it seems, some 
are fed up with President Heydar Aliyev's stability. The pont is that everytime 
when the head of state goes abroad in regard with his health, or retuns home 
unexpectedly... possible terror acts, secret meetings, power claiming intentions and 
plans fail... And the dirty money that was spent for... Perhaps, it would be naive to 
forget the foreign secret services who have certain interests in Azerbaijan. As to 
me, there must be a special "National Security conception. If the London 
intelligence service ("Mi-6" informs that there is a contact line between Baku, or 
Azrebaijan and the terrorist organization "Al-Kaida" (05.03.2002), then what is the 
reason of lack of understanding? Will not all these cause next terror acts? 
Professor Kobzar stresses another interesting item. Hinting at the 
assassinations in Sankt Peterburg, he writes: "Unfortunately, the investigation 
group is very often headed by the persons, who are in close touch with criminals. 
And it boosts strategic plans of criminals... The terrorists make favor of the 
unconducted, or worse-conducted reforms in the law enforcement bodies in the 
CIS countries. In the process of cadre alterations, they can emmadiately place their 
persons in the secret information net of any intelligence service, or law 
enforcement bodies. (The principles of relationship, friendship or other "favors" 
are of no use now. These points easily fail, or step back before the insidious and 
perfidious criminal groups with the web-like information net. These are reality in 
Azerbaijan.). Because, nothing can play the role which is played by dirty money 
and bank accounts in the society. 
 
NUCLEAR WAISTES IN KARABAKH 
 
The names of Russian officers participating in Khojali genocide are 
reaveled. 
 
"Ivan's brutal battalion" in Khojali 
 
That day (February, 1992) Illarion Allahverdiyan fighting under the name 
of armenian self-defence detachment, in fact, known as the head of the main body 
of "ASALA" terror organization established in Khankendi awarded 24 Russian 
officers with premium. For instance, he solemnly presentedthe Russian officer 
201 
 
Yevgeniy Golubev, who was called to the front of the detachment, with gold cast 
order of 25 grams and with "ASALA" engraved on it, and $5000 US. Or that day 
presenting the soldier Anastas S. Ivanov $10000 US, gave him the documents of 
"Hunday" made automobile waiting for him in Yerevan... 
At the result, the personal cooperations -"battle contracts" between 
Armenian armed troops and Russian officers were signed. I must remind that the 
part of these i.e the millitary contracts between Armenians and Russians were 
signed by oral orders. Every order, each word of general had its price. For instance, 
the price of an order on fighting of the isolated chemical defence batallion №463 
and detached intelligence batallion №909 in Khankendi, by the side of Armenians 
was $18000. Colonel V Savelyev writes: "While transfering the first batallion to 
the reserve region colonel Ivan Moiseyev kept the military equipment and the stuff 
in Chapar ravine, had the waiting position. Then his batallion entered Chikhani 
settlement and got into the Armenian's siege. At result, the batallion left voluntarily 
its military equipment to Armenians. Ivan Moiseyev and the personnel were called 
to fight together being offered money..." 
According to our investigations, it was Ivan Moiseyev"s batallion that 
destroied and blew the ash of the surrounding settlements of Khojali. And this 
batallion was known among the Armenians as "Ivan"s wild batallion". From the 
information we got it becoms clear that Armenians got 85% of the military 
equipment and weapons that were in the regiment. In addition, 142 sub-machine 
guns, 7600 bullets, 460 bullit proof vests, 11 tons canned food, 1200 paires of 
shoes (in six size), 146 pistols... sent from France were given to the disposal of 
armenians. 149 portable radio transmitters made in USA were distributed to 
Armenians. 
 
The Dead Bodies Were Burned in Bonfire 
 
According to the private soldier, Grigoriy Voroshilov one part of the 
documents connected with Khojali and the links of Armenians with Russians were 
burned on March 1, 1992 on the order of general major Lukashov, the aviation 
commander of Transcaucasian military district. Colonel V. Savelyev touching 
upon all of this in his "Secret Information" reminds:" ...Armenians gathering the 
dead bodies in the area with "KAMAZ" 02-19-MM number plate belonging to 
Russians made a bonfire in Khojali... Hate of a human being to a human being 
exceeded its limit. Who caused it, I couldn't understand. I want to introduce to you 
the high-ranking people who together with Armenians were lining the captured 
Azerbaijanians and had great pleasure of killing them. 
 Colonel B. Baymukov - the deputy of the regiment commander on rear; 
202 
 
 Colonel I. V. Moiseyev - the commander of the first batallion; 
 Major S. I. Ohanyan - the commander of the second batallion; 
 Major E. A.Nabonik - the commander of the third batallion; 
 Major V. I. Chitchiyan - the chief of staff of the first batallion; 
 Major V. G. Hayriyan - the chief intelligence of the regiment; 
 Senior lieutenant O.V. Mirzayan - the commander of the company; 
 Senior lieutenant S.V.Khrinkhua - the chief of the intelligence squad; 
 Senior lieutenant V. N.Garmash - the commander of the tank company; 
 Senior lieutenant N. T.Hakonyan - the commander of the company; 
 Senior lieutenant V. A. Azeryan - a battery commander; 
 Lieutenant V. I. Bondorev - the deputy of the chief intelligence; 
 Lieutenant A. I. Kuchov - the chief of radio chemical squad...  
(also 41 high-ranking officials of Armenian nationality). 
On 24 February of 1992 at 21.15 (?) Zarvigarov, having got the rank of 
general made such a speech before the officiers that the war in the regions is not 
the war of land, but the war of Islam against Christianity (?). 
 
Also the Land of Karabakh is Carried Away 
 
I think, the first seat of confrontation of Islam with Christianity in the world 
was Upper Karabakh. The Upper Karabakh point of the world is still the split 
center of the world... 
Our occupied lands are put to the auction in Upper Karabakh and leased. 
The Armenian multimillionaire Kirk Kirkoryan living in California (USA) alloted 
$ 100 million to Lachin, Kalbajar, Shusha lands. He bought a land plot of hundred 
million cost (?). Already the fabricated "republic's" "national deputies" guaranteed 
the Upper Karabakh lands to be easily purchased and sold by the foreign citizens 
(undoubtedly by Armenians), passed laws in Lachin - Kalbajar forests. "Hun" 
(Argentina), "Shnai" (Germany) private companies are making from nut and oak 
trees the handles for modern weapons, boxes for ammunition and other strategical 
products. Only from Kalbajar fauna rare birds of 36 species were caught for the 
zoos of England and its cost was $ 51 000 (not paid by pound). Chinese scientists 
have worked out a special "strategical programs" to research the blood diseases 
using 42 kind of flower and bush samples growing in Shusha and to prepare 
vaccine and other preparations. The interesting thing is that the fields of those 
flower and bush samples are indicated in this program. Antibiotics "Bablumyan" 
company of Florida State (USA) offered the high cost iron tree and spruce powder 
to "Kinrey" company, making preparations. (?) 
203 
 
The Russian Federation and Armenia though rented in appereance one part 
of the occupied lands, in fact they occupied them without paying for rent, i.e. they 
privatized them. So the zones called "nuclear zones" were created in Upper 
Karabakh. In these zones surrounded with barbed wire, Armenia, as well as Russia 
is engaged in deployment of the nuclear remains. Nuclear remains packed in the 
territory of Armenia (in the barrels) and sent in the special boxes with word "A-
TOOZ" on them are buried in the pits beforehand in specified villages. 
According to the researches we made, in Kolatag, Seyidbayli and Almali 
villages in the North - West part of Khojali settlement, the fauna, as well as "the 
climate stripe" has changed. Last year, only in Kolatag settlement 11 iron boxes 
with nuclear wastes (APS) sent from Armenia were buried. Seyidbayli and Almali 
villages, in the real sense of it, have become "nuclear graveyard" surrounded with 
barbed wire. But Armenians are not satisfied with it. According to the other 
information, deploying its nuclear remains in Upper Karabakh (it sells its nuclear 
remains to Germany and Japan beginning from June 12 of this year) Russia 
violates international law norms and defines new specific ones. 
Famous politologist, writer Frankis Fukuyama (Japan) pointing to all of 
this, writes in his work "The End of Time": "...The world is coming to end, my 
brother. But it seems there will be left some states which will fight with each other 
till the last light of the mankind. And in this fighting they deliberately will poison 
the soils, stir up waters, burn the trees, flowers... It is a terror. It is a terror against a 
nature, human beings conscious and moral. Neither the humanity, nor the nature 
can stand this terror... This terror will be the one that destroys the globe and 
time..." 
Though the politologist doesn't mention the name, he hints this terror to be 
the nuclear one. 
 
Can the USA Defend Itself from Nuclear Weapon? 
 
According to our investigations on July 21, 2001 a "Secret" report of 30 
pages reflecting the main principles of "military strategy" of USA was heard. There 
is such a note in one of those principles:" ... America should be protected from 
chemical and bacterial weapons. It should increase the control on important points 
of the planet..." 
Saying "important points" it mentions the names of Europe, North - East, 
Asia, Eastern Asia regions, Near East, South West Asia... geographical areas. It 
reminds the zones of conflict and war, fighting for potable water, for land. It is pity 
that in the framework of these conflict and war zones, the name of Azerbaijan, 
204 
 
Upper Karabakh, the lands of which are divided brutally and occupied with mass 
terror plans, was not mentioned there. 
In the occupied Gubadli region of Azerbaijan, Armenians have expanded 
their "nuclear graveyard". At the result in the territory between Bargushad and 
Hakari rivers where were our living places at times (north and north - east parts) in 
the area of Gayali, Mahmudlu, Garachayli, Sariyatag villages, special places for 
burying the nuclear wastes have been alloted. This work is done as a rule, by the 
soldiers of "radio chemical group" of "Upper Karabakh Army" (?). And in 2000 
the number of youth addressing to the military hospital in Khankendi with blood 
cancer (all of them served in "radio chemical group" in the army at times) was 22. 
From the other side, the children born in the families of demobilished soldiers 
serving in "radioactive groups," the disease of cepticalmia was observed. 
The interesting aspect of it is that, doctors group from Vanderbuilt and 
Nasivil universities in Tennessi State (USA), armenians by the nationality, is going 
to continue the researches in those zones next month. They also state that they will 
extensively use "Zovan" preparation which prevent bacteriological infection in 
blood against cepticalmia disease, spread among Amenian children. 
Together with it, the number of underground nuclear storehouses in the 
territory of Upper Karabakh is increasing. 
I want to remind that, a military conseption named "a war strategy during 
two hours and a half" was worked out in Turkey. This conception consisting of 
mobile armoured corps, has been defined in three directions: 
1. Against terror groups 
2. Against mass actions 
3. Against religious radical organizations 
Also "A Special Tactical Intelligence" school determining all of this was 
established. I think, Azerbaijan needs such an establishment. 
 
Terror Organizations in an Official List of USA 
 
1. "Abu Sayyaf"(Philippine National Liberation Front) founded in 1990
 "Al-Kaida" ("Base". Functions in every part of the world (?) founded in 
1989.) 
2. "National Liberation Army" (Columbia. Founded in 1965) 
3. "Brigade of Alexa Bonkayo" (Philippine. Founded in 1980) 
4. "Armed islamic group" (Algeria. Established in 1992) 
5. "Al Gamaa Al-islamiyya" (Sudan, Egypt... founded in 1970) 
6. "The group of the first October" (Spain. Established in 1975) 
8. "Volunteer Army" (Ireland. Founded in 2000) 
205 
 
9. "Jaish-e Muhammad" (Pakistan. Established in 1996) 
10. "Al Jihad Al-islami" (Palestine. Established in 1981) 
11. "Interaxamve" (Ruanda. Established in 1969) 
12. "IRO" (Ireland. Established in 1969) 
13. "For the Strike" (Ireland. Established in 1994) 
14. "The Real Army" (Iraland. Established in 1998) 
15. "Uzbekistan Islamic Movement" (Afghanistan. Established in 1980) 
16. "Kahane Hay" (Israel. Founded in 1990) 
17. "Red Hands of the Defenders" (Ireland. Established in 1990) 
18. "Kurdish Workers Party" (Turkey. Founded in 1977) 
19. "Lashker-e Tayba" (Pakistan. Established in 1989) 
20. "The Volunteer Force" (Ireland. Established in 1969) 
21. "Mujahidin-e khalg" (Iran. Established in 1965) 
22. "Palestinian Popular Liberation Front" (Palestine. Established in 1968) 
23. "Palestinian General Headquarter" (Palestine. Established in 1967) 
24. "United Revolutionary Front" (Serra-Leon. Established in 1991) 
25. "Columbian Self Defense Force" (Columbia. Established in 1997) 
26. "PAGAD" (Afina. Established in 1966) 
27. "Palestinian Liberation Front" (Palestine. Established in 1977) 
28. "Tupaka Amaru Revolutionary Movement" (Peru. Established in 1984) 
29. "Columbian Armed Forces" (Columbia. Established in 1964) 
30. "November 17" (Greece. Established in 1975) 
31. "Sendero Luminoso" (Peru. Established in 1970) 
32. "Tamil-ilama" (Sri Lanka. Established in 1972) 
33. "Revolutionary Council" (Palestine. Established in 1973) 
34. "Front" (Turkey. Established in 1978) 
35. "Hamas" (Palestine. Established in 1987) 
36. "Haraket-e ul-mujahidin" (Pakistan. Established in 1980) 
37. "Hizbullah" (Lebanan. Established in 1981) 
38. "ELA" (Afghanistan. Established in 1974) 
39. "ETA" (Spain. Established in 1959) 
40. "Japan Red Army" (Japan. Established in 1969) 
41. "Aum Sinrikio" (Japan. Established in 1987) 
42. "Al-Jihad" (Egypt. Established in 1970) 
43. "New Peoples Army" (Phillipine. Established in 1969) 
 
NUCLEAR COOPERATION 
 
Armenia is a country, which possesses mass destruction arms 
206 
 
 
There is  serious nuclear confrontation between several Moslem countries 
and the NATO-member countries that are interested in fuel fields and especially in 
Azerbaijan oil. The "aid" of RF and China to Moslem countries makes the situation 
more serious. The testing of ballistic missile "SS-25" belonging to Russia (October 
2000, September 2001) with "Redut" code in the Plesechk territory (Western 
Alaska, Camchatca peninsula), which ended in destruction of the defined "target", 
gave the interesting results. 
It turned out that the object, new Russian missile destroyed as a "target" was 
an American decoration... 
 
Missiles directed to Israel 
 
The earth has been going through the big and endless excitement since the 
beginning of the century. One of the reasons is the selling, carrying of mass 
destruction arms, their taking to black markets by stealing and also eliminating all 
prevents in including the arms to "strategic programs" of terrorist groups, as well 
increasing the out-of-control zones in number. According to our investigations, 
various new powered nuclear warheaded 10 missiles were directed only to Israel 
direction. The possibility that 3 of them can be used becomes true day-by day. 
Each of the missiles, which radius is from 45 miles up to 1700 miles has its own 
strategic target. But radiuses and targets are not stable, it constantly changes and 
increases. 
The report on "Modern Missile technology and the end of XX century" of 
International Strategical Investigation Institute in London says: "There is a serious 
missile potential in Libya, Iran, Iraq, Syria, Afghanistan, North Korea, Saudi 
Arabia, Israel. Libya shakes all NATO-member countries that are interested in 
world oil (as well as Baki oil-R.N.) with its nuclear, chemical, and bacteriological 
weapons. A chemical plant is built in Tarkhun city of Libya (in 35 miles from 
Tripoli). 
During our investigations, we also gained information that Palestinian 
Arabs will use nuclear warheaded weapons in the military battles against Israel. Or 
the specialists of RF have proposed the projects in building RLS of 300 Mq Vt 
power in Iran territory. It was estimated as a step to save from missiles supposed to 
be shot by foreign countries to the region. On the other hand, the plans of the attack 
by Russians and Armenians to Azerbaijan economic infrastructures through DK 
(Dagliq Karabakh) territory are also being drawn. A reasonable ground has been 
created for the war against the computers in Azerbaijan infrastructures, mainly in 
bank systems, military centers...in oil companies. 
207 
 
 
"Libya" missiles 
 
The intelligence service of NATO informs that Libya will possibly produce 
nuclear, chemical and bacteriological warheaded ballistic missiles in 2006. A new 
model of this missile (Arabs call it "Libya") which radius is 3000 km and covers all 
NATO-member countries, including Spain territory is being made. A part of Libya 
missiles is directed to military air force bases of the USA in Spain territory. These 
missiles can destroy HHQ base in Torrehon under Madrid, Saraqose HHQ base 
that is in the 400 km north from the capital, HDQ base in Moraneda, south of the 
country. 
Libya purchases a part of missiles directed to NATO-member countries -
"SS-21" and "SKADV", also necessary nuclear equipment and materials from CIS-
member countries - Ukraine, Belorussia, Armenia (Erevan has already sent its 
representative to Tripoli for this purpose. The negotiations will be on nuclear 
materials. We are carrying additional researches) 
According to the nuclear agreement signed between Ukraine and Libya on 
May 16 last year, Minsk is to provide the sale of ballistic missiles to Tripoli in the 
amount of $ 50 mln. 
Libya concluded an agreement with Belorussia in the amount of $380 mln. 
on discovering nuclear materials, building new uranium plant, training a group that 
will modernize old missile systems. 
And for carrying all this, Iran territory is chosen as the least dangerous 
route. On the other hand, as Iran plays a role of bridge, it provided the sale of a part 
of missiles (on November 2000) "Al-Fateh" (radius 95) which projected by its own 
AF in 1993 and also tested, to Libya. 
 
Baki oil and modern missiles 
 
The instigation of oil disputes in Caspian, breakage of relations between 
countries (Ashgabad-Baki), mutual notes, threat of war... putting religious 
establishments artificially in confrontation with communities...all this affects 
Azerbaijan oil strategy and national security issues. There is a struggle for oil, for 
division of Caspian Sea, for split of religious establishments. 
But those, who invaded Azerbaijan under the excuse of oil-the oil dealers, 
who void the moral values of the nation, who humiliate its customs and traditions, 
understands that this obstacle, i.e. Iran is also a state that possesses ballistic 
missiles as "Shahab-4" and "Shahab-5". There is no analogy to these missiles in the 
whole world. 
208 
 
Moscow and Tehran factors still keep being "a fear syndrome" in inner and 
foreign strategy of Azerbaijan. The danger becomes true by joining Erevan and 
Ashgabad to this line. 
It is possible that Moscow and Ashgabad will sue Baki to International 
Court on one of these days, because of disputable oil fields. It should be thought of, 
the contradiction should be solved. 
On the other hand, division of the Caspian Sea into sectors satisfies 
Ashgabad and Tehran that direct their nuclear technologies towards Azerbaijan 
water and ground territories. Iran carries out its policy based on the agreement 
signed in 1921. 
As to the new division, Azerbaijan sector of Caspian Sea makes 78.000 
km2, Turkmenistan sector-79.000 km2, Khazahkstan-113.000 km2, RF-64.000 
km2, and Islamic Republic of Iran-44.000 km2. 
The expert Mr. Robert Einhorn of the USA on military intelligence reports: 
"Russia assists Iran in getting far-ranged missiles potential. Russia also gives to 
Iran the technology of intercontinental SS-4 ballistic missiles." 
The Senator Ted Cocren concretes the addresses: "The technology of 
nuclear weapons, as well as ballistic missiles is transferred from Russia to Iran, 
Iraq, India..." 
On the other hand, Iran has tested new powered engines of "SS 4" 
strategical missiles on the basis of confidential "scenario" of "Shehid Hemat" 
industry group in Caspian line. And, this time, the scientists of "Silenko" group of 
confidential "IMPATX" private firm, which is attached to scientific-research 
Institute in Minsk that is engaged with nuclear problems, and the scientists of 
"Irannato state industrial aircraft corporation" assist the collaborators of industrial 
group, and also others (Iran) assist the "Basco" International Company that 
organizes.... 
 
Pekin-Tehran-Yerevan-Moscow "quartet" 
 
The total cost of Iran's military agreement including 2000-2005 is $7 
billion. One of the items of these agreements, article 8 consists of Moscow's 
nuclear assistance to Tehran, (for religous purposes). Moscow renders this 
assistance easily through the third territory. According to our investigations, this 
territory is Karabakh, its border areas with Iran. The Armenians called the 
occupied Azerbaijan, territories a transit zone or base for Russians. In this zone 
Armenians in Karabakh have fulfilled easily the tasks of the Russians. 
209 
 
We can't understand for what purposes Armenia has allocated 280 tons of 
preparations paralysing nerve system, viruses prohibited and not ending ... also 
computers controlling missiles. 
According to our investigations, Pekin has given to Tehran a protection 
system from most modern missiles. This system "Cey-UAY-14" was constructed 
for Armenia's FG. On July (2001). This protection system (in Turkey direction) 
was constructed by Tehran specialists themselves (?). 
The USA diplomat Lenn Devis reminds: "...It's a danger. We must feel the 
danger covering oil companies in the Caspian region and separate diplomatic 
corps"... According to our investigations, China's relations with Armenia extended 
after "Tayvan affair" and this stage was called a new stage. 
RF, CPR and Iran's role in changing Armenia's military potential is a 
strategical step. And Yerevan's military assistance to Beirut "patriots" (against 
Israel) is interesting. Thus it became clear that Yerevan is not only a good base for 
nuclear technology carried from the RF to Iran, and also main bridge of 
ammunition assistance rendered from Tehran to Beirut. 
Armenia regarding China defended "United and Great China" principle, 
called Tayvan being a part of it "historical right". 
According to our investigations, in the former times, i.e. in 1990-94 there 
were a lot of men of Armenian nationality in microbiology, physics, semi-
conductor, Quantum physics and oil-chemical processes centres, scientific-research 
laboratories of AS of Azerbaijan. For instance, Robert Aslanovich (?) Ovanesyan 
occupied with electro-physics and electrophysical problems of energy in the 
Institute of Physics carried out scientific researches in Dubna nuclear centre till 
1996, in Bushir APS since 1997. I'd like to show you another fact. In 1992 
Babayan Sarvar (probably) Server Bagramovich, the collaborator of Mathematics 
and Mechanics Institute solemnly defended a thesis (in technology) field ... went to 
Yerevan after he got academic degree and now carries out his researches on 
nuclear technology there. While at that time those whose scientific work or defense 
of thesis were unfinished or who were prevented to carry out scientific researches 
left or were  removed from Oil  Chemical  Processes Institute,   Physiology  
Institute,   Molecular and  Biology  Institute, Cybernetics Institute ... on various 
pretexts. Generally 28 specialists (directly occupied with nuclear technology), who 
were occupied with Quantum physics, mathematics and mechanics, cybernetics ... 
i.e. directly nuclear researches, gained scientific achievements in this field left Az. 
Unfortunately, according to the inform, 2 of them work with doctor S.Ter-
Avestesyan's group in "Ashtarak-2" (Institute of Physical Researches) (?). 
On June 4,1999 at the meeting of the heads of Yerevan and Tehran security 
forces (this meeting is shortly called "Khudaferin meeting") Iran's "ETTELAAT" 
210 
 
leaders (a special service organ) demanded from their colleagues the list of those of 
Armenian nationality working in former times in AS of Azerbaijan, its institutes 
(especially, in physics, chemistry, math, field). They discussed there Azerbaijan's 
project bureaus occupied with nuclear physics, cybernetics, special mathematical 
calculations, the last achievements of "Crystal" metal bureau on corrosion, 
researches on Genetics and selection, scientific work on chemistry and 
microbiology. At the result they decided that Yerevan Security Service would work 
out "special program" in order to extend the relations in this field by the half of 
2002. 
36 men of Armenian nationality work in Iran special service organs (only in 
Ardabil, Tabriz, Astara, Parsabag) (2 of them work in military counter intelligence 
agencies, 9 in "Ettelaat", 8 in military intelligence, 8 in "confidential information 
and news bureaus" of Islamic propaganda centres). 
Iran began to carry out scientific researches on a new nuclear engine "The 
World". 
(After Ayatulla Khamineyi's address to security forces) on June 16, 2001. It 
was planned to carry out these researches on this engine about 45 km away from 
the capital (northern direction) in SRC in Karaj territory. Scientists carrying out 
scientific nuclear researches on nuclear prospecting in Byelorussia were invited. At 
the result an agreement of 48 million cost was signed between Minsk - Tehran in 
this direction (August II, 2001) Also it was determined that a new nuclear engine 
would work with uranium-235. This project was investigated for military purposes 
and its power was 40 Mg Vt. It was possible to get or produce plutonium by 
scientific - research laboratory during test period of this engine, i.e. in its working 
hours. 
On August 19 of that year the members "Special Researches group" formed 
on Sep. 28, 2000 in Armenia's AF submitted their plans. Exactly "military-
strategical programs" for discussion in security council. 
The program suggested that Yerevan (according to our investigations) (the 
first nuclear weapon will be applied against Israel in Near East zone. Tel-Aviv 
would be aware that this attack will be carried on by Palestine Arabian groupings, 
"Jerusalem's power" radical proislamists. Besides this Tehran would better to 
review its "strategical, national security concept" for Tel-Aviv remaining as capital 
at least. Because on March 4, 2001 "International United Islamic Security System" 
against Israel was worked out) had to sign new agreements on scientific researches 
in military and also military-industrial field with Moscow, China, Tehran, Northern 
Korea, Lebanon, Syria, Irak, Brazl (?). 
If it is possible Yerevan will do a lot supported by these regions that have 
nuclear potential and war arsenal, comprehensive terror schools. This is its result 
211 
 
that today there're shippers "Barret M81-A1" and "Barret M 82 A1" with nuclear 
warhead and caliber of 50 mm, mines against tanks with chemical - toxic 
components (these mines were tested in Khojali), and round bullets with the 
compound of bacteriological weapons" ... artillery shells with nuclear warheads in 
Armenia's AF. Moreover, Construction of a new oil refining plant in Yerevan is 
put forward since August, 2002 (?). 
The According to the information we got, already 60 men known with their 
nuclear researches scientific researches in atom bomb field were "recruited" with 
high salary from Kazakhystan, Azerbaijan., RF, Byelorussia, Ukraine, 
Armenia...by India, Pakistan, Irak, Iran and Brazil, Northern Korea, China. 
On Feb, 2000 an agreement was signed among Armenia's "Razdanmash" 
Iran's "scientific-technical researches Centre" and Switzerland's "Alshneks-Asada" 
in Guge city dealing in technological equipments and here. Tehran signed an 
agreement of $210 million cost with Yerevan, Switzerland - an agreement of $347 
million with Tehran. It means "serious and dangerous" weapons, nuclear materials. 
It includes "electromagnet" installations and mechanisms in splitting isotopes. 
It realizes its plan on construction of "electromagnet separators" in Ahvaz 
and Isphahan with assistance of RF and Byelorussia. At the result program 
"Nuclear program and strategic researches of Iran Islamic Republic for 2001-2005" 
was worked out in Iran. In Armenia this program is called so: "Special projects in 
nuclear researches field" (for 2002-2005)... 
 
SANCTION TO THE ARMENIAN COMPANIES  
NUCLEAR TECHNOLOGY IN KARABAG 
 
According to the investigation on November 14, 2001 at 12.30 o'clock by 
Yerevan time on the third floor of the NAS in Armenia, a meeting was illegally 
build with the participations of one group of deputies-the members of the 
legislation organ of "Taliban" government functioning out of Afghanistan. The 
financial expenses were paid by "Yerevan-Baku" invested by a businessman 
Mahammad Nabi building a medicine factory in Yerevan. Twelve of "Taliban" 
deputies took part in the meeting (Iran, Mashad radio, 2001. XI-15 at 21.45 
o'clock) 
The name of this factory registered as "Taliban" in the official documents of 
the Cabinet of Ministers of Armenia on March 19, 2001 was called "Afghan 
factory", too. According to another information, Mahammad Bagiri gave 410 
million dollars to the industrial complex "Shahid Bagiri" in Tehran as assistance. 
According to our investigations, 80 tons of "Pesticides" produced in Chine 
were carried to that "Afghan factory" built in the east of Yerevan by the line of 
212 
 
"Pirimyan group" known as the coordination center of businessmen in Iran. As to 
the problem of which medicine preparation is made from this material, the scientist 
and microbiologists of the Toxigology Institute in Armenia will help to the factory. 
Some of them have already signed a treaty with the factory. Mahammad Nabi who 
is Afghan merchant by his nationality has pulled one part of his investment to the 
"Razdanmash" industrial complex. A contract has been signed on this problem in 
the city of Razdan. (2001. IX-21) 
According to the information, 23 percent of Armenia state budget income 
come from narco-business smuggling, but 11 percent of it come from arms and 
nuclear technology speculation of the terrorist groups organize in the settlement 
which are out of control and carry illegal words in the occupied territory of 
Karabag. This information was written to the former Procurator-General of the 
Russian Federation Yuri Surkatov by Aleksandr Prokopenko, a businessman who 
had been occupied with the speculation of arms and both interrogated after words. 
(Y Surkatov's interview on A. Prokopenko's case: "SR" newspaper. 2000.XII-11). 
"RRR" Armenian-Russian businessmen's joint firm being occupied directly 
with smuggling problems was the first center that have its own strategical 
investigation center and 13 scientists, being busy with the nuclear technology, 
Quantum physics, mathematical calculation worked in this center. Today that 
center has succeeded in placing its headquarters' in one of the motor infantry 
regiment of the military units in the territory of Khankandi. 
During our investigation we learnt the routes of nuclear technology carried 
to Armenia, as well as to Karabag, occupied by Armenian terrorist and in 
consequence, turned out the territory out of control, the materials considered very 
important in rocket industry and military ammunitions: 
-Kamenka (RF-Penza)-Gumru(Armenia)-Khankandi(Up.K) 
("AN -124") airliner.2000. VI-23) 
-Mozdok (RF)-Yerevan(Armenia)-Khankandi (Up.K) 
("IL-76" airliner. 2001. III-14) 
-Novorossiisk through Batumi, (by "General Ryabikov" ship) 
("AN-12") airliner. 2001. VII-1) 
-The city of Aktubinks. ("Jasmin" airport-Yerevan ("Zvartnos" airport) 
("IL-76" airliner.2001. II-3) 
 
Missile with nuclear warhead In Armenia 
 
Note: Nuclear technology materials and weapons are carried to "Jusmin" 
airport from Ouisk, Volgograd, Irkutsk, Sverdlovsk, Perm, Dubna, Arkhangelsk, 
Saintpeterburk. According to the information on Feburuary in 14, 2002. The 
213 
 
members of the "Shahid Bagiri" military-industrial group organized a joint-
company Jasmin Dovshantapa" in the territory of the "Jasmin" airport. As it is 
informed, this company is of special strategic importance in test-flights and 
designing of (Shahab" and "Yer-Yer" missile which catches attention in Iran's 
nuclear programme. 
According to our investigation, Russian Federation has found its most 
profitable market of the nuclear technology in the territory of Armenia and in the 
settlements of the occupied Karabakh. 
For example, this work was organized incoherently till the first part of 2001, 
but from the December 15, 2001 it was reorganized strictly according to the plan. 
Because at that day the new Board of Directors of the "Sukhoy" military industrial 
complex was elected in Moscow on the special instructions of "The Kremlin". 
Mikhail Pogosyan was elected to this board and  industrial complex. I'd  like to 
remind that "Sukhoy" military-industrial complex is very important, strategic 
center, well known in the world and this center is one of the main objects being 
occupied with nuclear technology. Anton Danilyan was elected to the economic 
office of the complex. Another member of it was Denis Manturyan, the chairman 
of the State Investment Company of the Russian Federation. Armenians positions 
in the military-industrial complex being engaged in the Russian Federation's rocket 
technology haven't got decorative character. Till 2003-2005 years rocket tech-
nology, bombing airplanes, fighters which cost $17 billion will be exported to 
some countries of the world (Iran, Irag, Yemen, Egypt, Algeria,  Libia, China) 
From this military-industrial complex and Armenian Anton Danilyan will be at the 
head of this $17 billion. 
According to our investigations, 31 armenian scientists and specialists 
already work at the Novosibirsk, Irkutsk and Komsomolsk-Amur centers of the 
"Sukhoy" military-industrial complex. (information for April 12, 2002). It must be 
noted that "Krasnopol" projectile with nuclear head is produced there and 180 of 
them was transported to Armenia on May 26, 2001. On the June 21, 59 of these 
projectiles were sold to one of military units around Tabriz with the line of 
"SANAM" (Iran) military-industrial complex stopped its activity in appearance (?). 
But Armenian politologist Gayane Sarmakeshyan persisted: "... Armenia is 
surrounded by brutal enemies. Yes they are Turkey and Azerbaijan. Its very 
serious. At the same time we have got two mighty and big allies-Russia and Iran 
being ready to support us, being interested in the stability and prosperity of 
Armenia ..." ("Artakh" newspaper, 2002, II-25 reprinted). 
 
 
 
214 
 
Armenian companies being busy with nuclear technology 
 
According to the information 86 specialist found jobs in the military 
industrial complex es of Iran. "In the category of high salary 42 of them work at 
the secret military-industrial complex belonging to "Sepah-e   Pastaran".   The  
armenian   scientist Ovanes Sadaryan (physics), Vartan Orabelyan (Quantum 
physics), Semyon Shahnazarovich (mechanics-mathematics), Garik Avakyan 
(theotical physics), Farhad Simonyan (lazer physics) who are engaged in rocket 
technology work at the Karaj military-industrial complex (approximately 45 km 
away from Tehran). 
According our investigations the companies "Arshavir", "Sak-Mag metals", 
"Vartanial", "Razdanmash", "Adamand" acting in the territory of Armenia and as 
well as in the settlements of the occupied Karabakh known as "black markets" for 
their direct transportation of the materials in the nuclear technology strategic 
precious metals and equipments as well as uranium-238 and platinum to the third 
states. As it is informed, each of these companies has separately got ties with the 
center of the nuclear researches, the Physics institutes, with plants producing 
computer and electronic equipment telecommunication centers of the Russian 
Federation, Byelorussia, the Ukraine, Moldovia, Brazilia, Pakistan, the People's 
Republic of China, Iran, Irag and South Korea. For example "Adamand "company 
Avakyan, Bagdasaryan, Akopyan trio succeeded in creating direct business ties 
with the Samara branch of the Institute of Physics named after Zebedev in RF 
(personaly with professor V.Iposhin, address-Samara, Novo-Sadovaya street 221), 
the institute of Atom-Molecular Physics in Byelorussia (personally with Professor 
A.Voynovichi's group. Adress: Minsk Avenue, Ef.Skorin street 70 ), the institute 
of Lazer Physics in Saint-P-Peterburg (personally doctor N.Gryaznov. Adress: 
Saint-Peterburg. Stockborker line 12.) 
The "Adamand" company takes part in importing military ammunition and 
food for Armenia according to the NATO's standards. In fact the "Adamand" 
company is registered in official documents as the company acting in the 
transportation of electronic equipments to the country and buying and selling of 
them. According to another information this company belongs to Ashot Egiazayan-
the chief of the Financial and Economic office in Armenia. 
There is a special laboratory carrying scientific researches on the flight 
mechanism's of rockets in the "Razdanmash" company. The scientists of the 
Yerevan Institute of Physics in Armenia, doctor Sharabyan, doctor Ogancanyan, 
doctor Stepanyan who are engaged in with the nuclear problems work at this 
laboratory. According to the information, On December 14, 2001 the RF's 
outstanding academician on the field of mechanics-mathematics and researcher on 
215 
 
space and defense problems Vladimir Mikhaylovich Titov's and professor Igor 
Konstantinovich Khyalov's who takes an active part in the investigation of cosmic 
informations and in the preparation of anti-missile defense, one day visit to 
"Razdanmash" causes too much interest. The problem on the territory of 
"Razdanmash" and its defence and insuring its security was discussed at the 
Armenia's Security Council held on the December 17, 2001. 
On December 26, 2001 The "Razdanmash" company signed a contract with 
Iran's "Dorion-Dizelz Iran" (Tabriz) industrial establishment desingnin diesel 
motors and that will begin producing engines meting international standards in 
future in the years of 2003-2004. Though it is strange, this contract become valid in 
the occupied territory of Azerbaijan, in Khankandi, was signed by Iran side, on 
Migran Pirimyan, the chairman of the economic-political commission of the 
Armenian diocese in Tehran with Artsakh (Khankandi), Norayr Shahnazaryan, the 
leader of the Armenian businessmen Union in Tehran and economist Anushavan 
Danilyan. (See: At this time in Yerevan there were talks on the relationship 
between the company "Vartanial" and the concern "Semens" functioning in the 
town of Khanau of Germany. (in the direction of the south, it is situated 30 km 
away from Franfurt-Mayn) The town of Khanau is called as "Atom and nuclear 
pollutions" in the pages of German press. The "Simens" concern works in the 
secret and security principles. 
Strategic investigations on the preparation of high combustible uranium, 
platinum for nuclear energy, engines and other nuclear technology are carried here. 
According to our investigations, on January 11, 2002 Sergo Tumanyan one 
of the responsible officials of "Vartanial" company met with the leaders of the 
"Simens" concern in the town of Kanai. And on the 14th of January Armenian S. 
Tumanyan visited "Oyrokot" Russian-German company in Bremen. As a result, on 
January 23, 2002 "Simens" concern's officials were seen in Khankandi (occupied 
Azerbaijani territory). The Germans interrupted the talks on the problem of the 
opening of the branch in the territory. Nobody could guarantee the security of the 
branch which will be opened there as the territory is out of control. 
On March 9, 2002 "Sak-Maq metalz", one of the leading companies in 
Yerevan signed a joint contract "On Cooperation" with Moldova's "Renan" 
company (Kishinyov).  Unlike "Simens",  "Renan" company decided to open its 
branches in Khankandi and Lachin. Till that time "Renan" company had signed a 
contract with the same-called company "Ayntav", regional social-political 
organization created by kurds in Tambov region (2002.II-21).We should note that 
this company was registered by the Ministry of Justice of the Russian Federation 
on July 22, 1997. 
216 
 
As to Renan company a Russian officer colonel Viktor Buta noted in the 
newspaper of "Evenimentul Ziley" published in Romania that company was busy 
with carrying weapons by "IL-18" airplane to "Taliban" people in the years of 
1999-2000. (March 17, 2002. page 2). 
"Renan" company has got tight ties with P.Haji-professor of the physics-
mathematics faculty of the University named after T. Shevechonko in Moldavia 
and his scientific-research laboratory was financed by the company. As to 
professors P. Haci, according to the information he took part in the meeting 
concerning with the theoretical nuclear number physics at the "Daneshgah-e 
Shahid Jamaran" institute of Physics-Mathematics in Ahvaz (Iran). 
According to our investigation, from April 2, 2002 the branches of the 
"Nelk", "Moscow", "AO-Terna SB" companies of RF were decided to open in 
Armenia and the occupied territory of Karabakh (in Khankandi, in Zangilan) and 
till the end of 2003, widening of this work which have strategic significance was 
decided. As it is informed, "Nelk" company (Moscow). 
a) Establishes security system from information (in artificial rockets, in 
bombing aircraft) 
b) Secret shooting of the strategic objects from space. It is busy with the 
installations of constructions. 
c) Creates the conducting mechanism in rocket technology. "TERNA-SB" 
company is engaged in and air-conditioner and ventillation problems in reactive 
airplanes. 
According to our investigation, in September (from 19 to 13) 2002 the 
Siberian branch of the Lazer Physics Institute of the AS in the Russian Federation 
will hold an international symposium on "Lazer in military industry and in 
science". As it is informed the scientist from Moldava, Armenia, Iran, Lebanon, 
China, Byelorussia, the Ukrine have received invitation to participate at the 7th 
international symposium which will be held in the campus of the academy in New 
Siberia. According to the information at this symposium Yerevan will invite the 
scientist from Iran, The Lebanan, China to participate in the scientific-research 
centers of the country. Because these strategic ties in nuclear and lazer technology 
remain to be the structure of Armenian's national security. 
 
Terrorist organizations in Karabag 
 
According to our investigation, the social-political processes at the 
settlements of the Karabakh occupied by Armenians and remained out of control 
substitute, one-another. As a result one diplomatic negotiation, diplomatic power 
or political consultation are not able to stabilize this region. As desired chance and 
217 
 
momental hope remain just as a hope. As a result from the 19th April to the 21 st 
of April, 2002 a conference called "Ten years without Shaumyan" was held. (When 
Armenians mention Shaumyan, they mean present Goranboy) Great Armenia" 
ideologists came to this conference from Iran, RF, Lebanon, Syria, USA, France. 
Acording to the logic Armenia's strategic-military plan concerning with 
Azerbaijan hasn't finished yet. Because talks, meetings, diplomatic contracts, 
correspondence between the sides take away not only the heroism of nation but 
also its carefulness. 
Separate terrorist groups and detachments, whose names have already been 
mentioned and providing quite security of the companies playing the role of the 
market for the 3rd country (in the field of nuclear technology-R.N) have already 
been seen in Armenia and in the occupied territory of Karabakh. 
According to our investigations, some of these detachments were acted 
together in the commited crimes with local Armenians in the territory of the 
Karabakh between 1992-1994 years. For example, let's look at the terrorist group 
"Returned heroes". As Armenian headed from Beyrut Orlik Ter-Grigoryants 
Andrianovich is at the head of this detachment taking part in Agdam (1,094 kv. 
km) in July 23, 1993. 
Background: He was born in Beyrut 1962. From May 1, 1992 he has been 
taking part in terror acts in the Karabakh. Orlik, being a doctor by profession 
fought in Shusha with a paid group of 17 persons. At that time he killed four 
Azerbaijani having been in Shusha prison. According to another information, this 
detachment headed by Orlik was registered in Armenian. Justice Ministry on 
September 12, 1992. As a charity, assisting organization. 
 
FINANCIAL SOURCES: 
 
a) The income obtained from the trafficking, buying and selling of 
narcotic by the way of smuggling. 
b) The income from the transportation of the nuclear technology to the 3rd 
country from the territory of the Karabakh. 
The headquarters of the organization is in Lebanon. From April 9, 1993 
"Returned heroes" organization acted in Bashlibel settlement of Kalbajar region 
(1936 kv. km. territory). From January 10, 2002 this organization got this office 
both in Bashlibel and in Kalfali village of Shusha. (See: The "Zartunk" newspaper. 
1994 (Beyrut), "Ramgavar, the newspaper of Armenian party. July 13. page 2". 
Orlik's detachment returned, another: O. Allahverdiyan). 
"National Revival Organization" registered at the Karabakh and Armenia's 
Justice Ministry on June 17, 2001, also took an active part in occupying of Lachin 
218 
 
and Kalbajar. A sniper woman Armenian by nationality Elvira Galushyan is at the 
head of this organization whose anthem, flag and emblem were in blood. This 
woman, being a doctor by profession was the organizer of the first "Amputation 
room" in the Karabakh (Kalbajar). At Khojali tragedy "Elvira's group" with six 
persons took part in Killing and burning children. One of activity spheres of this 
woman is to demonstrate and spread the shot made in the Karabakh territory, in 
Arabian countries, Cyprus and Crece as the tragedy of Armenian nationality. 
According to the information, this organization has got its own zone for 
training. They learn the implementation rules of academic programs called Hamza 
the realization of terror acts, their organization and collecting information in this 
direction. "Advance" newspaper (2001, IV-8. page 2). Our investigations made 
clear that the Karabakh is in peace in appearance. In reality everyday new 
companies, detachments and groups come to this zone out of control. 
If we make it more precise our territories occupied by Armenians will be 
known as one of the nest of international terrorism in near future. 
 
NUCLEAR WASTES IN KARABAKH 
 
Usame bin Laden wants to gain nuclear knowhow through Armenian 
terrorists 
 
Searching for Uranium in Nakhchivan 
 
One of the games that joined to Internet network by the famous "NOVA 
LOGIS INS" computer firm of America, is the war scene of Armenia with 
Azerbaijan (from March 19 to May 21). By the end of this war, the scene where 
ballistic missiles with the word "Armenia targeted towards Azerbaijan is described 
Armenians call it "Astarjanyan Project" (Dr. Astarjanyan is a head of "Armenian-
kurdish" strategical research center, financed by Armenian lobby in Washington 
since 1985) For the preparation of this abnormal project, Californian armenians 
transferred 386000 dollars to "Stepanovan" fund (then it was called "Hayastan") on 
September 19 of last year. That year at the meeting, held on September 26, at the 
Institute of physics in Yerevan, professor Caren Egiyan raised a problem that the 
scene in USA computers should be realised. C. Egiyan revealed such an issue that 
for vitalization (it is his words) of the ballistic missiles with the word "Armenia", it 
is possible to search for uranium in Nakhichivan... (?) 
It is also known that the first search of Armenia with Iran (Araz expedition) 
for uranium in the territory of Nakhchivan in March of 1985 remained unfinished. 
219 
 
Because Arshak Tiqranov Qachikyan, the student of the faculty of physics of 
Yerevan State University and Ahmedziya Mehtipur, the teacher of the Institute of 
Theoretical Physics and Mathematics in Tehran died of unknown skin desease. 
From the doctor's conclusion, it turns out that both of them died of radiation. At the 
result, on March 28, 1985 "Araz expedition" stopped its work and returned. But in 
the strategical map of Armenian Ministry of Defence and also in the Military 
intelligence Plan of Iran ("Senah-e Pastaran" corps), Nakhchivan is circuled as an 
uranium source. 
After fifteen years of the activity of expedition, i. e. in December of 2000 
Rafig Damirchiyan (scientist) who participated in "Araz" expedition as a student 
made a speech in nuclear Physics and Scientific Research Center named after 
D.V.Skobeltsin attached to Moscow State University. (21 December 2000. Adress: 
RF, Moscow, "Vorobyevi qori" at 16.00 by Moscow time). He states that allegedly 
there is uranium in the territory of Nakhchivan which is a part of "Great Armenia" 
(?). At the end of December of that year in "nuclear commentary" of 42 pages 
prepared for Russian Federation Security Service the facts and figures of doctor 
Damirchiyan and his view on "Nakhchivan's being the territory of Armenia" found 
their reflection. On February 14, 2001 a document on information exchange "in 
connection with nuclear information" between Intelligence Office of Russian 
Federation Federal Investigation Service and Armenian Security Service was 
signed. 
On March 13, 2001 R. Damirchiyan who specialized on nuclear physics 
appeared in "Iranian community on scientific research progres to CIS countries" 
located in the building № 1/6 Shahid Akbari street in the North of Tehran. On 
March 19 of that year he makes speech in "Scientific and Technological 
University" of Tehran and says that each country should think seriously on nuclear 
wastes in their territory, their protection and sale (?). It is strange that 
R.Damirchiyan advises the "host" countries' scientist and researchers engaged in 
nuclear technology to give preference to building the great part of storehouses for 
protection of nuclear wastes in subtropical zones and ones with little mild climate. 
According to him the reactionary ability of nuclear wastes reduces twice in 
subtropical condition. 
 
Nuclear Wastes are Spilt into Araz and Kur Rivers 
 
The direction in the offer of Armenian scientists is clear. Pointing the 
provinces of Western Azerbaijan to his Iranian colleagues, he hints that Armenia 
will assist in developing the projects. But nuclear wastes being left in open air or 
directed to the rivers have "water turbidding ability". That is nuclear wastes 
220 
 
strongly affect evoparation in any riverbed they fall. For instance, according to he 
estimates in Araz river water capacity was 36% in 1999 - 2000 years. At the result 
8 kinds of fish exterminated. Instead extict birds with sharp beak and claw have 
appeared in the banks of the rivers. Or at the result of spilting wastes with uranium 
and tungsten to Kur river from the military units belonging to Russian Federation 
in Georgia, the water capacity of the river reduced to 40%. Instead of 15.7 billion 
cube metre, 9.3 billion cube metre water have in Mingachevir water reservour. The 
amount of toxic substances in the waters of the Caspian Sea has increased 1.5 
times. It is an unprecedentable problem in the last 10 years and the weight of 
nuclear wastes causes all these calamities. 
On the bases of views and ideas of R.Damirchiyan, Armenian government 
worked out a document called "Strategical project" (?) on April 10, 2002 and on 
the basis of it stood the problem of removing the nuclear wastes of Atomic Power 
Station and the toxic remains of scientific research centres of Yerevan engaged in 
nuclear physics from the settlements - from "Green Stripes" adopted on July 2 of 
1990 -1992 (this project is usually connected with APS of the country and nuclear 
substances), buring the nuclear wastes in Zod (East Armenia), Qajaran (West 
Armenia), Tatel (South Armenia), Tekh (East Armenia) settlements was planned 
and USA side alloted $300 thousand aid (For not the nuclear wastes to be stealed, 
carried away and sold). But on October 30, 1993 Armenian Security Council made 
amendment in this project itself. After occupation of Azerbaijan lands Yerevan 
changed "nuclear geography". This time Gubadli, Zangilan, Jabrayil, Fizuli zones 
were selected... More correctly, according to doctor Damirchiyan's project... there 
is much supposition on Azerbaijan's being surrounded with nuclear wastes from 
our border with Iran, as well as from our occupied territories. 
 
Weapons Made of Uranium 
 
We must remind that, new projects are planned in the direction of producing 
ammunition made of uranium and mixed ones in the munition plant having already 
been put into operation, more accurately, reconstructed. Generally, what is the 
ammunition of Armenians, made of uranium? We must note that the amount of 
natural uranium is more in the entrail than silver or mercury. Each ton of granite 
rock contains 25 gramme of mixed uranium. It consists of two uranium isotope: a) 
I -238 (99, 286) b) I -235 (0.72%). 
The last isotope is used in atomic bombs as an explosive substance. This is 
the most dangerous weapon of the present times. It keeps up with chemical and 
bacteriological weapons, even with Reontgen ray. United uranium isotope I-238 is 
alora radioactive metal, its thikness is 18.7 g. sm cube. It remains 4 billion 510 
221 
 
million years in half extinct condition. It is a brief explanation, an explanation 
without dictionary, which we got during our investigation. 
 
Serbians Fighting in Upper Karabakh 
 
According to our investigations bureaus regulating narcobusiness, arms 
trade and nuclear carriers are functioning in the territory of Karabakh. In 1993 
Koso Mitrovich (Kucheva city), Serbian by nationality, who was fighting within 
"Tigran" ("Protigrans") terror organization (coming from Vardenis training camp) 
i. e. in the international military wing, became the head of the group regulating 
arms trade in the territory. According to the information an officer Koso Mitrovich 
is serving today in Khankendi army under the name of Robert Pashayan. From our 
investigation it becomes clear that Koso Mitrovich assisted to bring mines, 
submachine guns of "M -16" seria with trade marks of USA military industrial 
complexes, clothes belonging to NATO army to the territory of Karabakh. At the 
result in August of 1993, 185 "M -16" produced in America were brought with the 
way of smuggling to Karabakh to defend the puppet government. An officer Koso 
Mitrovich highlights that Georgian and Iran territories are more open to carry these 
products. 
Serbian Koso Mitrovich in his book "I Stayed in Artsakh" (?) writes: "...We 
came to Karabakh from Yugoslavia. We were eleven. Five were killed: Captain 
Slobodan Vukovich (Shabats city), Antal Ivashevich (Stremska city), Milosh 
Loznich (Mladenovats city), Petro Kikin (Kuchevo city), Levtin Boykovich 
(Brlojnik city). They were killed. But I survived. I stayed in Karabakh. To live and 
die..." (Khankendi, "Artsakh". - 1996. p. 26. Editor: G. Petrosyan - colonel of 
Defence Ministry). K. Mitrovich then goes on: "...We changed our fighting and 
battle tactics every day. We didn't suffer from the lack of ammunition, weapon and 
cloths. The state was unaware of aids we gat through Iran and Georgia. "ASALA", 
the military force (?) of Armenians did it more quickly. "ASALA" managed to 
create illegally its bureaus in Iran, as well as in the territory of Georgia, "Akopyan" 
international company was assisting it…" 
 
"Nuclear Bureau" in Razdan 
 
According to the information we investigated, in Razdan city of Armenia 
(in the West shore of Sevan Lake) "Nuclear Bureau" has illegally been functioning 
since 1998. This "Secret Nuclear Bureau" is headed by an armenian, Huseyn 
Gaffur by name, living in Bagdad and who is financing the factory, producing 
medical preparations and which is situated in 35 km to the North-West from the 
222 
 
city. It is also known that Huseyn Gafur, chemist by speciality is a financial source 
of Islamic organization "Asbat al-ansar" which has very radical position against 
Israel. Instruction book of the organization "SD-ROME" is also the book of other 
radicals. On the 8th page of this book it says: "The organization is a combined one. 
Not only moslims, i.e. not only islamic people are united there. The people whose 
rights were violated, unite here and fight..." 
In other information it is said that among the islamic organization, it is the 
group: "Asbat al-ansar" that provides "Al-Kaida" (Usama bin Laden) with nuclear 
materials. On April 14 the local department of organization "Asbat al-ansar" 
published in Sudan a book called "Instruction... wisdom and human" for nuclear 
researchers working in "Al-Kaida". The book published in Arabic, pushtian and 
urdu languages has three authors: Hazirkhan Ahmad, a scientist from Pakistan, 
arabian Sheykh Jabbar Al-Zahir, armenian (Irak) Arakel Alanakyan. According to 
our investigation, Arakel Alanakyan graduated from the faculty of physics of 
Armenia State University. In 1990 he moved from Yerevan to Syria, then in 1995 
to Irak. He began to work in the group "Ter Grigoryan" heading one of the Bagdad 
military-industrial complex. 
 
Bin Laden's Second Front 
 
In the cover page of the book published for the "nuclear researchers" there 
are such words of Usama bin Laden:"...Everything for jihad". The 11th page of the 
book runs:"...We must write on our missiles, shells with uranium component only 
one sentence:" For jihad, for Islam..."Don't think that we shall install these 
weapons somewhere and direct to someone? No...we shall install all of this in the 
territory of America itself...We shall install them in Balkans...in the Middle 
Asia...We shall install these weapons in Georgian network to control 
Transcaucasia..." 
Only after it Usama bin Laden opened the second front in Balkans. He has 
radical stands in Kosovo, Metokhiyi, Makedonia, Southern Serbia, Albania, Bosnia 
and Hersogovina. Usama bin Laden, in reality, opened "the second front against 
Europe" in Balkans. He opened another front in Middle Asia, established 
"Georgian net" for Transcaucasia. He appointed egyptian Ahmad az-Zavahiri the 
head of "Balkan struggling Power" created in Balkans (his headquarter was opened 
in Tiran). 
The coordinator of "Al-Kaida" in Southern Serbia is Isfand Sardaryan, 
armenian by nationality who immigrated from Yerevan since 1992. He was drafted 
from Krasnodar in 1989-1991. 
 
223 
 
The Main Tasks of the Nuclear Terrorists 
 
It becomes clear from our investigations that Sheykh Ahmad az-Zavahiri 
was arrested in Dagestan when he was 18. He also met with members of "Muslim 
organization" which is establishing links with "MI-6" intelligence office and which 
differs with its radical character in London. Though the aim of this meeting 
(August, 2001) wasn't revealed, establishing relations with the immigrants from 
CIS countries was the main task. Usama bin Laden put two tasks before Abu 
Hamza Al Masri and Abu Koutadin, the leaders of "Muslim organization": 
1. Gathering materials on the ways of transporting nuclear technology and 
substances. 
2. Involving the scientists, analytics engaged in nuclear problems and 
researches, to the bureaus of "Al-Kaida". 
On August 12 (2001) the meeting of the armenian citizen Rudolf 
Ayvazkhanovich Manukyan, former worker of APS, doctor of physical sciences 
with Reda Huseyn, one of the leaders of "Muslim organization" was arranged. On 
August 14 he meets in Embassy of France in London with the collaborators of 
General Office of Foreign Security coming from Paris. 
On August 17 R.Manukyan was in training grounds laid for islamic people 
in "Fkisbern" and "Regents" parks of London. 
Though strange, but it is a fact. In this issues at least the USA CIO's attitude 
should have been revealed. Because the Intelligence should have been aware of the 
secret plans of Armenian scientist involved (with high salary) to work and of the 
laboratories established in "Fkisbern" park and given necessary revelations on it. It 
is also known that in September 2001, Amot Odabekyan(1962) and Levon 
Soomovich Sitafyan, the graduates of the faculty of mathematics of Armenia State 
University came from Yerevan only to the training camps in "Regents" park of 
London. 
Our investigations show that at the meeting (September 16, 2001) of the 
Security Council headed by the Russian president V.Putin the main topic of the 
discussion was the interests of islamic extremist groups; as well as "Al-Qaeda" 
which is in search of nuclear and other mass destruction weapons in CIS countries' 
strategical objects. The president warned: "Look, the fate of the Russian Federation 
is discussed in Pakistan Intelligence, in London, Paris...at the meetings of radical 
proislamic people. Be aware that in proislamic plan the problems of Middle Asia, 
Northern Caucasus, Azerbaijan have already been solved..." 
 
 
 
224 
 
Secret Bargaining Erevan 
and Tehran Are Drawing New Plans. 
Big States Bury Nuclear Wastes in Karabakh 
 
On January 14, 2002 the Armenian Ministry of Security invited to work 
four of the Russian secret service men having worked in the USA and Israel during 
1998-2000 and now retired. On January 19, the former Russian Intelligence agents 
Oleg Ivanovich Safanov (colonel), Yefim Bagdanovich Suvorov (colonel), Valeriy 
Aleksandrovich Popov (colonel), Sergey Trofimovich Antonov (colonel) came to 
Yerevan and were temporarily registered. According to our investigations, on 
January 24, Intelligence colonel Sergey Trofimovich Antonov and colonel Oleg 
Ivanovich Safonov went to Karabakh-Khankendi Intelligence Department. For 
instance, colonel Valeriy Aleksandrovich Popov worked at times (during the years 
we noted) in Nes-Tsiana city of Israel. I must remind that this city is of strategical 
importance (it is situated 24 km away from the south-east of Tel-Aviv). The secret 
Biochemical Institute of the country is in this area. This institute worked out 
stratgical plans in chemical and biological fields for the intelligence service of the 
country and these plans are connected with the name of the ex-prime minister 
David Ben-Qurio. 
Colonel Sergey Trofimovich Antonov worked in the territory of Livermor 
(According to the information, Livermor is one of the USA cities of strategical 
importance. National laboratories on radiation named after Lourens situated in this 
city). 
This political move of Yerevan on the chessboard of the region became 
more serious after the ultimatium of US president George Bush (January 10, 2002, 
February 9, 2002, February 13, 2002) to Iran Islamic Republic. On January 9 
(2002) the speech of George Bush on "the situation in the country" (with the report 
adressed to people) was heard in Congress. He noted: "...Iran has expanded its 
strategical interest in designing of nuclear weapons and mastering new missile 
technology. History calls us and our allies to fight in this direction (Remember 
Azerbaijan's being in the row of allies). Iran is the country which experts terrorism 
in its territory...We spent $1.5 billion on fighting in this direction. Everyday $30.2 
million is spent on this struggle. 
 
Nuclear Waste in Karabakh 
 
Security of "Collective Intelligence against American plans" bloc 
established (November 22, 2001) directly on the proposal of Tehran in Shusha was 
commited to Counter Intelligence Department. 
225 
 
As the radiation is very high in the region, this strategical centre, establihed 
since November 22 activated its work only on January 12 of this year. 
Masud Sahmayi, the head of the European Office of Technical Cooperation 
Department of the International Agency on Atom Energy and Alexandra Bilbao-
Alfonso, the collaborator of the department of agency of safety of radiation and 
radioactive wastes, in their report (04.09.2001) inform about the degree of 
radiation in Karabakh area. They state that the degree of radiation is not normal in 
the region. Alexey Koltsov (RF) engaged in radiation research, notes that the 
degree of radiation in Karabakh, around Dnestr, Abkhazia, Chechenistan exceeded 
its norm. The professor writes: "...There are 29 radiation sources in Karabakh area. 
One of the reasons of it is that radioactive wastes belonging to Mesamor Atom 
Power Station (Armenia) are carried to this area. (See: A.Koltsov. "Report to the 
International Agency". 3.12.2001. RF NAS) 
According to another information we got at the result of burying nuclear 
waste in Karabakh, 80 thousand ha of arable lands, 150 thousand ha of forests, 22 
thousand ha of land plots, 2 preserves have been destroyed. According to the 
information, on October 13, 2001 the scientific group conventionally called 
"Military District" submitted the geographical map of the occupied Agdam, Fuzuli, 
Jabrail, Gubadli regions to the representatives of "VIK Nuslears Lns" company. 
The administration of Paris office of the company realized a secret plan called 
"Seyf-12" for burying radioactive wastes accumulated in five countries of Europe 
(Afghanistan, France, Belgium, Romania, Austria) in Karabakh territory. At the 
result the company transferred $28.5 million to the budget of Khankendi. The 
employees of the "Defence Ministry" of fabricated "Karabakh Republic", colonel 
Artur Abramovich Mnasakanyan and major Vartan Ashotovich Arustamyan left 
for Bern on July 2, 2001 on the personal instruction of A. Gukasyan (They were in 
Bern also on August 10, 1999). Holding talks with the engineering group of "SUN 
Energy YV" registered in Trak and Keykos islands and "Union Atomis Garbage 
RIs" company which has central office in Baham islands, they agreed on building 
"concreted pits" (See: newspaper "Eko". Paris.XII.2001). 
The first meeting of "Collective Intelligence" which has general headquarter 
in Shusha was held on January 14, 2002. The delegates from Yerevan, Afina, 
Rekin, Moscow, Beirut and Tehran participated at the meeting held illegaly 
(newspaper. "Artsakh" 2002. № 6 "The columb of editor") It can be considered to 
be a new page of Yerevan and Tehran stage. 
 
 
 
 
226 
 
A Polisy to Divide Nakhchivan 
 
According to our investigation, in the first serious bargaining between 
Yerevan and Tehran the territory of Nakhchivan was divided. In reality this was a 
conventional division of both countries military intellegenge service. The military 
maps were drawn on the basis of division made (19 Aprel 1998) in Yerevan, as 
well as in Tehran. The secret division plans were worked out by the members of 
"Grigoryan group" together with "Nakhchivan Intellegence group" established in 
Yerevan Security Service in January, 1998(the chief of the detachment is Arushan 
(bek) Markaryan). 
It is not dificult to determine Iran's attitude from the speech of the professor 
of Tehran University Rza Inayetullahi in the simposium held in Yerevan on "Iran 
Policy in the relation of Armenia and Azerbaijan" (24.09.1994). Or as a strategic 
plan uniting Nakchivan after dividing it, with occupied Karabakh, tearing its 
borders away, keeps to be a component of the idea "Great Armenia". 
Calling Shahbuz region in the occupation plan "Nakchivan", abolishing 
Babak region, generally creating "Artsakh Autonomous Republic", though unreal, 
is an object of disscussion in the confidential talks of secret service organs /see 
schemes/ 
On the proposal of Iran, creating analytical group attached to Armenian 
diaspora living in Southern Caligorniya (USA), considered to be appropriate. 
 
Modern Missilies of Tehran 
The country has moderned three mobile missile system: -"DF-31", -"DF-31 
ISBM", and "Y1-2". Pekin has bought "Don" missile system made in Russia. All 
these exting missile system have been installed in the direction of USA, Japan, and 
Taivan. But Iran is thinking about the final  testing  of  'Zemlya-Zemlya'   (Ground-
Ground)  missiles. (According to another information we got, Tehran is seriously 
interested in the achivements of last missile technology of Pekin). We came across 
in our research with the materials on deployment of missile system of Iran in the 
east part of Tabriz, in frontier stripes with Azerbaijan. For instance, the soldiers 
demonstrated installation of missiles and other militiary equipments on the basis of 
new consruc-tion projects in "Fajr "decades in Germi, Parsabad, Namin, and Astara 
areas (safe zones) and you can not forget participation of Armenian soldiers in the 
military uniforms, in building of military consructions. IF Iran deploys in these 
zones "SKAD"-S/SS-1D missiles, then analyse: 
"SKAD"-S/SS-1D; 
maximum distance is 550km; 
SER:0.8-1km; 
227 
 
Diametre of the missile: 0.88m; 
Length: 11.25m; 
Weight of the shell: 5900 kg; 
Fuel: VD MH; 
Oxidant; IRFIVA; 
Warhead: 600kg 
The weight of the explosive: 770kg 
Undoubtedly, the targets of these missiles can be the diplomatic corps of 
America and Israel in Baki and oil companies (so the problem of Baki's becoming 
Beirut would be realized). Look at the raduis of these missiles: 
So in the intelligence plan of the West, as a well as East Azerbaijan can be a 
target of firing ground from all prizm. That is why Baki should gain advantage in 
Washington-Tehran relations. Working out strong state strategy, intellegence, and 
military conception is necessary for it. And this could be the defeat of the policy of 
Yerevan or Moscow in this direction. Yo umust remember that Baki is a city of oil, 
But oil has been grief and joy along the history. It is a peace and also a war. Yet 
there is no war in the strategy of state leader Heydar Aliyev. The strategy of left 
forces making minority in the country's parliament, in the connection with Iran is 
very close to this. It is a strategy of peace and regulation, changing this strategy to 
other direction could be the end of everything, i.e the end of power and opposition. 
There is no independence here "Being ready to the terror acts that could be 
perpetrated by the ":Collective Intellegence " (Armenia and Iran plan) in the 
strategical centres located America and Israel territories is considered to be 
necessary. Also, modernization problem of "KASSAN-2" missiles belonging to 
"Hamas" and shot from Beirut in the direction of Yeruselim was included into 
military industrial program of Iran for 2005. To say it more accurately, one of the 
specialists designing "KASSAN-2" missiles is Arkadi Alekseyevich Bagramyan 
who left Russian Federation on July 21.1999 and settled in Lebanan, engaged in 
missile technology in Dubna during 1980-1989, then being the specialist in 
"Sukhoy" military industrial complex on Kvant physics. It is an undeniable fact. 
 
Terrorist Camps in Karabakh 
 
The press of the country confirms nuclear technologies being transported to 
Iran from Armenia. 
There is such a school on USA: "Armenian School". We shall speak about 
the graduates of "Moscow school", "Tehran school", "Ankara School", and who 
has incomprehencibles positions in the geoeconomical, also geopolitical scene of 
the region. According to our investigations this school as a political strategical 
228 
 
center, functioning since 1946 is called "the institute establishing coordinations in 
conection with Security problems" and is located in Bening city of Georgia state, 
up to now about 60 thouthands students graduated from the school. Among them 
there are 16 armenians, 8 georgian and 11 Azerbaijanianies who graduated from 
the schoolin 1988-1992. It is also known that the cruelest dictators and leaders of 
separatist groups of the world graduated from this school. 
 
Terrorist Detachments in Karabakh 
 
Undoubtedly we shall speak about the Azerbaijanis graduating that school, 
living with sepatarist spirit, and their activities in separate mass media, political 
parties and communities and non-governmental organizations. Because some of 
them "studied" from June 14.1989 till May 19.1991 with some break, with ex-
prime minister of Armenia Vazgen Sarkisyan, Present President Robert Kocharyan 
(that times the leader of Armenian national liberation movement, member of 
"ASALA"  disgraced writer.  Zori  Balayan  the  representetive  of Karabakh in 
Armenia Karen Mirzoyan, an executive director of Yerevan strategical and 
national research centre Grayr Hakaryan", diplomat. Naira Melkumyan.. 
(Washington National Archives. Extract from the materials submitted by CIO in 
2001). State Texas, Osting city. A library named after Lindon Conson. Extract 
from theCIO materials in 2001) 
According to our investigations, one of the Armenian graduates of that 
school Ema Nacharyan (the leader of Social Democratic Party) Maria Nersesyan 
(the chairman of "Shamiran" women movement), Artur Bagdarasyan (the chaiman 
of "Law" party) Parus Hayiriyan (the chairman of national of national self 
governing Association). Rubin Mnachanyan /the chairman free armenian mission/, 
Vahan Avakyan /the chaiman of Armenian Revolution Federation/. Sighneda 
resolution on May 24.2002 in "Erevan Consultation" and the fabricated Artsakhhad 
a chance to be a capital of independent armenian republic as Yerevan. But one of 
the Armenian Political leaders Ruben Mnachanyan claimed in one of his speeches 
in Syunic settlement that president Kocharyann's "peaceful document" in 
connection with Karabakh will be recognized as an independent republic one of 
these days and will celebrate on December 22, anniversary of its independence. 
R.Mnachanyan also declared that all state attributes including emblem, 
anthem, flag, currency have been prepared For Karabakh as an independent 
armenian republic. 
We consider it as one of the unwritten laws occupied for Karabakh territory 
of Azerbaijan with paiticipation of armenian terror groups. As Karabakh is 
declared to be an uncontrolled zone today all the laws are unhelpful before there 
229 
 
facts. From the other side as terrorism is the state idelogy of Armenia, the occupied 
Karabakh has been framed within this idelogy: According to the information 
terrorist droups belonging to light countries of the world have created their training 
grounds in this frame. 
1. "The Sparks of Motherland" (China People's Republic, the leader-
Abdulgafar Shahriyar) area: Gubadli region, Gal and Charali territory (in south 
direction) 
2. "Kurdish congress" (the leader-Zeynal Ojalan from Ojalan family) area: 
Lachin region, Zabukh village (south direction). 
3. "People's Liberation Front/Suria Leader-Zamir AL-Gisse/" area: 
Kojakand. Red market territory /west direction/ 
4. "Hizbullah" /Lebanon.leader-Omar Shahabi/ 
5. "Hamas" /Lebanon Leader-Musa Gulam Khak/, Area: Zangilan region, 
Minchivan territory /east part/ 
6. "Al-Jihad"/Egypt. Leader - Said Jamal. 
The organization declared about uniting with Usama-bin Laden's "AI-
Kaida" on February 3, 2001 
On July 26.1999 Gaham Manukyan, the executive secretary of National 
Armenian Revolution Federation reportedat the meeting of Armenian Security 
Council, about his letter prepared in this direction. Doctor G.Manukyan in his letter 
suggests that Centralized Coordination Council of these "fraternal organizations" in 
Karabakh territory should be created and the general Headquarter of this council 
shoul be located in Khankendi. (Lebanon Private News Agency: "AVM". "Ab-
Wikala al Duwaliya, dissamonation date of the in conformation 4.08.1999. The 
information was comented byll telechanel of Iran on August" 9.1999. 
 
Armenian Companies Selling nuclear Technology to Iran 
 
According to our investigations, a burea called "Transit burea" is func-
tioning in Khankendi territory of Karabakh since November 14.2000. Burea mainly 
prepares programs, tables and inquires with Tehran-Khankendi-Yerevan-Beyrut, 
Yerevan-Khankendi-Isfahan, Moscow-Yerevan, Khankendi-Tehran, Pekin-
Yerevan-Khankendi-Tehran, Pekin-Moskva-Erevan) 
Routes. 
 
On May 9, 2002 USA state department charged Pekin, Moskva, Kishinev, 
Yerevan, in selling Iran nuclear technology and other mass testruction weapons in 
the direction of Iran, Lebanon, Cyprus, 350 billion dolklaries transferred to 
armenian budget /we do not consider the personal earnings and bribes. 
230 
 
Thenamed states kept silence before the facts in intelligence documents. No 
rejection was demanded. At the result the companies as "Vartaniyol", 
"Razdanmash", "Yan-Mak Metaliz" dealing in the issues of transfortation and 
transferring of nucleur technology, stayed aside and the name of behind theschene 
Armenian Company "Lizin" was mentioned whereas, "Lizin" bisness company has 
branches in Iran Russian Federation, Confidential meeting of Armenian Security 
Council was held on May 11, on May 13 of foreign Affairs, on may 16 of financial 
and economical office. Yerevan, Obzor "Eko. Izvestiya"- 2002.26.05. 
After 12 days of official revelation of USA State Department On May 
17.2002 an information center named "Pan Armnian" spread such news that does 
not coincide with intellignce documents:"... 
Armenian company "Lizin" fell into the "black list" of the USA state 
Department on suspicion of mediating Iran in creating weapons of mass 
destruction: As the agency "Arminfo" informs refering to the "trustful source", two 
tears ago the owner of the company of that time - the brother of the killed prime 
monister Vazgen Sakkisyan sold equipment to one of the neighbouring countries. 
In particular, ferments-fig tanks made of non- ferroussteelin which a strain of 
microbes fof production of Lithium were been perceived as the mass destruction 
weapon". 
Undoubtedly, you can with this information in any auditorium, The fact is 
that "Lizin" company was registered not two years ago, but on July 26.2001 in 
Armenian Ministry Justice with number "U.H. 120/43 Az lu.T.u.s." Two month 
later from 26 October till March 28 this firm transforted materials not registered in 
the documents with the route Moscow-Erevan-Khankendi-Tehran the responsible 
person for all transported strategical materials was not Armen Sarkisyan, but the 
intellegence colonel of MD Azmais Ayanesyan. In fact "Lizin" company 
completed the unfinished works of "Razdanmash", "Vartaniyol", "Arshvir", Yak 
Mak Metaliz. 
According toour investigations the company which regulated armenian 
companies transporting missile equipment as well as the components of 
massdestruction weapons to Garaj, Mashad, Isfahan, Bushir, Bandar was 
"Akoryan" armenian company's Tehran headquarter /The head office and basic 
account of this company is in France/. 
The money for the purchaosed materials was transferred to the bank account 
of "Razdanmash", "Vartanyol", "Arshvir", Yak Mak Metaliz, "Adamand", "Lizin", 
in Paris and Marsel. 
On February 14.1997 "Lizin-1" company was registered with "U.R-012/21. 
Az.lu."D.RR" number in Armenian Ministry of Justice. One of the leaders of the 
company, prof. Microbiologist D. Sarkisyan makes such a proposal at the meeting 
231 
 
of Armenian Defence Ministry, held on the topic: "Preparing adequate responces 
against chemical and bacteriolojical weapons that Azerbaijan supposideky could 
use against Armenia, that isnicessary to spread the powder of "anth rax" to 
Nakchivan area from the direction of Rind, Zaritap, Dashtakert, Kacaran, from the 
occupied Kalbajare direction to Ganja-Kazakh zones. 
A chemist-scientist O.Akopyan participating at the meeting called this 
proposal "to be emotional" and spoke about impossibility of it. /K.Alibayov: 
Biolanger Washington.200.p47./" 
Generally, according to our investigation, eash Caspian Littoral States has 
got "A special Measures Plan" for 2002-2003 to be protected from bacteriological 
war. For instance Kazaghistan has allot-ed 18 million dollars, Turkmenistan 15 
million dollars, Russian Federation 257 million dollar, Iran 467 million dollar, to 
be protected from this war. The Russian mikrobiologist Kanachan Alibekov, who 
emigrated to America in 1688 writes in his mentionedbook. "...There are a lot of 
bacteriological and toxic wepons at reserve in Russian Federation and CIS 
countries (Mainly in Kazakhistan, Armenia). The supposition of biological, attack 
will increase and expand in XX century... they will fall into the hands of terror 
groups... 
It means Armenian microbiologist, professor D.Sarkisyan's proposal is not 
removed from strategical program of the country. 
American politologist Judit Miller claims that one part of microbiologist 
functioning in CIS regions and Russion Federation are engaged in transporting the 
equipments of mass destruction weapon and the use the uncontrolled Karabakh 
territory and an ancient bridge Xudaferin on Araz river in their work (USA."New 
York Times" newspaper. February 2.1999.p.9) 
That times, since January 2, 1999 Russian microbiologist Valeriy 
Sergeyevich Bakayev, Bladimir Yakovlevich Rishinski, armenian scientist Arakel 
Chilingaryan have been participating in Paster Institute of Tehran in desiging 
bacteriological weapons specified for armed forces of Iran. Pofessor V.Bakayev 
and A. Chilingaryan claim in their interview to "Keyhan" newspaper of Iran 
(February 8 1999 p2) that the experiments, they carried out in Paster Institute of 
Iran sopecified for peaceful purposes. 
But according to our investigations professor Arkadi Semyonovich Igitov 
working at times at "Vektor" Scientific Research Center (RF, Obolinsk territory) in 
his interview (3.06.1996. Koln) to "Short Deutch Wave" radio channel after going 
to Germany for permanent living, confessed that he was in Iran in 1998 and 
worked at Paster Institute in Tehran. A.Igitov informs: "... we worked at that 
biological center. There we some scientists, including Bakayev, Vishinsky, 
232 
 
Chilingaryan, Amburyan and Adelyan... were working in developing 
bacteriological weapon program of the country ..." 
According to the information "Lizin-1" company registered in Armenia 
Ministry of Justice establishing relations with Paster Institute since January 16 
1998 provided cow to bicteriological reseach labara-tories through "SANAM" 
military-industrial complex. The occupied and uncontrolled Upper Garabag was 
used as a transit. Since 1997 Moscow-Erevan-Tehran trio have been carring out 
experiment on the basis of program called up obtaining new hyrids in connection 
with "Anthrax". To say it more clearly they are researching the ways of "antrax" in 
food. The scientists want to know if these two sources were together, what will 
happen. We must notethat this experiment was tested in some conflicted zones and 
gave inconceivable tragic results. 
In international scientific conferenceof microbiologists held in London on 
December 26, 2000, Russian Scientists confess that (RUSI) journal 02.2001.p.14. 
London. 
Press secretary of Pentagon, Colonel James Brukes claims that a special 
project is required to research biotechnological problems of Moscow, Yerevan as 
well as Yerevan. 
The famous American physic professor Steven Hokings notes in his 
interview in the issue of "Gardian" (London) of December 22 2001: "..People will 
plant such a virus that they cease to be a human being. Bacteriological terrors are 
more dangers and mercyless than nuclear weapons. A little labaratory is enough for 
it. 
 
Gold in Kalbajar is carried away 
 
After it Pentagon immediately organizes Vaccination of its soldiers against 
"Anthax" beginning from January 6.2002. As to Azerbaijan this problem is still 
remains open. "A special measures plan" of Republican Ministry of Defence with 
the Ministry of Health in this direction is not seen yet. From our investigations it 
become clar that armenian as an independent state will start production of separate 
companies of mass destruction weapons. For instance, only in October of the last 
year 97.5% of strategical materials coming to importing ang exporting going from 
armenia was used in designing materials for mass destruction weapons as well as 
for deployment of nuclear wastes.  
Look at the table: 
According to our investigation "Lizin" company that is mentioned in USA 
intelligence documents and "Lizin-1" doing behind scene work, today do intensive 
work in explotaition of precious metalls fields in the occupied areas of Azerbaijan 
233 
 
and these work keep to be a component of Yerevan-Washington strategical 
program. It is also truth that one of these days USA secret service organs will make 
amendments all documents of Lizin" and "Lizin-1" in connection with gold 
extracting fields. 
"Lizin" company was active in 2001 inprospection of armenian Megradzor 
and Sotk gold fields. Since January 14 2001 "Lizin" and "Lizin-1" companies do a 
real work in gold fields of occupied Kalbajar and Zangilan regions of Azerbaijan. 
"Lizin" company beginning from January 27/2001 signed contracts with American 
"Slobal Sold" company in Yerevan and "First Dynasty Mines" (FD)company of 
Kanada. As a result "Vajnali" in the occupied territory of Zangilan, big gold fields 
in Kalbajar as "Zod", "Soyudlu", "Gizilgulag" were devider among armenian, USA 
and Kanada. (Kanada "Financial Post" newspaper ("Economic Post") 03 2001 p4). 
The cost of 400 tonnes golg, 2500 tonnes silver, 1.5 million tonnes copper 
extract was concealed. Azerbaijan got nothing. According to USA experts the 
quality of the gold extracted in the occupied territory of Azerbaijan is 1.6 times 
higher than in Russian 1.5 times higher than American 1.9 times than Kanada. 
Azerbaijan Gold is widely used in USA and Canadian military industrial complex. 
But Armenia has increased its gold reserves 3.5 times on the account of our 
precious ore fields in the occupied territory ang gold reserves have become 
Armenia's main provision. USA "Slobal Sold" company has invested 2.8 million 
USA$ for efficient use of gold wastes in the territory. 
For these reasons USA State Department approaches Armenia from double 
position and carefully. From one side USA charges Armenia in transportation of 
mass destruction wepons in their secret purchesing and selling. From other side 
impacts the increase its military potencial. 
In the official secret intelligence folders of USA CIO., FBI, CIA there are 
exposing materials of 122 pages (covering 1990-2000) on armenian's "ASALA", 
"Haydat" and "Chegakron" terrorist organizationsof international scale. Some part 
of such documents are "kept" in the intellegenge centers of Tehran and Moscow. 
Today many people think about violation of USA principles against 
Azerbaijan. Because "Azerbaijan School" does not allow it. Also "Moscow 
School", "Tehran School", "Ankara School" keep to be a barrier. In order to 
destroy all these barries creation of "Azerbaijan School" would be reasonable. 
Other wise separatist activities of "Sadval" "PKK" "died" in apperance will be 
inevitable. 
 
 
 
 
234 
 
"NUCLEAR ZONES" IN KARABAKH 
 
There are terrorist camps of "ASALA " in Shusha, Khojavend and 
Khankendi 
 
According to our investigations, the Karabakh is specified as the terrirory of 
an independent rRepublic - the Karabakh republic" in internal correspondences of 
Armenian republic, minites and reports signed by state and government officials, 
diplomatic corps and chambers of commerce abroad, in meetings held in church 
and community centers. (?) [newspaper "Azg". Yerevan. From October issue of 
2001 till may issue of 2002] 
Note: According to the information, this political campaign is being carried 
on since February 16, 2002 on the bases of published materials. A new, 140 -page 
book "The Karabakh -an independent and new republic" was published on 
February 27 in printing house of Armenia's MFA in 6 languages (Armenian, 
English, Arabic, French, Persian and Russian). This book with 10 thousand copies 
has been sent to Armenia's diplomatic corps abroad. According to another 
information, an "Karabakh - Strategical Investigation Centre" directly subordinate 
to Security Council of the country and investigating present social-political, 
economic and geographical situation in Karabakh was established in Yerevan. This 
strategical and political organization has a staff of 16 and was established on march 
3. 7 of analysts were high -ranking officers resigning from Armenia's special 
service organs in different years. They are occupied with issues concerning mass 
destruction weapons and terrorism in invstigation center. (?) (MFA's "Special 
bulletin", March 19, 2002, p.4) 
Professor Grayr Hakopyan, the executive director of Armenia's "Strategical 
and national investigations center" says: "...there's nothing illegal. We have only 
liberated our lands occupied by Turks". ("Voice". Weekly newspaper of Armenian 
community in California. January 9, 2002). 
 
Shusha, Lachin, Kalbajar in "nuclear zone" 
 
According to our investigations, America's economic and political relations 
with Armenia are created on the bases of many-sided strategical program. 
According to some experts, in fact Azerbaijan is in America's blockade from both 
geoeconomic and geopolitical point of view. This is also reflected in analytical 
report with secret signature stamp made by the experts of ministry of Trade. One 
issue in this report is the amount of international humanitarian aid rendered by 
America's USAID (US Agency of International Devolopment). You can't stop 
235 
 
thinking comparing all these figures with Amenia and Georgia. For instance, 
America allotted only $34 million 291 thousand for Azerbaijan in 1998 as 
humanitarian aid. This figure decreased in 1999. it means it decreased to $23 
million 840 thousand. It totaled $ 33 million 500 thousand in 2000 and $ 26 million 
480 thousand in 2001. Compare the aid rendered to Armenia. We see that 
American administration allotted to Armenia $ 87 million 500 thousand in 1998, 
$79 million 900 thousand in 1999, $71 million 500 thousand in 2000, $92 million 
680 thousand in 2001... and finally $ 180 million 440 thousand within 6 months of 
2002 so far.* 
a) $ 103 million for guarantee of Armenia's security (on may 13, 2002) 
b) $ 43 million for military purposes (on June 11, 2002) 
c) $ 25 million for operative measures against mass destruction weapons 
and narcotic contraband (on June 26, 2002) 
d) $ 10 million 440 thousand for strengthening intelligence and frontier 
service of the country (on July 4, 2002) 
If calculating America's other donations to Armenia we'll see that this 
amount totaled $ 1.2 billion 750 million in 1993-2001 including half of 2002. But 
in Azerbaijan this figure was no more than $ 357 million. ("Expert of Eurasia", 
M..., August 4, 2001 (magazine, "New Magazine", M..., May 20-26, 2001, RF AN 
(Institute of Oriental Studies) "Bulletin of abstract - analytical information. M... , 
2002. N: 1,5) 
Concerning America's attitude to Karabakh territory occupied by 
Armenians, generally Armenia - Azerbaijan war magazine "Russia and muslim 
world" writes: "... American variant of settling Armenian - Azerbaijanian conflit 
will cause absolute loss of Nagorni Karabakh for Azerbaijan which is unacceptable 
for this country. 
Azerbaijan is still considered to be a country that the USA doesn't offer a 
"favourable regime in trade." These countries are considered to be strategic 
"enemies" of Washington, North Korea, Cuba, Iran, Iraq and so on. Thus, though 
unofficially Azerbaijan is considered to be a "hostile country" by the USA 
government..." (2002, N 1. p. 64) 
We wouldn't like to think about all this as we are a sensitive nation. 
America itself is the first to create such a strained and vague atmosphere between 
America and Azerbaijan. This is because of America's wrong strategic plans 
concerning Azerbaijan. The USA regards Azerbaijan from Baku oil prism. Let's 
say, America doesn't regard from refugee settlements or Karabakh prism occupied 
by Armenian terrorists and doesn't even want to do that. 
According to our investigations Yerevan is planning to spend $ 42 million 
out of $ 103 million (Armenia got it on May 13, 2002) on nuclear researches in the 
236 
 
area. By America's dictate Yerevan invites to work in the region Armenian 
scientists who went from Dubna nuclear researches center (RF Moscow) and 
Yerevan Institute of Physics to work in Iran Islamic republic in 1999 -2000 and 
carry out researches on nuclear technology. 
According to the information, 11 Armenian scientists came to Armenia 
from Iran on June, 2002. 4 of them (prof. O.Ovguyan, B.Batum, S.Sarkisyan, G. 
Petrosyan) opened scientific -research centers in strategic heights of occupied 
Karabakh. America side is not interested in distribution of donations allotted so far. 
It's not more than an illusion for some people that Armenia is looking for nuclear 
weapons and has gained initial achievements in this field (Yerevan weapons plant 
has begun to produce nuclear warhead bullets and shells) but it is impossible to 
deny facts and realities. 
 
Armenia Works out Security Conception Corresponding to Russia 
 
Diplomat Arsen Kasparyan, the counsellor of Armenia's Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs notes in symposium under "Armenia-Russian Federation: strategic 
cooperation of XXI century" (Moscow, October 9, 2000): "...Armenia that is 
Russia's traditional ally in the Caucasus plays special role in the region. National 
security of Armenia as any other country in modern world can not be guaranteed 
by its own exceptional internal resourses or even strong potential of one allied 
country but only by harmonization of its national interests with the interests of 
other powers and first of all with the interests of contiguous countries -regional 
liders. Most of Armenian politicians believe that today the only guarantee of 
security in Armenia are its own armed forces and Russian military base in its 
territory..." ("NG". M..., October 17, 2000, p.4) 
Diplomat Arsen Kasparyan also claims that Armenia has to reconsider its 
national security conception, work it out corresponding to RF's strategic document 
of the same name. Diplomat Arsen Kasparyan concludes that in reality the 
Karabakh people consider their territory to be Russia's territory. (?) Because in 
1813 these territories were taken from Iran given to Russia. Russia was always 
interested in these territories. (?) (These ideas coincide with the ideas of historian 
Ashot Manucharyan in 1994). 
According to the information, during general Nicholai Patrushev's meetings 
with Robert Kocharyan, the head of government, general Serj Sarkisyan, the 
secretary of Security Council, general Karlos Ter-Petrosyan, the head of 
Intelligence Department this issue was widely discussed and it was decided that the 
delegation of both countries visited borderlines of Karabakh with Iran Islamic 
Republic. (?) (Itar-TASS. July 25, 2002. Yerevan) 
237 
 
 
Will the Russians Defend Our Borders? 
 
According to our investigations, border lines of our lands with Iran 
occupied by Armenian terrorists can be given to control of Russia's Frontier 
Forces. During the visit of Serj Sarkisyan, Defence Minister of the country to the 
USA (April 14) this issue was discussed with general R.Ramsfeld, the chief of 
Pentagon. At the result Pentagon has alloted $103 million for Armenia's security 
problems. According to the information, American administration agrees the 
occupied lands (border lines with Iran) being controlled by Russian frontier guards 
provided a special department controlling mass destruction weapons and narcotic 
contraband will be opened in America's Embassy in Yerevan. It is also highlighted 
that these control group will be empowered to conduct "check-review" raids in 
frontier posts at any time. 
According to the information, Hojjatul - Islam, Intelligence Minister of 
Iran's "ETTELAAT", general Ali Yunisi and Defence Minister, admiral Ali 
Shamkhani paying an official visit to Armenia on May 3, 2002 focused particularly 
on this issue during their talks with Serj Sarkisyan. (Maybe this issue was stressed 
during confidential talks of Ali Yunisi, the head of "ETTELAAT" in Azerbaijan. 
According to the information we got Iran's Intelligence Minister is laso supposed 
to desert his post within next few days. A more radical general will replace him. 
We should note that his visit to Baku coincides with the visit of Nicholai 
Patrushev, the head of Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the RF to Yerevan. Both paid 
a visit on July 25). 
According to our investigations, Azerbaijan is not even mentioned in all the 
political processes concerning occupied Karabakh. Karabakh territory occupied by 
Armenian terrorists is settled from point of view ofv Moscow-Washington-
Yerevan-Tehran. Azerbaijan's "territorial integrity" is crossed off. 
 
There is still Plunder in Karabakh 
 
According to our investigations, Karabakh is "reconstructed". All the 
"attributes" belonging to Azerbaijan is being destroyed, plundered in the occupied 
region. Ukranian specialists (enginner group of 18 ) has established tank repairs 
plant with length of 436 meters in Khankendi. Roads, bridges are built for military 
purposes in occupied areas with assistance of Armenian community "Chuch" in 
Argentina. ($21 million) According to the information, Garik Gurjyan, the chief of 
Armenia's Institution of Protection of Armenian Historical Monuments and 
Handicraft and Serj Tatevosyan, the head of Historical Monuments and Museums 
238 
 
Institution of Karabakh gave such an interview to "Armen Press" on December 23, 
2001: "A group of Iranian specialists (a staff of 42) began to reconstruct the 
monuments in the region on March-April, 2002. S.Tatevosyan's also highlighted 
that everything is changing, everything "gets their real name" in Karabakh...Iranian 
restores have reconstructed Tadeves and Sorsor churches in Tehran so far. A new 
Armenian church was founded in the area of 120 ha in Tabriz. ("Armen Press". 
June 2, 2002) 
It becomes clear from our investigations that joint Yerevan-Tehran 
enterprises are being set up in the territory of occupied Karabakh since September 
1, 2001. $24 million has been alloted for construction of oil and gas pipelines, 
electricity cables in the area. $16 million out of it has been alloted by Iran. 
According to the official agreement signed on January 14, 2002 they've agreed to 
build oil processing plant in Mehri region. Both sides have worked out new 
construction project of $89 million cost for this, (magazine "Khazar". Rasht. 
February, 2002. N7). In general, Iranian specialists completed new gas pipeline at 
186-km length, passing via Khankendi, Shusha, Asgaran, Khojavand regions of 
Karabakh from October 3, 2001 to May 19, 2002. ($ 48 million cost) "Artsakhgas" 
(Khankendigas) Joint Stock Company assisted Iranian specialists in this. 
According to the information, two agreements on gas pipelines were signed 
between "Iran and Armenia". (August 14, 1992 and June 19,1995). According to 
the agreement the length of the first gas pipeline will be 110 km, the length of the 
second one -140 km. Iran has already completed 120-km distance to the border. 
According to the information, Armenia is planning to join international North-
South Railway in order to expand its strategic range. "Armenian diaspora" living in 
foreign countries will directly assist Armenia in this strategic "operation". For 
instance, the Armenian millionaire Kirk Kirkoryan living in California (he is also a 
worldwide known founder of "Liney" company and bank that provided pecuniary 
aid during "ASALA" Armenian terrorist organization's activity in Karabakh in 
1991-1993) has alloted $100 million for Armenia's joining this project. It is of both 
economic and political importance. The length of the highway important from 
strategic-military point of view in the region will be 355 km. (It is also called Iran-
Russia-Azerbaijan highway) This highway making a profit of $260 million a year 
will join Gazvin and Astara and provide shipping from Iran and Persian Gulf. 
 
Uranium Theft 
 
According to our investigations, Armenia and the Russian Federation 
regards the territory of occupied Karabakh as a nuclear base in national security 
and intelligence documents. There're other items related to this in nuclear programs 
239 
 
of Armenia and the RF. This issue pointed in intelligence documents of Moscow 
and Yerevan may happen to be primarily realized in 2005. According to our 
investigations, Armenia's   nuclear   program was primarily adopted on December 
14, 2000. The names of program makers were announced in Security Council in 
Yerevan. (Pr. Y. Ter-Akopyan, pr. K. Ter-Martirosiyan. Pr. S.Avakyan, pr. R. 
Saakyan, pr. K.AIanakyan...) In 4 places of the strategic program consisting of 6 
articles (in articles 12, 14, 19, and 26) occupied Karabakh is mentioned, a part of 
the territories is divided into "nuclear zones". 
1. The territory of Kalbajar region. (Bashlibel settlement in South western 
part). 
2. The territory of Shusha region (Goytala settlement in South western 
part). 
3. The territory of Lachin region. (Mijidara, Malkhalaf, Lower Farajan 
settlements in eastern part). 
(B: Pr. S.Stepanyan, the teacher of Yerevan Institute of Physics mentioned 
these places in the meeting on "Nuclear Explorations and Armenia" topic held at 
the institute from April 9 to April 11 of 2001: -YDU. "Special bulletin", 30 April, 
2001. p.4). 
To open new scientific-research centres or enlarge them in Armenia's FG is 
considered to be reasonable . (B:) 
According to the information, training camps are opened for new, radical 
wing of Armenian terrorist organization "ASALA" in 3 points of occupied 
Karabakh territory: 
1. The territory of Shusha region (Khalfali settlement in northern part). 
2. The territory of Khojavand region. (Kish settlement in Western part). 
3. The territory of Khankandi region. (Asgaran settlement in Western part). 
These places are mentioned in L.O. Gevorkyan, intelligence officer's article 
under the name "defence structure of our national liberation fronts" in special 
bulletin "Karabakh" (N-6) published in the same -called publishing house of 
"Gngak" Armenian party in Beirut (Lebanon) on 14 August, 2001. These training 
camps are remarked as "Defence base" of "Armenian National Liberation Front" in 
official documents. According to our investigations, "ASALA" has links with 
"Hamas" and "Hezbullah" armed-terrorist groups operating in Lebanon. Yevgeniy 
Kojushko, the Byelorussian investigator who's gained interesting achievements in 
this field writes in his book "Modern Terrorism": "... "ASALA" is a terrorist 
organization. Its main goal is to restore Armenia's independence not in modern, but 
historical borders. It's the East of Turkey (including Artvin, Kars, Grzurum, Van 
cities), a part of Northern Iran, Nakhchivan region of Azerbaijan" (The same 
source. Minsk. "Charvest" publishing house, 2000. p.218). According to the other 
240 
 
information, special small, the so-called groups "Defence groups" consisting of 
"ASALA" members have been formed. These groups operate directly in close 
relationship with "Hamas" armed forces (Lebanon). (This group has special 
Khankendi-Yerevan-Beirut trip.) 
The investigator Y.Kojushko then remaks in his book: "One of the main 
bases of "ASALA" is Lebanon main partner - OLP (Organization of Liberation of 
Palestine), it is supported by armenian diaspora in most countries of the world. The 
other base is still in Syria as previous, (also in France, the USA, Great Britain ... 
Armenia ..) 
It maintains contacts with Kurdish "PKK" and Palestenian terrorist 
organizations as NFOP, "Khamas" .. and so on. (The same source p. 218-219). 
According to our investigations, in the territory of occupied Karabakh a 
united front-the so-called "ASALA" and "Hamas" and "Al-Kaida" unit was set up 
on 21 November, 2001. 
Security Service of the RF has got primary information ... about the activity, 
strategic programs of this united front. 
According to our investigations, in the territory of occupied Karabakh these 
united front-line soldiers realize sabotage "projects" against diplomatic corps, 
embassies and chambers of commerce, oil companies, charity and humanitarian aid 
centres of NATO member states in the territory of CIS countries. Newspaper 
"Boston Globe" published in New York on 4 July, 2002 mentions:"... Nuclear 
weapon is more attractive for terrorists, even more valuable for them than nuclear 
fuel and considerarably more portable than war-heads of strategic missiles... Mr. 
Bush stressed that "Al-Kaida" is seeking to get nuclear weapon and means of its 
delivering for use against the USA..." Correspondent David Filipov. P.2). 
It becomes clear from strategic materials we've collected that there're 
enough conditions in Armenia for the production of nuclear war-head weapons 
(Don't forget weapons plant put into operation on 13 April, 2002 with a staff of 
2000 in Yerevan) and also modernisation of nuclear war-head missiles of "Shkad" 
and "Tayphun" type in FG. 
Today Yerevan itself that was informed to smuggle uranium - 238 material 
and to pass it to Iran and Iraq via Karabakh territory in official documents of the 
USA CIA is in need of nuclear technology. 
The Armenians claim Nuclear Power Station in Metsamor territory can 
work for 15 more years. The station's engine "B-230" is calculated for 30 -year 
period and is reliable till 2016. (But it's the result of toxic chemical, compounds, 
wastes floated into Araz river from this source that gold fish is in danger of 
extinction in river basin). According to the calculations, this station can endure an 
241 
 
earthquake of 10 magnitude. But there're cracks in energy blocks of the station and 
radiation rate around has increased. 
According to our investigations, Atom Power Station in Metsamor is 
necessary for Armenia not as energy source meeting the region's energy needs but 
research source of nuclear materials. Because the RF and Iran, Iraq, Georgia meet 
Armenia's energy, fuel needs. Oil's transported to the region from Baku. (State 
Railway Office. Way-bills N1-608193, 1-605133, 1-605134, 608197 and so on) 
Armen Khanbabayan, the Armenian politologist remarks: "..Baku again 
considered actual the issue of Armenian Atom Power Station (AAPS) I which 
endangers environment as it's affirmed in Azerbaijan". According to Gultakin 
Gadjiyeva, the member of Azerbaijan delegation on PASE, Baku'll try to put this 
issue into consideration of the Committee on agriculture and ecology. Azerbaijan 
parliamentarians rely on their European colleagues as "Europe is very sensitive 
towards ecological problems". 
It's clear that however it is not ecological but political problem... ("NQ"-
Moscow, 14 April, 2002). We must take it natural. One of the results of our 
investigations is that today Atom Power Station in Metsamor is really not an 
ecological problem. It's absolutely a political issue. 
In November-December of 2001 theft of uranium-238 materials and nuclear 
engines allotted for research (in reality for test) from Georgia's Mtsekhet settlement 
under the leadership of Armenian Akhalkalaki groupings - the members of 
"Pediani" organization (doctor Ashot Arakisyan lecturing on quantum physics at 
Tbilisi University and Ermik Sasunyan, the chief of the laboratory) is carried out 
systematically. According to the information, approximately 2 kg of uranium-238 
materials have been stolen, moreover 3, not so big engines have been taken from 
Sukhumi nuclear research centre. Pointing to nuclear materials stolen from 
Georgia, Metyu Bann, the adviser on nuclear researches of Belfer centre on 
international issues and science (attached to Harvard University) warns: "..The 
terrorists use all the opportunities in order to get a part of these materials at least... 
We must do our best in order they couldn't get these weapons of 
destruction.." (Newspaper "Washington Post". June 3, 2002. Correspondent. Jobi 
Orrick) Harvard University's report on "nuclear threat" addressed to Central 
Intelligence Office says: "..Who is seeking a material for atom bomb he'll find it. 
Even by means of stealing, smuggling he'll find it... Serious steps should be taken 
for the sake of national security..". 
"Nuclear laboratories", engines and components of nuclear technology 
stolen from Georgian territory have not been taken away from Armenian territory. 
A part of nuclear materials have been sold to Lebanon Armenians. It's true that a 
part of these materials have been given to "Hamas" terrorist group. (We've carried 
242 
 
out special investigations in this direction). "Islamic bomb" is reality not 
supposition. 
Armenian nuclear researchers have carried out active work in this field for 
the last 2 years. For instance, Armenian specialists working in nuclear research 
centres in the territory of the RF would like that a nuclear weapon were created in 
their homeland Armenia, Armenia were nuclear country. Because according to 
their philosophy, "Turkey and Azerbaijan" always seems dangerous to Armenia in 
this direction. According to the information, some Armenian scientists working in 
different institutes of the RF have already moved their laboratories to Yerevan or 
Karabakh. For instance, L. Mikailyan (the Institute of physics named Kurchatov) 
carrying out researches on nuclear engine , the, G. Ter-Akoyan, the teacher of 
Nuclear Researches Institut, R. Saakyan, the pr. of Theoretical Experimental 
Institute, doctor L. Ter-Petrosyan, the teacher of Theoretical Physics and 
Experimental Institute have opened their research laboratories. (Newspaper "Iran", 
Tehran 2001, VII-6). 
 
Nuclear research and program "Post-14) 
 
According to our investigations, N.Egijan, K.Alananyan and A.Sharabyan-
scientists of Yerevan Institute of Physics, well-known researchers in nuclear 
technology field head "special laboratories" engaged in preparing engines by 
nuclear and quantum physics, also in nuclear energy problems. They operate 
separately in Kalbajar settlement. Doctor Herm Millolin the director of "Viskonsin 
program on nuclear weapons control" says:" ... Strategic materials are usually sent 
from the RF to these places, engaged in nuclear researches, bargaining. (Nuclear 
technology is meant). This region's opened its doors wide to nuclear smuggling"...  
("Nyukmer Times"  (Nuslear Times) - New York, 2001, 12 December, p.6). 
George Tenet, the head of America's CIA wants "war to be declared to Nuclear 
robbers shocking the world. According to him, the USA's fear and caution can be 
next "nuclear terror". Collected Intelligence materials give grounds to tell that. 
According to the information, Kerol Noton, the chairman of "Campaign against 
nuclear weapons  (England) pointes".. War is not a way out. To retaliate with 
weapons to weapons is a wrong step. It'll cause new Bin Ladens to appear...  (The 
same source. Interview with K.Noton, 2002, 21 February, p.9). 
According to our investigations, program "The government and secrecy" 
came into force on 26 March, 2002 in Armenia. Such a step was taken in occupied 
Karabakh 2 days after this strategic -political program was declared (on 28 May). 
As to the content of the program Y. Aletsandryan, the intelligence officer of 
Khankendi says that the goal is to create serious control mechanism on strategic 
243 
 
objects, correspondences and Armenian scientists' researches on microbiology, 
chemistry and nuclear prospecting. According to him this mechanism has already 
been created. The principle of secrecy is the basis of this mechanism. 
According to the information, program 'The government and secrecy" 
applied in Armenian has been prepared on the basis of the project presented to 
George Tenet, the head of CIA by American Scientists Federation (Washington). 
(American scientists presented such a program project to White House, CIA in 
2000. Protection of scientific-research objects engaged in nuclear technology, 
research documents of the country are meant). ("SESRESU is Bask in Fashin Bull. 
Of the atom is scientists - "Shisago, 2000-Vol. 56, N-6 R, 25-29). According to the 
information, intelligence officers of the country often appear in Yerevan strategic 
centres, separate persons are seriously controlled. Already 13 Armenian scientists 
carrying out strategic researches have been banished from the country only in May 
of this year. 
Pr. Andrianik Lalayon points out in his interview to the bulletin "Armenian 
Messenger": "..Armenia wants to put and end to bureaucratic principles of secrecy 
in strategic research centres, enter real political secrecy course. It's always an 
important issue for Armenia which's in war..." ("Armenian Messenger" M..., 2002, 
May 26, p.3). 
According to the information, a special conference was held in General 
Headquarters of FG connected with working out program "Post-14 in military 
intelligence and counter intelligence services of Armenia on 2 April (2002). This 
program also proposes protection of scientists, analysts engaged in nuclear 
researches in the territory. 
"Control departments on mass destruction weapons" have been set up in 
military intelligence service agency (colonel p-k S.Ala-Verdiyan), also military 
counter intelligence Service Agency (colonel O. Ambassumyan). The reports of the 
heads of this new strategic departments were heard in Security Council of the 
president on 12 June. 
Serj Ter-Avetisyan the pr. Of Armenian  Institute  of  Physics Researches 
(Armenia National Academy of Sciences Ashotarak-2) stressed that such a reform 
carried on in country intelligence is an invaluable, unprecedented step ..." for 
Armenia, for its national security." 
According to our investigations, nuclear researchers of Armenia have 
created scientific relations with the RF and Iranian colleagues. Before these 
relations were open in some stages but today they're more closed and secret. 
244 
 
245 
 
246 
 
247 
 
248 
 
249 
 
250 
 
251 
 
252 
 
253 
 
254 
 
CONSTANT 
 
KARABAKH ON TARGET 
OF ARMENIAN TERROR (Instead of Prologue) 
HISTORIC DOCUMENT 
NARKOBUSINESS TRIANGLE 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION. 
ECOLOGICAL TERROR. 
BIOTERRORISM. 
TUBERCULOSIS 
HISTORIC DOCUMENT. 
AZERBAIJAN FACING TERRORISM. 
BIN LADEN'S CONTACTS WITH ARMENIANS 
USAMA BIN LADEN WHO PROCLAIMED HIMSELF "CALIPH" IN 50 
COUNTRIES 
THE CAPTURED CHILDREN ARE SOLD 
KARABAKH: UNCONTROLLED ZONE. 
HISTORIC DOCUMENT. 
ARMENIAN'S INFERTILITY PROGRAM. 
THE AMPUTATION ROOMS 
LACHIN: PAIR OF GALLOWS 
HISTORIC DOCUMENT 
WHO HAD TO BE ON THE HELICOPTER, 
AND WHO DIDN'T. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF THE RUSSIAN COLONEL 
KHOJALI TERROR. 
NEW FACTS ON "ASALA" AND "HAYDAD" 
HISTORIC DOCUMENT. 
THIEVES OF URANIUM. 
NUCLEAR WASTES IN KARABAKH. 
NUCLEAR COOPERATION. 
SANCTION TO THE ARMENIAN COMPANIES 
NUCLEAR TECHNOLOGY IN KARABAG. 
NUCLEAR WASTES IN KARABAKH. 
"NUCLEAR ZONES" IN KARABAKH. 
 
255 
 
Editor:        Poladova F. 
   Corrector:  Bayramova N. 
 
 
 
 
 
Rovshan Novruzoglu, Yunus Oguz. 
 
Karabakh: uncontrolled zone. 
 
 
 
 
 
Approved to print: 03.09.2002. Size 70x1007 
1
/16. 
Offset printing. Value 15,75 ph.p.sh. 
Order № 55. Circulation 1000. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Printed in 
 
CBS  
POLYGRAPHIC 
                                                                               PRODUCTION 
 
Tel/Fax: 47 75 05, Tel.:47 75 04 
