Azerbaijani Community of the Nagorno-Karabakh region 
of the Republic of Azerbaijan
'7 //̂
SCARABAKH: VISION
“We are ready to guarantee the security o f  
the Armenian community ofKarahakh.
I  stressed, that Baku will not allow 
the community to face any danger”
Ilham Aliyev 
President of the Republic of Azerbaijan 
September 2005
№ 0 -
A zsrbäycan  R espub likasi Prezidentinin 
iş la r idarəsi
PREZİDENT KİTABXANASI 
www.karabakh.az
BAKU-2011
CONTENTS:
Introduction..........................................................................................................................................................................  5
A GLANCE AT THE HISTORY OF AZERBAIJAN:
General Information............................................................................................................................................................  8
KARABAKH:
Facts and Developments.................................................................................................................................................  12
NAGORNO-KARABAKH REGION OF AZERBAIJAN:
Two Communities -  One Vision...................................................................................................................................  17
MILITARY OCCUPATION OF TH E TERRITORY OF AZERBAIJAN:
A Legal Appraisal...............................................................................................................................................................  23
Conclusion..........................................................................................................................................................................  41
Introduction
The Nagorno-Karabakh region of the Repub­
lic of Azerbaijan is part o f the geographical 
area called Garabagh (Qarabağ). The name 
consists of two Azerbaijani words: “qara” 
(black) and “bağ” (garden).1 The geographi­
cal area of Karabakh covers the lands from 
the Araz River in the south to the Kur River 
in the north, and from the junction of the 
Kur and Araz Rivers in the east to the eastern 
ranges of the Lesser Caucasus on the west.
Refugees from the Karabakh War, frantic to get away 
from the invading Armenian troops.
The Armenia-Azerbaijan conflict is one of the 
bloodiest and longest-lasting armed conflicts 
in the territory of the former Soviet Union. 
It resulted in the occupation of roughly one- 
fifth of the territory of Azerbaijan and made 
approximately one out o f every eight persons 
in Azerbaijan an internally displaced per­
son or refugee. No final resolution has been 
reached yet, but the conflict has been a top
1 The term Nagorno-Karabakh or "Nagorno Karabakh" is a 
Russian translation of the original name in Azerbaijani language 
— Dağlıq Qarabağ (pronounced Daghlygh Garabagh), which lit­
erally means Mountainous Garabagh. In order to avoid confusion 
the widely referred terms "Nagorno-Karabakh" or "Karabakh" will 
be used here, as appropriate
agenda item for the Government of Azerbai­
jan with the following priorities:
1) liberation of all occupied territories;
2) return of forcibly displaced persons to 
their places of origin;
3) establishment o f long-lasting peace and 
stability in the Nagorno-Karabakh region of 
the Republic of Azerbaijan, which will pro­
mote in term the peace in the entire South 
Caucasus.
Further continuation of such kind of pro­
tracted conflicts is a major security threat in 
the region o f South Caucasus, which is evi­
dent from the Five-Day war in Georgia (Au­
gust 2008) that “frozen conflict” can easily 
turn into a flash fire.
The President of Azerbaijan, Ilham Aliyev, 
has recently made an assessment of current 
conditions of the Nagorno-Karabakh con­
flict: “The situation of no war, no peace, may 
send a wrong message that it is frozen -  but it 
is not frozen. Peace is provided by the Arme­
nian army and the Azerbaijani army.”2
Even though the mediation efforts have con­
tinued for almost 20 years and sometimes 
one can observe only the appearance of in- 
tence negotiations, Azerbaijan remains faith­
ful to the settlement of the Armenia-Azerbai­
jan conflict within the OSCE Minsk Process. 
However, the success of the peace process 
depends upon a similar commitment and 
constructive approach on the part of Arme­
nia, as well as on the active contribution of all 
O SC E member states, especially those repre-
2 "Foreign Policy Challenges for Azerbaijan," Transcript: Presi­
dent Ilham Aliyev, Chatham House, July 13, 2009, http://www.cha-
thamhouse.org.uk/files/1438B_130709aliyev.pdf
First Congress of the Azerbaijani Community of the 
Nagorno-Karabakh region of the Republic of Azerbaijan
.
I \
F T T J f OU M 4/JC
л Т / ь Р
sented in the Minsk Group as Co-Chairs.
This brochure evaluates the Armenia- 
Azerbaijan conflict from the historical 
perspective, as well as from the position 
of international law and was prepared at a 
time of critical importance in the drive to 
find a solution to the conflict.
The territorial integrity of Azerbaijan can­
not be a subject of compromise. Azerbai­
jan will not surrender an inch of its terri­
tory. However, Azerbaijan does not want 
war and remains committed to a peaceful 
resolution. Nevertheless, Azerbaijan also 
understands that it has a full right under 
international law to restore its territorial 
integrity by all necessary means.
In order to veil its aggressive policy to­
wards Azerbaijan, the Armenian side fre­
quently speculates on the international 
legal principle of self-determination. In 
truth, the practical realization of this right,
as stipulated in the relevant international 
documents, does not involve unilateral 
secession, but represents a legitimate pro­
cess carried out in accordance with inter­
national and domestic law within precise­
ly identified limits. Obviously, the critical 
factor in addressing the issue o f self-de- 
termination with regard to the conflict in 
question is that all actions aimed at tear­
ing away a part o f the territory o f Azerbai­
jan are unconstitutional and accompanied 
by violation of basic rules o f international 
law, particularly those prohibiting the use 
of force and the acquisition o f territory.
Azerbaijan’s official approach to the right 
of self-determination derives from its true 
values. It envisages securing the peaceful 
coexistence and cooperation o f the Azer­
baijani and Armenian communities of the 
Nagorno-Karabakh region o f Azerbaijan 
and creating the necessary conditions for 
the effective realization o f their right to
rtrrmt
participate in the conduct o f public affairs, in­
cluding through the formation o f legitimate 
regional authorities at all levels.
The Government o f Azerbaijan believes that 
the legal status of the Nagorno-Karabakh re­
gion can be worked out only with the equal 
participation of the citizens o f Azerbaijan of 
both Azerbaijani and Armenian communities 
within the framework of a lawful and dem o­
cratic process. While the realization of this 
perspective is in the final stage o f the peace 
process, it is logical that the whole strategy 
would not become a reality without the res­
toration of Azerbaijan’s sovereign rights over 
all occupied territories and the safe and dig­
nified return of the expelled Azerbaijani pop­
ulation thereto.
First Congress of the Azerbaijani Community of the 
Nagorno-Karabakh region of the 
Republic of Azerbaijan
Once an agreement is achieved, Azerbai­
jan will need the international com m unity’s 
help to guarantee its realization through the 
deployment of multinational peacekeeping 
forces, support for demining, restoration of 
communications and rehabilitation o f lands, 
as well as the provision of security guarantees 
for the population in the Nagorno-Karabakh
region, including the creation of local police 
forces in the region for both Azerbaijani and 
Armenian communities. The Government 
o f Azerbaijan is ready to assist in all possible 
ways with the infrastructural rebuilding and 
econom ic development of the region, includ­
ing the attraction of investments at the local 
level.
Special attention in the Armenia-Azerbaijan 
conflict settlement should be given to the 
issue o f infrastructure in the region. Those 
who are familiar with the conflict often en­
counter the notion o f “corridors” or “unim­
peded access.” The government o f Azerbaijan 
suggests a policy o f shifting from restricted, 
antagonistic understandings of the corri­
dor concept to the use o f all infrastructures 
in the region for the mutual benefit of both 
sides. This approach acquires particular sig­
nificance with regard to the so-called “Lachin 
corridor,” which is important for linking both 
the Armenian population in the Nagorno- 
Karabakh region o f Azerbaijan with Arme­
nia, and Azerbaijan with its Autonomous 
Republic o f Nakhichevan through the terri­
tory o f Armenia. The use o f the Lachin road 
in both directions along the route Aghdam- 
Khankendi-Shusha-Lachin-Goris-Shahbuz- 
Nakhichevan (with the possibility o f further 
extension to Turkey) can provide both Azer­
baijan and Armenia with guaranteed secure 
connections. The significance of utilizing the 
“Lachin corridor” in such a way goes beyond 
the practical benefits o f direct transport com­
munication between two states. This road 
could become a “road of peace” of great polit­
ical, economic and pan-regional importance.
A GLANCE AT THE HISTORY OF AZERBAIJAN:
General Information
The favorable geographic and climatic 
conditions of Azerbaijan furthered the 
appearance of humanity on its territory 
from great antiquity. The history of Azer­
baijan begins in the Paleolithic era. In 
the northwest of Azerbaijan, on Aveydag 
Mountain and in the caves of Azikh in
also can find a rock with an inscription 
in Latin relating to an expedition of the 
centurions of the Rom an Legion in Go- 
bustan in the 1st century AD: “At the time 
of Emperor Domitian Caesar Augustus 
Germanicus Lucius Julius Maximus (cen­
turion) of the Legio X II Fulminata.”3 The
Inscription in Latin relating to an expedition of the centurions of the 
Roman Legion in Gobustan in the 1st century AD
Karabakh, stone tools have been found. 
Aside from this, the lower jaw of one of the 
most ancient forms of Neanderthal man 
was found in Azikh cave. Relics from the 
Bronze Age have been found in Khojali, 
Gadabey, Dashkesan, Ganja, Mingeche- 
vir and Nakhchivan. Not far from Baku, 
in Gobustan, at the place of settlement of 
ancient people, survived the rock carvings 
of approximately 10,000 years of age. One
epigraph is the most distant from Rome 
among the Latin ones known up to now.
The phonetic sound o f “Azerbaijan” has 
regularly changed along with history. His­
torical sources reflect former names of 
Azerbaijan as Andirpatian, Atropatena, 
Adirbijan and Azirbijan.
3 Memoires de I'Academie des Sciences, IV, 7. Information
about this was given a few years later (in 1951, inscription no.
263) in the Annee Epigraphique.
Great states such as Manna, kingdom of Iskit 
(Skit, Skif), Atropatena and Albania appear 
on the lands of Azerbaijan in the 1st millen­
nium BC and the 1st millennium AD. Those 
states played distinctive role in development 
of ruling traditions, in history o f the econo­
my and culture of the country and in the for­
mation of one united nation.
Zoroastrianism, or fire-worship and belief in 
the Sun, the Moon, the Sky, the stars, earth, 
water etc. existed at the time. Christianity
Atashgah or “Fire Temple," religious structure in a 
suburb of Baku, Azerbaijan (Zoroastrian temple built 
originaly in 6th century and reconstructed in the 
17th-18th century)
was widely spread in the northern part o f 
the region, i.e. in some places o f Caucasian 
Albania, especially in western mountainous 
regions. An independent Albanian church 
existed together with Armenian and Geor­
gian churches.
Acceptance of Islam in the 7th century sig­
nificantly changed the history o f Azerbaijan, 
as Islam in turn created a new identity. The 
common religion of Turkic and non-Turkic 
ethic groups brought to formation the same 
traditions, essentially, the widening of kin­
ship relations and the deepening o f the inte­
gration process in the territory o f Azerbaijan.
Qiz Qalasi or "Maiden Tower," 
a part of the Walled City of Baku
After the collapse of the Arabic Caliphate 
since the mid 9th century, Turkic-Islamic 
empires increased their role in the Caucasus, 
in all the Near and the Middle East. States 
ruled by such Turkic-Islamic dynasties as 
Sajis, Shirvanshahs, Salaris, Rawadis, Shad- 
dadis, Shaki governors, Saljugis, Eldanises, 
Mongols, Elkhanis-Hulakus, Chobanis, Ja- 
layirs, Teymuris, Osmans, Garagoyunlus, 
Aggoyunlus, Safavids, Afshars, Qajars and 
others remained in the history of the state 
system of Azerbaijan, o f the whole South 
Caucasus and the Near and the Middle East.
In the late 18th century, the political power 
o f Persia was passed to the dynasty of the 
Qajars (1796-1925) o f Azerbaijani origin. 
Their main policy was to unite all the terri­
tories once ruled by their ancestors -  the Ga­
ragoyunlus, the Aggoyunlus, the Safavids, as 
well as the Azerbaijani khanates, under their 
power. This gave start to long lasting wars 
between the Qajars and Russia, aimed at oc­
cupying the Southern Caucasus. Azerbaijan 
was subsequently pressed in the middle of 
the bloody struggle between two great states.
According to the Gulustan (1 8 1 3 ) and Turk-
manchay (1828) agreements, Azerbaijan 
was divided between the two empires. 
The northern part of Azerbaijan joined 
Russia, while the southern part went to 
Persia ruled by the Qajar dynasty. This his­
torical event determines the origin of new 
political-geographical notions: “Northern 
Azerbaijan” (or “Russian Azerbaijan”) and 
“Southern Azerbaijan” (or “Iranian Azer­
baijan”). Later, in 1836, Russia liquidated 
the independent Albanian church, subor­
dinated it to Armenian Grigorian church 
and thus created a favorable condition to 
“Grigorianization” and “Armenianization” 
of ancient population of Azerbaijan -  the 
Christian Albans.
Baku streets developing during the 
Oil Boom (late 19th century)
The 20th century entered the history of 
the Azerbaijani people as the period of 
radical changes in socio-economic, po­
litical and cultural life. The oil boom gave 
an impetus to the emergence of Azerbai­
jani middle class and millionaire men­
tors. Baku turned into the world centre 
of oil extraction and refinery, yielding 
more than half of the worlds and 95 % of 
Russia’s oil extraction totals. This period 
witnessed unprecedented renaissance in 
Azerbaijani national consciousness.
Azerbaijan Democratic Republic (ADR) 
parliament (20th century)
On the verge of Russian revolution of
1917, in March of 1918, the Dashnak-Bol- 
shevik forces under the leadership of Ste­
pan Shaumyan executed the terrible mass 
murders and other war crimes against 
Azerbaijanis. But the interference of 
Turkey brought victory to the liberation 
movement in Azerbaijan. In May 28th of
1918, northern Azerbaijan witnessed the 
establishment of the Azerbaijan Demo­
cratic Republic -  the first Parliamentary 
Republic in the history of the people of 
Azerbaijan, the first democratic, legal and 
secular state in the whole East and Islamic 
world.
Over the 23 months of existence of the 
Azerbaijan Democratic Republic (ADR) 
prior to Bolshevik occupation of Azerbai­
jan in April 1920, the A D R succeeded in 
restoring the territorial integrity of the 
country, in securing the international 
recognition of Azerbaijan, and in estab­
lishing democratic institutions, includ­
ing the Parliament and the multi-party 
representative government. Nevertheless, 
the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic fell 
under the military attack o f the Russian 
XI Red Army. Accordingly, state indepen-
Central Railway Station Baku (1930)
dency of Northern Azerbaijan was liquidat­
ed. On April 28th of 1920, in the territory of 
Azerbaijan, the Soviet Socialist Republic o f 
Azerbaijan (SSRA) appeared instead o f the 
Democratic Republic.
While the ethnic group or, more specifically, 
nationality of “Azerbaijani” was first indicat­
ed in the 1939 Soviet census, the formula­
tion of an Azerbaijani identity started in pre- 
Christian Caucasian Albania and Atropatene, 
incorporating Islamic and Turkic elements in 
medieval times, to become in 1918 the first 
secular parliamentary democracy in the M us­
lim world.
Prior to 1939, Azerbaijanis were called Turks, 
until Stalin decided to disassociate the Tur­
kic people of the Caucasus and Central Asia 
from Turkey. In a similar move in the 1920s,
Soviet authorities granted the Zangezur re­
gion to Armenia, separating Azerbaijan into 
two disjoined parts.
After the tragic events of 1918, the Azerbai­
jani people had to bare another wave during 
the Stalin era. The second wave of cleans- 
ings targeted the intellectual elite of people 
o f Azerbaijan. As such, Azerbaijan remained 
under the influence of this process for many 
years, which almost depleted the intellectual 
potential and took away honorable men of 
our people.
The North region of Azerbaijan completely 
turned into a Soviet state after the call of the 
first Soviet Conference of Azerbaijan SSR in 
May 6th o f 1921 and adoption of Constitu­
tion o f Azerbaijan SSR  on May 19th, 1921. 
That period of Azerbaijani state establish­
ment ended with the adoption of the Con­
stitution Act on “The State Independence 
o f Azerbaijan Republic” on October 18th 
o f 1991, on the eve o f the fall o f the USSR. 
M odern Azerbaijan Republic is following 
the road o f independent development, with 
citizens o f Azerbaijan confident that such a 
modern democracy will assume the place in 
the world that it deserves, according to its 
past, present and future.
KARABAKH:
Facts and Developments
To understand the roots o f the Armenia- 
Azerbaijan conflict, it is sufficient to look 
upon the last two centuries for the birth 
of precursors and the creation and prog­
ress of Nagorno-Karabakh’s autonomy. In 
other words, it is imperative to review the 
whole period, starting from the amalga­
mation of the entire South Caucasus with 
Russia, up to the modern times.
From 4th century B.C. to 8th century 
A.D. the territory of the current Nagorno- 
Karabakh region o f Azerbaijan was one of 
the provinces o f Caucasian Albania, the 
most ancient state o f Northern Azerbai­
jan. After the fall o f the independent Al­
banian state, Karabakh being inseparable 
from Azerbaijan both geographically and 
politically, was a part of the Azerbaijani 
state o f Sajids, in the 10th - to the state o f 
Salarids, and in the 11-12th centuries - to 
the state of Sheddadids. During 12-13th 
centuries Karabakh constituted a part of 
the Atabey-Ildenizids state, in the sec­
ond half of the 13th century- beginning 
of 15th century, during the existence of 
the Mongolian Khalugoid state -  part o f 
the Jalairds’ state. In the 15th century it 
existed within the states o f Gharagoun- 
lou and Aghgounlou, and during the 16th 
and 17th centuries Karabakh, as a part o f 
the Karabakh beylerbeyyat (duchy), was 
within the dynasty of Safavids. The latter 
consisted of 4  beylerbeyyats: Shirvani, 
Karabakhi, Erivani and Tabrizi, when a 
part of the Karabakhi beylerbeyyat was
ruled by the representatives o f the Turkic 
Ziyad-oglu tribe, subordinated to Kajars 
from 16th till 19th century. In the second 
half o f the 18th century Karabakh be­
longed to the khanate (principality) and 
along whith the latter was incorporated
А ЗЕ РБ А Й Д Ж А Н  V СОСЕДНИЕ ОБЛАСТИ 
*  П ЕРКОЙ  ППЛПВИНК IP  в.
so о too «м
Ш ЛИ О&АДОИ СМ С МНСТ#4. М *о<ЭД(<чиак а  » « £ ! « /  по Гяюгттт- скоиу м и р см у  АНХ9Ф Г  М З г ,
—• с  V T j * ■ ; кчугим;  Av
Map of Azerbaijani khanates (kingdoms) in 
early 19th century
into Russia. All through the 19th century, 
Armenians remained a m inority on the 
territories o f Karabakh and present-day
Armenia despite their active relocation from 
Ottoman and Persian domains after the Rus­
sian conquest. At the time of incorporation of 
Karabakh Khanate to Russia (M ay 14, 1805) 
Armenian inhabitants o f the region consisted 
of only one-fifth of the whole community. By 
studying the data in “A Record on Karabakh 
Province in 1823 collected by a civil servant, 
Mogilevsky and a colonel, Erm olov (Tiflis, 
1866)”
“... Karabakh Khanate consisted o f 90 ,000  
people, one city and over 600  villages, 
from which only 150 were Armenian ones. 
Around 1,948 Azerbaijani families and ap­
proximately 474 Armenian families resided 
in Shusha. In villages 120 ,902  and 4 ,331 
respectively.”4
By studying the historical documents, one can 
see the process of relocation of Armenians to 
the South Caucasus including Karabakh dur­
ing the course of Russian-Persian wars of 
1804 -  1813 and 1826 -  1828 and in the fol­
lowing period of time. Official data shows that 
major parts of the resettlements got relocated 
specifically in Karabakh. N. N. Shavrov writes 
in his 1911 book titled “A new danger for the 
Russian affair in Transcaucasia”; “Impending 
sale ofMughan to foreigners”, that:
“... From 1828 to 1830 we have moved to 
[the] South Caucasus more than 40 ,000  
Persian- and 84,000 Turkish-Armenians and 
settled them on the best state owned lands 
of Elizabethpol and Erivan provinces where 
Armenian population was less than low, and 
provided them with 200,000 tenths of state- 
owned lands and bought for them private
lands from Muslims for more than 2 million 
rubles. The mountainous part o f Elizabeth­
pol province and shores of Lake Geokcha 
[present Sevan] are now populated by these 
Armenians. It should be noted that in addi­
tion to officially transferred 124,000 Arme­
nians a lot o f other Armenians moved un­
officially, so their total score goes well over
200 ,000  people.”5
Already, in the X IX  century, possible out­
comes of such relocations and radical chang­
es in the ethnic composition of population of 
territories have raised awareness of both the 
indigenous populations o f the region as well 
as o f the influential parts o f Russian political 
establishment. For example, famous Russian 
diplomat and poet Griboyedov (also direct­
ly connected with the Turkmenchay Peace 
Treaty that divided Azerbaijan in two parts) 
notes that:
“In addition we (prince Arguntskiy and my­
self) thoroughly discussed the incitement to 
present to Muslims in order to settle them 
with the present aggravation, that will be
Interior paintings of battle scenes of Khan's Palace 
in Sheki, Azerbaijan (18th century)
4 See: A Record on Karabagh Province in 1823 collected by a 5 See: Shavrov N.N. A new danger for the Russian affair in
civil servant, Mogilevsky, and a colonel, Ermolov (Tiflis, 1866), Transcaucasia: Impending sale of Mughan to foreigners. Baku,
StateArchiveof of the Republic of Azerbaijan, f. 21, 24— 1, №117 1990.
short-lasting, and to eradicate their fears 
that Armenians will keep their lands, to 
which they were allowed for the first time, 
forever-on.”6
Fourth Cabinet of Ministers of the 
Democratic Republic of Azerbaijan 
(March 14, 1919 - December 22, 1919)
Upon the fall of the Russian Empire, 
in 1918-20, the territory of Nagorno- 
Karabakh was under the control of the 
Azerbaijan Democratic Republic, whose 
authority over Karabakh was officially 
recognized by the Allied powers. After 
the establishment of the Azerbaijan SSR 
in 1921, the Bolshevik Caucasus Bureau 
(often shortened to KavBuro) voted to 
not to incorporate but to retain Nagorno- 
Karabakh in Azerbaijan.
In a declaration of then Soviet govern­
ment in Azerbaijan, from 1 December 
1920, it was stated that: "... working peas­
ants of Nagorno-Karabakh have a full right 
to self-determination.” The idea of giving 
Nagorno-Karabakh the right to self-de­
termination was debated in the party and 
Soviet circles. With passing time, in regard 
of Nagorno-Karabakh within the Soviet 
leaders had been formed a view that there
6 AS.Griboyedov. 2-volumed works. II volume, Moscow, 
1971, p. 341
was a need to present Nagorno-Karabakh 
with autonomy. Anastas Mikoyan, a pow­
erful ethnically Armenian Soviet official 
and right-hand of Stalin, in his report to 
the chairman of C.C., R.C.P.(B.) Vladimir 
Lenin on 22 May 1919, wrote: “Dashnaks 
-  agents of the Armenian government, are 
trying to connect Karabakh to Armenia. 
But for the population of Karabakh that 
would mean to lose their source of life in 
Baku and link up with Irevan and with 
which [meaning Irevan/Yerevan] they 
were never and in no way linked together.”
Then, in August o f 1920, in the letter by 
the chairman of Azerbaijan Revolution­
ary Committee (AzRevCom), Nariman 
Narimanov, and such Armenian members 
of the body as abovementioned Anastas
11 th Soviet Red Army occupied Baku,
(April 28, 1920)
Mikoyan and A.Narijanyan, addressed to 
the Commissar (Minister) o f Foreign Af­
fairs in Moscow, Chicherin, and to Ord­
zhonikidze, another powerful Bolshevik 
and senior member of the Caucasus Bu­
reau of the CC R C P (b ), in Vladikavkaz, 
wrote: “As to the supposedly disputed
7 Central Party Archive of the Institute of Marxism-Leninism 
of the CC CPSU (Moscow), f. 461, op. 1, report #45252, p. 1.
Zangezur and Karabakh, already part o f So ­
viet Azerbaijan, we categorically declare, that 
these lands must indisputably remain as part 
of Azerbaijan henceforth.”8
Azerbaijani town Khankendi renamed to 
Stepanakert in 1923 (Soviet Era)
On 5 July 1921, Plenum of Caucasus B u­
reau of the Central Committee,taking into 
account the view of Central Committee o f 
Russian Communist Party (Bolshevik), 
came to a decision: “Acknowledging the need 
of national peace between Muslims and Ar­
menians and economical ties o f  upper and 
lower Karabakh and its constant connection 
with Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh shall 
remain in the boundaries o f Azerbaijan SS R  
and shall enjoy wide regional autonomy with 
regional center in Shusha city, that is a part 
of autonomous region.”9 On 7 Ju ly 1923, the 
Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Oblast 
(NKAO) was established in the m ountain­
ous part of Karabakh. The town o f Khankan- 
di was defined as the administrative centre o f  
the autonomy. In September 1923, the name 
of the town was changed to Stepanakert after 
Stepan Shaumian, dashnak, and bolshevik 
leader. The Constitution o f U SSR  o f 1936
8 Central State Archive of October revolution of Azerbaijan SSR 
(Baku), f. 410, op. 2, d. 69, pp. 181-187.
9 See: Russian State Archive of Socio-Political History (Mos­
cow), f.64, op. 2, d.l, p.118,121-122.]
provided that Nagorno-Karabakh Autono­
mous Region (N KAR) is part o f Azerbaijan 
S S R .10
According to article 86 o f the Constitution 
of U SSR  o f 1977, an autonomous region is 
located within the composition of union 
republic or territory (krai). Law on au­
tonom ous region was adopted by the High 
Council o f  Union Republics brought by the 
Council o f Peoples Representatives of au­
tonomous region. Article 87 o f the Constitu­
tion mentioned only eight such autonomous 
regions in U SSR, and among them NKAR as 
apart o f Azerbaijan S S R .11
Azerbaijani town Agdam  (Soviet Era)
From the first years Nagorno-Karabakh Au­
tonomous Region saw considerable reforms 
in the economic, social and cultural spheres. 
Along with Ganja and Nakhichevan, Karabakh 
was defined as the region of priority tempos 
for industrialization in the republic. Special 
attention was paid to the firm observance of 
the proportionality o f the national composi­
tion o f all the elective organs with the popula­
tion’s ethnic composition in the region. There 
were also 136 secondary schools, in which 
the teaching language was Armenian (16,120 
students), and 13 inter-ethnic schools (7,045
10 See: article 24 of the Constitution of USSR of 1936
11 See: Constitution of USSR, 1977, p. 13
students) in NK region of Azerbaijan. As 
such, there were altogether 181 Armenian 
secondary schools (20,712 students) and
29 inter-ethnic schools (12,766 students) 
in Azerbaijan in the academic year 1988- 
1989. In the town of Khankendi (formerly 
Stepanakert) there was a State Pedagogical 
Institute with over 2,130 students, mainly 
Armenians, annually attending its Arme­
nian, Azerbaijani and Russian departments. 
In addition, there were dozens of technical 
colleges and vocational training schools in 
NK working in the Armenian and Russian 
languages.12 Apart from that, all the ruling 
positions in autonomy were occupied by 
the ethnic Armenians; it was ordinary for 
ethnic Armenians to occupy ruling posts in 
central bodies of Azerbaijan SSR.
On 16 June 1981, the last act was asserted 
towards the status of Nagorno-Karabakh 
as the autonomous region in the boundar­
ies of Azerbaijan SSR -  Law of Azerbaijan 
SSR “On Nagorno-Karabakh Autono­
mous Region.” The autonomy’s status was 
determined by the Constitution of USSR, 
the Constitution of Azerbaijan SSR and 
by the aforementioned law.
Regarding the early claims that the econo­
my of NKAR was supposedly deliberately 
neglected by Soviet Azerbaijani authori­
ties to both “punish” and “root out” Arme­
nians; this, allegedly, left no choice than for 
Armenian separatism and military action. 
Ironically, this argument never passed the 
test. Authoritative ethnically Armenian 
Soviet economists maintained in a March
12 Council of Europe, ACFC/SR (2002) 1, Report Submitted 
By Azerbaijan Pursuant To Article 25, Paragraph 1 Of The 
Framework Convention For The Protection Of National Mi­
norities, (received on 4 June 2002).
1988 government meeting, which was at 
the start of the Armenia-Azerbaijan con­
flict, that the economy of the NK autono­
mous region, if taken separately, was actu­
ally better overall than in both Azerbaijan 
and Armenia, and even all o f USSR. In fact, 
from the point of economic development, 
the NK region in Azerbaijan was second 
only to the Absheron region and its city 
in Baku, the capital -  ahead o f nearly 60 
other regions of the country. The meeting 
was chaired by the academician Tigran 
S. Khachaturov, a prominent Armenian 
economist sent from Moscow, and the fol­
lowing ethnic Armenian high-level officials 
o f Azerbaijan SSR  reported: A.Ayriyan, 
Minister of Timber and Wood-processing 
of Azerbaijan, L.Davidyan, deputy head of 
the Department of Construction and Ur­
ban Management of the Azerbaijan CPCC, 
and A. Pogosova, deputy department chief, 
State Planning Committee (Gosplan).13
By the end of the 80s and the beginning of 
the 90s, Azerbaijan experienced specific 
difficulties connected to the destruction of 
ruling socio-economic formation, similar 
to other states that were in the USSR. In 
this situation, it was popular to use nation­
al issues to achieve separatist goals. Taking 
into account the guarantees to the autono­
my provided by the law and supported by 
actual situation of its national minority, the 
demands of independence and breaking 
out from frontiers of Azerbaijan were con­
sidered as provocation directed against its 
state sovereignty and territorial integrity. 
As the result of this, autonomy of Nagorno- 
Karabakh was abolished in 1991.
13 "Expert Contrasts Armenia, Azerbaijan Development," 
FBIS-translated item WA182000106, Baku, "Bakinskiy Rabo- 
chiy" newspaper, in Russian, (11 March 1988), pp. 2-3.
NAGORNO-KARABAKH REGION OF AZERBAIJAN:
Two Communities -  One Vision
T B IL ISI Salakarv- ' N . .
Zaga r ;i 1 a* j
/ G ubti
y Sh ak i
b g h u i
'çİcKieVtr Ismayil
iu m g a y  t
Qadabay_ :as;i  n
[urdmnir-
K alb ^ ar
iS h irv t in
’■ > Khojaly< 
K h a i ik a n
National C apital 
Capita] o f Autonom ous 
Republic 
City/town un der 
rep ublican rule 
D istrict cen ter  
Village
Salyani
iwragS* Bilas)
N eftchaln
Ja lilabad <
"Majuillyi O ccupied areas
S ta te  bound ary
..........  D istrict bound ary
-------- Railroad
_____  Road
REPUBLIC O F TURKEY
Y ardym ly
L crik
in k a r a n
Map of the Republic of Azerbaijan
To simplify the current situation and under­
stand the lack of progress toward resolution o f 
the Armenia-Azerbaijan conflict, one should 
understand both sides: Armenia has been 
talking to Azerbaijan with the rhetoric o f force 
and trying to impose a fait-accompli based 
solution, while Azerbaijan has been doing so 
with the language of law and has tried to find 
a creative solution with the respect for the ter­
ritorial integrity and inviolability o f the inter­
nationally-recognized borders o f Azerbaijan, 
and the peaceful coexistence o f Armenian 
and Azerbaijani communities in the Nagorno-
the benefits of democracy and prosperity. The 
com m on language will be reached only if the 
both sides start to talk on the same level. It is 
time -  either for Armenia to start using the 
language o f law and to comply with the United 
Nations (U N ) Security Council resolutions 
822, 853, 874  and 8 8 4 ,14 as well as the related 
documents and decisions o f the Organiza­
tion for Security and Cooperation in Europe 
(O S C E ); or for Azerbaijan to start to talking 
in the language of force, and remove invad-
14 UN Security Council resolutions were adopted in 1993 in re-
Karabakh region, fully and eqijally enjoying firmed the sovereignt 
A zərb aycan  R esp u b  intem atförfdf^ciers
lijla r  Ir la rə s İ
/, territorial integrity and inviolability of the 
pf the Republic of Azerbaijan.
PRESIDENT KİTABXANASI
ers from the occupied regions of Azerbai­
jan: Nagorno-Karabakh in addition to the 
seven adjacent regions of Lachin, Kalb ajar, 
Aghdam, Fuzuli, Zangilan, Gubadli and 
Jabrail.
amples of different cultural heritage thus, 
extend the occupation policies up to the 
level of cultural values. Appeal in this re­
gard was addressed to the International 
Organization of Intellectual Property.
Azerbaijani town Agdam.Present Day (Andre Widmer)
The disastrous results of these hostilities 
are not limited to the occupation of Azer­
baijani territory. The strategy of terror 
against Azerbaijani people raised at the 
level of Armenian state policy has dam­
aged also Azerbaijani history, culture, re­
ligious monuments, toponims and other 
values.
The Republic o f Armenia, while violat­
ing requirements of international docu­
ments, continues to vandalize and anni­
hilate Azerbaijan’s cultural wealth before 
the eyes of the world. More than 100.000 
cultural monuments were destroyed, as 
well as more than 500 cultural and 100 
archaeological monuments and 22 muse­
ums were ruined as a result of occupation.
Besides the material cultural monuments, 
Armenian nationalists regularly and sys­
tematically misappropriate the Azerbai­
jani folklore, music, literature, and ex-
Another fact -  Azerbaijan’s educational 
system, one of the best in the wider re­
gion, has also suffered from the Armenian 
aggression. Established in December of 
1830, secondary school № 1 of Shusha be­
came the first civil educational facility not 
only in the region, but whole East and Is­
lamic world. Unfortunately, when the town 
of Shusha fell to Armenian armed forces on 
8 May 1992, the school had to relocate to 
Baku where it remains to this day.
Just this school since its foundation has 
made a great contribution to bringing up 
progressive, new generations of intellec­
tuals to the country’s cultural and enlight­
enment movement.
Armenia blames Azerbaijan for increas­
ing its military budget and for violat­
ing arms limitation norms. At the same 
time, it omits the fact that annual defense 
spending of Azerbaijan remains in line
with overall budget increases and that the 
size of the armed forces o f Azerbaijan are 
proportional to its population, territory and 
length of borders.15 Armenia also passes over 
in silence that the arms control mechanism 
is not in force in the occupied territories o f 
Azerbaijan and that it deploys, beyond in­
ternational control, a great num ber of arma­
ments and ammunitions in these territories.
Taking advantage of the favorable results o f 
military actions, Armenia is trying to consoli­
date the current status quo and impose a fait 
accompli situation ( “an accomplished fact”) 
through measures aimed at preventing the 
expelled Azerbaijani population from return­
ing to their places of origin. Such measures 
include, among the others, continuing illegal 
settlement practices and economic activities 
in the occupied territories accompanied by 
serious and systematic interference with prop­
erty rights.
In 1992, a mission of the Conference on Se­
curity and Cooperation in Europe (C SC E , 
precursor to the O SC E) headed by then- 
U.S. Secretary of State Jam es Baker, worked 
out the so-called Baker Rules, which were 
agreed to by all sides o f the conflict. Those 
rules recognized the two communities o f Na- 
gorno-Karabakh as “interested parties,” and 
Armenia and Azerbaijan as “directly involved 
parties.”
In this context, one could only welcome the 
ideas about participation o f Nagorno-Kara- 
bakh Armenian community representatives 
at the negotiating table. Unfortunately, many 
analysts stopped short o f m entioning the eth-
15 See, e.g., Azerbaijan: Defence Sector Management and Re­
form, International Crisis Group policy briefing No. 50, 29 October
2008, p. 5.
nic Azerbaijani community that, prior to the 
1988 conflict, comprised one-third o f Nago- 
rno-Karabakh’s population16 and 99 percent 
o f the population o f seven other adjacent dis­
tricts o f Azerbaijan1 currently occupied by 
Arm enian forces.
The military separatist regime, established by 
Arm enia in occupied Azerbaijani territories 
an unjustly m onoethnic Armenian entity in 
the Caucasus. It is not independent, as it can­
not sustain itself without outside assistance 
from  Armenia.
But m ost importantly, it was established af­
ter the exodus of one ethnic group forced by 
another. The leaders o f the puppet military 
regime cannot speak on behalf of the people 
o f  Nagorno-Karabakh, because one-third of 
them  were stripped of the right to choose 
their leaders due to their ethnicity. Therefore, 
Azerbaijan -  along with all the reputable or­
ganizations including the United Nations, 
the Council o f  Europe, and the O SC E -  con­
siders the so-called “elections” illegitimate. 
Moreover, in the words o f then-U.S. Assis­
tant Secretary o f State Elizabeth Jones, these 
leaders o f  puppet military regime constitute 
“criminal secessionists.”18
At present, Armenia’s military occupation
16 The 1989 all-Union population census. [Vsesoyuznaya 
perepis' naseleniya 1989 д.] Vestnik Statistiki, No. 1, 1991. 63-78 
pp. Moscow, USSR. In Rus. Selected results of the 1989 Soviet 
census are presented concerning the Georgian, Azerbaijan, Lithu­
anian, Moldavian, and Latvian republics. Data are included on the 
population of each republic by ethnic group (nationality), first 
language, and other languages spoken.
17 Ibid
18 ANCA Press Release, "ANCA criticizes State Department state­
ment describing the Nagorno Karabagh republic as 'criminal se­
cessionists.' Incendiary Remarks by Assistant Secretary of State 
Jones Undermine the Karabagh Peace Process," Washington D.C., 
(January 18, 2005), http://www.anca.org/press_releases/press_re- 
leases.php?prid=698
of the region precludes the much-desired 
participation of Nagorno-Karabakh’s eth­
nic Armenian community in the peace 
process  ̂ because the region’s ethnic Azer­
baijanis were stripped of this right. Last­
ing peace in Nagorno-Karabakh cannot be 
achieved without a return of the region’s 
ethnic Azerbaijani population and their 
harmonious coexistence with the ethnic 
Armenian community. Furthermore; to re­
establish the much-needed trust between 
the two nations, it is important for both Ar­
menians and Azerbaijanis to refrain from 
any hostile, derogatory, or inflammatory 
rhetoric.
Secondly, Azerbaijan has consistently of­
fered -  during all the period of negotia­
tions, from the 1990s until today -  that it 
is ready to grant the highest possible level 
of autonomy for those who live in Nagor- 
no-Karabakh, within the framework of 
the sovereign Azerbaijani state.
At the same time Azerbaijan also under­
stands the concern of Armenia about a 
land connection between Armenia and 
Nagorno-Karabakh, about security guar­
antees, and about peacekeeping opera­
tions. It is ready in a constructive manner 
to address these issues. Some of them are 
already agreed and we need to continue 
this process.
Peace in the region will bring numerous 
advantages to everyone. Azerbaijan will 
restore its territorial integrity and citizens 
of Azerbaijan will have an opportunity 
to live in their own country, in the places 
where their ancestors lived. Armenia will 
put an end to the occupation policy and to
the image of a country that occupies the 
sovereign territory of another country. At 
the same time Nagorno-Karabakh, which 
is situated inside Azerbaijan and never 
had any connections with Armenia, will 
have unimpeded access to Armenia via 
the corridor. All the communications in 
the region will be opened. Then full-scale 
regional cooperation can happen. All the 
sides and all the countries o f the Caucasus 
will only benefit from that.
It is highly unlikely that Nagorno-Kara­
bakh will ever be recognized as an inde­
pendent country: the territory inside a 
sovereign Azerbaijani state, with very 
small population, cannot be independent. 
The fact that it was not recognized so far, 
by any country -  including Armenia -  is 
a clear indication that independence is 
not possible. Azerbaijan will never agree 
to such a peace plan that would predeter­
mine the independent status of Nagorno- 
Karabakh. This is completely out of ques­
tion. The proposals of the OSCE Minsk 
Group clearly indicate that there is no 
mechanism of secession or independence. 
Instead, what can be achieved is peace and 
peaceful coexistence between the Arme­
nian and Azerbaijani communities of 
Nagorno-Karabakh. Both communities 
lived together in peace in the past and will 
continue to live side by side.
Azerbaijan’s economy is certainly part of 
the dynamic of Azerbaijani diplomacy. 
Azerbaijan recognizes the need of state 
revenues to benefit all citizens of Azerbai­
jan (including Armenian and Azerbaijani 
communities of Nagorno-Karabakh, as 
well as all the regions of Azerbaijan). This
recognition takes part while Armenia, tar­
nished by lost economic opportunities, while 
economic migration to Russia and the West 
has arguably decreased the population in half, 
and separatist authorities in Nagorno-Kara- 
bakh suffering from severe under-employ­
ment, increasingly depending on “external” 
support, particularly from Armenian D ias­
pora groups in the West and from so-called 
“inter-state” loans from Armenia.
The problem is that, even if with the demise 
of the Soviet Union in 1991, Armenia gained 
independence, and has becom e the second- 
largest per capita U.S. aid recipient in the 
world as of current, thanks to a very large and 
influential Armenian-American community. 
Unfortunately, then another set o f problems 
arise -  negative impacts o f this increased aid 
exist. Regrettably, it is perfectly reasonable to 
conclude that the biggest impact o f  official 
aid on financially undeveloped countries in 
recent decades has been the certain condi­
tions attached to it. Changes in trade rules, 
bad privatizations, and the liberalization o f 
financial flows may well have had a more 
serious negative impact than the benefits 
of more cash in hand. Aid does, and m ost 
probably continues to retard Armenia’s in­
stitutional development, with most evidence 
suggesting that countries receiving aid have 
less of an incentive to raise taxes, perhaps 
the fundamental step that developing coun­
tries need to make, is to both increase the 
resources available to the public sector to fi­
nance development and to improve govern­
ments’ accountability to their citizens. In this 
light, the significance of econom ic forces in 
the South Caucasus and components o f the 
Armenia-Azerbaijan conflict dynamic are
worth unpacking.
Azerbaijani economy accounts for some 75 
per cent o f the total economy of the South 
Caucasus. Its gross domestic product (G D P) 
for 2 0 1 0  was $52.1 billion, almost six times 
bigger than Armenia’s $8.8 billion. Economic 
development, along with visionary policies, 
has helped Azerbaijan to fully develop -  not 
only its capital city, but its provinces to enjoy 
rapid growth. Sometimes Azerbaijans eco­
nom ic performance is linked to oil and oil 
prices, but this is not exactly the case as oil is 
being produced by some o f our neighboring 
countries as well, even in much bigger quan­
tities. The econom ic development o f Azer­
baijan’s regions where oil is not produced is 
a clear indicator o f diversification of the na­
tional economy.
This diversification supporting private entre­
preneurship and econom ic reforms allows 
Azerbaijan not to depend solely on oil and 
gas. That was one o f the m ajor objectives: to 
reduce this dependence and to create a strong 
econom y which can be sustainable in periods 
o f  crisis and low oil price or even reduction 
o f  production.
Social issues were also seriously addressed: 
the reduction o f poverty is one o f the biggest 
achievements in Azerbaijan. It also shows 
that the oil wealth is being distributed in a 
just manner. Azerbaijan’s reforms were no­
ticed by the W orld Bank, which ranked Azer­
baijan the top reform er in the world in 2008  
in the D oing Business project (project pro­
vides objective measures o f business regula­
tions for local firms in 183 econom ies and 
selected cities at the subnational level).
Political and econom ic reforms in Azerbai-
Azerbaijani town Shusha. Ashagi Govhar Aga Mosque (Andre Widmer)
jan are conducted adjacent to each other. 
Energy policy was a crucial part of vision 
and will continue to play an important 
role. Already not only in Azerbaijan but 
around Azerbaijan, oil and gas projects 
which were implemented by us today is a 
solid foundation for future energy devel­
opments in the world. Azerbaijan was the 
first country to invite foreign investors to 
the Caspian Sea; oil and gas fields which 
output more and more; pipelines which 
were created as a result of this investment. 
A favorable investment climate in Azer­
baijan, attracting increasing amount of in­
vestment into non-energy sector became 
the reality due to the vision and wisdom 
of Azerbaijan’s national leader Heydar Ali­
yev, who initiated the signing of the “Con­
tract of the Century” in 1994.
Azerbaijan has a diversified supply infra­
structure: seven pipelines -  three for oil, 
four for gas -can transport oil and gas in
various directions. Billions of dollars were 
invested in production. Reserves which 
have been discovered will allow Azerbai­
jan to be a reliable supplier of gas to inter­
national markets for at least 100 years. But 
for Azerbaijan, diversification means not 
only the ability to realize energy potential. 
For example, the Joint Declaration on Gas 
Delivery for Europe, signed by the Presi­
dent of the European Commission Jose 
Manuel Barroso and the President of Azer­
baijan Ilham Aliyev in January of 2011, is 
an important step in the realization of the 
Southern Gas Corridor and the diversifica­
tion of Europe’s energy supplies. However, 
the Azerbaijani government has been quite 
straightforward about the transit issue. It 
means their energy security for citizens 
and industries and reduced the risk of en­
ergy dependency, removes the threat of 
“energy weapon,” aimed to influence Euro­
pean foreign and economic policies.
MILITARY OCCUPATION OF THE 
TERRITORY OF AZERBAIJAN:
A Legal Appraisal
Essential facts
At the end of 1987, the Armenian Soviet So ­
cialist Republic (SSR) openly laid claim to 
the territory of the Nagorno Karabakh Au­
tonomous Region of the Azerbaijani SSR . 
That marked the beginning of the systematic 
expulsion of Azerbaijanis from the Armenian 
SSR and the Nagorno Karabakh A utono­
mous Region.
On 20 February 1988, at a meeting o f the re­
gional soviet of the Nagorno Karabakh Au­
tonomous Region, Armenian representatives 
adopted a decision on petitioning the Su­
preme Soviets of the Azerbaijani SSR  and the 
Armenian SSR for the Nagorno Karabakh Au­
tonomous Region to be transferred from the 
Azerbaijani SSR to the Armenian S S R .19 This 
decision set in motion determined actions by 
the Armenian authorities aimed at the unilat­
eral secession of the Nagorno Karabakh Au­
tonomous Region from the Azerbaijani SSR .
The first victims were two Azerbaijanis, killed 
by Armenians on 22 February 1988 near the 
town of Askeran in Nagorno Karabakh. O n
28 February 1988, interethnic clashes broke 
out in Sumqayit.
19 This section is based on the report which has been prepared 
by the Foreign Policy Planning and Strategic Studies Department 
of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Azerbaijan 
and has been circulated as the UN General Assembly and Se­
curity Council document A/62/491-S/2007/615 dated 23 Octo­
ber 2007. See Vaan Arutunyan. Sobytiya v Nagornom Karabakhe: 
Khronika (Events in Nagorno Karabakh: Chronicle), part 1, Feb­
ruary 1988-January 1989 (Yerevan, Academy of Sciences of the 
Armenian SSR, 1990), p. 38.
At a meeting o f the Nagorno Karabakh re­
gional soviet, held on 12 June 1988 without 
the participation of any Azerbaijani depu­
ties, an unlawful decision was adopted on the 
withdrawal o f the Nagorno Karabakh Auton­
omous Region from the Azerbaijani SSR .20
The A rm enian SS R  was also actively involved 
in efforts to legalize the separation o f the Na­
gorno Karabakh A utonom ous Region from 
the Azerbaijani SSR . The highest organ o f 
State authority o f the Arm enian SSR  —  the 
Suprem e Soviet —  adopted a num ber o f de­
cisions that violated the Constitution, the
20 Decision of the eighth meeting of the twentieth convoca­
tion of the Soviet of People's Deputies of the Nagorno Karabakh 
Autonomous Region proclaiming the withdrawal of the Nagorno 
Karabakh Autonomous Region from the Azerbaijani SSR, 12 July 
1988; see Vaan Arutunyan, pp. 113-115.
Azerbaijani refugees and IDP's from  the Karabakh. 
Early 90 s
most notorious of which was the resolu­
tion of 1 December 1989 on the “reunifi­
cation of the Armenian SSR and Nagorno 
Karabakh”. This document made provi­
sion for the adoption of all the necessary 
measures for the amalgamation of the po­
litical, economic and cultural structures 
of the Armenian SSR and Nagorno Kara­
bakh into a single State political system.21
The proclamation on 2 September 1991 
of the “Nagorno Karabakh Republic” 
and the declaration of this territorial en­
tity as an “independent State” based on 
the outcome of a referendum held on 10 
December, marked the next step in efforts 
to legitimize the separation of the Nago­
rno Karabakh Autonomous Region from 
Azerbaijan.
The collapse of the USSR finally freed the 
hands of the Armenian nationalists. Over 
the period 1992-1993 a considerable area 
of Azerbaijan was occupied, including 
Nagorno Karabakh and seven adjacent 
districts. The resulting war unleashed 
against Azerbaijan led to the deaths and 
wounding of thousands of people; hun­
dreds of thousands became refugees and 
were forcibly displaced and several thou­
sand disappeared without trace.
Collapse of the USSR and 
legitimization of borders
All the decisions taken with a view to 
separating Nagorno Karabakh from Azer­
baijan ran counter to the Constitution 
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Repub-
21 Resolution of the Supreme Soviet of the Armenian SSR 
on the reunification of the Armenian SSR and Nagorno Kara­
bakh, 1 December 1989. Kommunist newspaper, 2 December 
1989.
lies, which stipulated that the territory 
of a Union republic could not be altered 
without its consent, while the borders be­
tween Union republics could be altered 
by mutual agreement of the republics 
concerned, subject to ratification by the 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.22
The Nagorno Karabakh Autonomous Re­
gion remained in existence until 26 No­
vember 1991, when, pursuant to an act 
adopted by the Supreme Council of the 
Republic o f Azerbaijan, the autonomous 
region was abolished as a territorial entity 
of the country.23 Until the full restoration 
of State independence of the Republic of 
Azerbaijan and its recognition by the in­
ternational community Nagorno Kara­
bakh continued to form part of Azerbai­
jan, and any actions intended to secure 
the unilateral separation of this region 
were without legal consequence.
Shortly after the Soviet Union ceased to 
exist, its former constituent republics 
were accorded de jure recognition by the 
international community. The moment 
the Republic o f Azerbaijan gained inde­
pendence, the former administrative bor­
ders of the Azerbaijani SSR, which also 
encompassed the Nagorno Karabakh Au­
tonomous Region, were deemed hence­
forth to be international borders and to 
be protected under international law ( uti 
possidetis juris). This tenet is also unequiv­
ocally and unconditionally upheld in 
resolutions of the United Nations Secu-
22 USSR Constitution (Moscow, 1977), p. 13, art. 78.
23 Nagorno Karabakh Autonomous Region of the Republic 
of Azerbaijan (Abolition) Act, 26 November 1991. Gazette of 
the Supreme Council of the Republic of Azerbaijan, 1991, No. 
24, pp. 77 and 78.
Azerbaijani town Shusha. (Soviet Era)
rity Council relating to the conflict between 
Armenia and Azerbaijan.24 As pointed out by 
David Atkinson, rapporteur on the Karabakh 
conflict for the Parliamentary Assembly o f 
the Council of Europe (PACE), “the borders 
of Azerbaijan were internationally recog­
nized at the time of the country being recog­
nized as an independent State in 1991”, the 
territory of which “included the Nagorno- 
Karabakh region”.25 Under the rules o f inter­
national law on State succession, Azerbaijan 
also inherited the corresponding sectors of 
the frontiers of the former U SSR  with Iran 
and Turkey, which had been established on 
the basis of international treaties concluded 
between the USSR and those States.
Prohibition under international law of the 
forcible seizure of a territory
The Charter of the United Nations proclaims 
as one of the purposes o f the United Nations 
the maintenance of international peace and 
security and, to that end, the taking o f effec­
tive collective measures for the prevention
24 Security Council resolutions 822 (1993) of 30 April 1993, 853 
(1993) of 29 June 1993, 874 (1993) of 14 October 1993 and 884 
(1993) of 11 November 1993.
25 Report of the Political Affairs Committee of the Parliamentary 
Assembly of the Council of Europe. Document 10364, 29 Novem­
ber 2004. Explanatory Memorandum by the Rapporteur, part III,
para. 5.
and removal o f threats to the peace, and for 
the suppression of acts o f aggression or other 
breaches o f the peace, and the bringing about 
by peaceful means, and in conformity with 
the principles o f justice and international law, 
of adjustment or settlement of international 
disputes or situations which might lead to a 
breach o f the peace.26
Pursuant to Article 2, paragraph 4, of the 
Charter, States shall refrain in their interna­
tional relations from the threat or use of force 
against the territorial integrity or political 
independence of any State, or in any other 
manner inconsistent with the Charter of the 
United Nations.27
The Declaration on Principles o f Internation­
al Law concerning Friendly Relations and 
Cooperation among States in accordance 
with the Charter o f the United Nations of 24
O ctober 1970 stipulates that a “war of aggres­
sion constitutes a crime against the peace, for 
which there is responsibility under interna­
tional law”. In addition, under the Declara­
tion, “[ejvery State has the duty to refrain
26 Charter of the United Nations, 26 June 1945 (New York: Unit­
ed Nations Department of Public Information, 2001), Article 1, 
para. 1.
27 Ibid.
Azerbaijani town Shusha after occupation
from the threat or use of force to violate 
the existing international boundaries of 
another State or as a means of solving in­
ternational disputes, including territorial 
disputes and problems concerning fron­
tiers of States”.28
Attention is also drawn to the Declara­
tion’s conclusion that the “territory of a 
State shall not be the object of military 
occupation resulting from the use of force 
in contravention of the provisions of the 
Charter” and, accordingly, that “ [n] о ter­
ritorial acquisition resulting from the 
threat or use of force shall be recognized 
as legal”.29 This position is also upheld in 
the Declaration on the Enhancement of 
the Effectiveness of the Principle o f Re­
fraining from the Threat or Use of Force 
in International Relations of 18 Novem­
ber 1987, which stipulates that “[n] either 
acquisition of territory resulting from the 
threat or use of force nor any occupation 
of territory resulting from the threat or 
use of force in contravention of interna­
tional law will be recognized as legal ac­
quisition or occupation”.30
As the International Court of Justice es­
tablished in its judgment in the Military 
and Paramilitary Activities in and against
28 Declaration on Principles of International Law concern­
ing Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in 
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, 24 Oc­
tober 1970. General Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV). Resolu­
tions adopted by the United Nations General Assembly at 
its twenty-fifth session. Official records, supplement No. 28 
(A/8028), p. 153.
29 Ibid.
30 Declaration on the Enhancement of the Effectiveness of 
the Principle of Refraining from the Threat or Use of Force in 
International Relations, General Assembly resolution 42/22 of 
18 November 1987. Official Records of the General Assembly, 
Forty-second Session, Supplement No. 41 (A/42/41), p. 403.
Nicaragua case, principles relating to the 
use of force that have been incorporated 
in the United Nations Charter reflect cus­
tomary international law. The same holds 
true for the Court’s determination of the 
illegality o f territorial acquisition result­
ing from the threat or use of force.31 This 
rule prohibiting the use of force is a con­
spicuous example of a peremptory norm 
of international law (jus cogens), as de­
fined in article 53 of the Vienna Conven­
tion on the Law of Treaties.32
The sole exception to this rule is the right 
of self-defence under Article 51 of the 
United Nations Charter. Bearing in mind 
the arguments put forward by the Arme­
nian authorities on this issue, it is impor­
tant to note that the beneficiaries of this 
rule are States. As pointed out by the In­
ternational Court of Justice in its advisory 
opinion regarding the Legal Consequences 
o f the Construction o f  a Wall in the Occu­
pied Palestinian Territory, “Article 51 of 
the Charter thus recognizes the existence 
of an inherent right of self-defence in the 
case of armed attack by one State against 
another State.”33 The entity established on
31 Military and Paramilitary Activities in and against Nicara­
gua case (Nicaragua v. United States of America), Judgment 
of 27 June 1986,1.C.J. Reports 1986, paras. 188 and 190; see 
also Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the 
Occupied Palestinian Territory. Advisory Opinion of 9 July 
2004,1.C.J. Reports 2004, para. 87.
32 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, 22 May 1969. 
For text, see Ian Brownlie (ed.), Basic Documents in Interna­
tional Law (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 5th ed., 2002), 
pp. 270-297, at p. 285. See also Military and Paramilitary Ac­
tivities in and against Nicaragua case (Nicaragua v. United 
States of America) (Merits), para. 190; Articles on Responsibil­
ity of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts. Annex to Gen­
eral Assembly resolution 56/83 of 12 December 2001, article 
41, para. 2; Ian Brownlie, Principles of Public International Law 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 6th ed., 2003), pp. 488-489.
33 Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the 
Occupied Palestinian Territory, para. 139.
the occupied territory o f Azerbaijan by Ar­
menia and rendered subservient to its will is 
not a State and cannot therefore invoke the 
right of self-defence.
This understanding is reflected in the corre­
sponding resolutions o f the Security Council, 
adopted in 1993 following the armed seizure 
of Azerbaijani territory. The resolutions rec­
ognize that the Nagorno Karabakh region 
belongs to Azerbaijan and reaffirm the sover­
eignty and territorial integrity of the Republic 
of Azerbaijan, the inviolability o f its interna­
tional borders and the inadmissibility o f the 
use of force for the acquisition o f territory. The 
resolutions demand the immediate cessation 
of all hostilities and the immediate, complete 
and unconditional withdrawal o f the occupy­
ing forces from all occupied regions o f the R e­
public of Azerbaijan and, in this context, call 
for the restoration of economic, transport and 
energy links in the region and for measures to 
assist refugees and displaced persons to return 
to their homes. In this light it is clear that the 
actions of the Armenian authorities can only 
be viewed as a violation of the peremptory 
norms of international law.
The role of Armenia in the occupation of 
Azerbaijani territories
It cannot be denied that the policy pursued 
by Armenia in the occupied territories o f 
Azerbaijan differs little from comparable ac­
tivities carried out by occupying countries 
in other areas of the world. Considerations 
of time and geographical conditions do not 
substantially alter the methods employed in 
the occupation.
There have been numerous instances in his­
tory of States arguing that situations in which
their armed forces have become embroiled do 
not constitute a military occupation or that, at 
the very least, are substantially different from 
the notion of occupation as defined in the 
1907 Hague Regulations respecting the Laws 
and Customs of War on Land34 and the 1949 
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection 
o f  Civilian Persons in Time of War.35
In addition, the occupiers often disguise 
their own role in the forcible seizure of the 
territory o f another State by setting up quasi­
independent puppet regimes in the occupied 
territories.36
At the same time, the occupying Power gen­
erally endeavours to lend its actions a sem­
blance of legality and to confer an appear­
ance of independence on the entities created 
through those actions, entities that, more 
often than not, have been formed with the 
collaboration of certain elements of the pop­
ulation o f the occupied country. It is clear, 
however, that for all intents and purposes 
they are always subject to the will of the oc­
cupying Power.37 Sometimes actions o f this 
kind are accompanied by attempts to endow 
the subordinate regimes set up in the occu-
34 Annex to the 1907 Hague Convention IV respecting the Laws 
and Customs of War on Land: Regulations respecting the Laws 
and Customs of War on Land, 18 October 1907. For text, see 
Adam Roberts and Richard Guelff (eds.), Documents on the Laws 
of War (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 3rd ed., 2003), pp. 73-84. 
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons 
in Time of War, 12 August 1949. For text, see Adam Roberts and 
Richard Guelff (eds.), pp. 299-369.
35 Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Per­
sons in Time of War, 12 August 1949. For text, see Adam Roberts 
and Richard Guelff (eds.), pp. 299-369.
36 Adam Roberts, "Transformative military occupation: applying 
the laws of war and human rights", see website http://ccw.politics. 
ox.ac.uk/publications/roberts_militaryoccupation.pdf.
37 Jean Pictet (gen. ed.), International Committee of the Red
Cross, Commentary on the Geneva Convention (IV) Relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War (Geneva, 1958),
p. 273.
pied territories with a respectable image 
and to foster the impression that they es­
pouse democratic values.
The features enumerated above are all evi­
denced in the policies and practices fol­
lowed by Armenia in the occupied terri­
tories of Azerbaijan. Armenia denies both 
that there is any occupation within the 
meaning of international law and that it 
has anything to do with controlling these 
territories. Thus in one of his interviews 
Armenian current president Serzh Sarg- 
syan claimed once again that only volun­
teers had fought for Nagorno Karabakh. 
At the same time, Armenia, in his words, 
acted as “guarantor of the security of Na­
gorno Karabakh”, prepared to intervene 
immediately in the event of the outbreak 
of a new war.38 The question of Armenia 
providing guarantees is also mentioned in 
the country’s national security strategy of 
7 February 2007.39 No explanation is pro­
vided, however, of how these guarantees, 
which affect a portion of Azerbaijan’s ter­
ritory, fit with international law.
In addition, the authorities in Yerevan 
are trying to give the puppet regime they 
set up in the occupied territories the ap­
pearance of legitimacy, independence and 
democracy. In the words of Serzh Sarg- 
syan, “the young Republic o f Nagorno 
Karabakh is today taking mature strides
38 Caucasus Context (2007), vol. 4, issue 1, pp. 43-44. See 
also the message by Serzh Sargsyan of 1 September 2007 
on the occasion of the "sixteenth anniversary of the inde­
pendence of the Republic of Nagorno Karabakh". "Hay- 
info" website: www.hayinfo.ru/page_rev.php?tb_id=18&sub_ 
id=18iid=18956.
39 National security strategy of the Republic of Armenia of 
7 February 2007, chapter III, see website of the Ministry of 
Defence of Armenia www.mil.am/eng/?page=49.
towards the formation of statehood and 
the development of democracy”.40
It is no secret, however, that democracy 
cannot be propagated by the sword, and 
the holding of multiparty elections is not 
in itself proof o f pluralism or the absence 
o f authoritarianism.41 Generally speaking, 
however, such attempts to disguise ag­
gression against a neighbouring State are 
unlikely to be taken seriously, given the 
incontrovertible evidence of a situation 
that is the diametric opposite.
In addition to the facts at the disposal of 
the Azerbaijani authorities attesting to 
the direct involvement of the Armenian 
armed forces in the military hostilities 
against Azerbaijan and the presence of 
these forces in the occupied territories — 
issues which merit a separate and careful 
investigation —  the assessment of Arme­
nia’s role given by independent observers 
is also completely unequivocal.
As the PACE rapporteur David Atkinson 
pointed out, “Armenians from Armenia 
had participated in the armed fighting 
over the Nagorno-Karabakh region be­
sides local Armenians from within Azer­
baijan. Today, Armenia has soldiers sta­
tioned in the Nagorno-Karabakh region 
and the surrounding districts, people in 
the region have passports of Armenia, and 
the Armenian government transfers large 
budgetary resources to this area”.42
40 Message by Serzh Sargsyan of 1 September 2007.
41 Adam Roberts, "Transformative military occupation: ap­
plying the laws of war and human rights".
42 Report of the Parliamentary Affairs Committee of the
Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe. Document
10364, 29 November 2004. Explanatory memorandum by
the Rapporteur, para. 6.
This view is corroborated by other sources 
as well. For example, according to the find­
ings of the International Crisis Group, “[t]he 
highly trained and equipped Nagorno-Kara­
bakh Defence Army is primarily a ground 
force, for which Armenia provides much o f 
the backbone”. According to estimates by 
this non-governmental organization, the Ar­
menian military presence in the occupied 
territories of Azerbaijan consists o f some
10,000 soldiers from Armenia. Attention is 
also drawn to reports that many conscripts 
and contracted soldiers from Armenia are 
forcibly sent to serve in Nagorno Karabakh 
as part of their military service, and not as 
volunteers, as maintained by the Armenian 
authorities. The Crisis Group states: “There 
is a high degree of integration between the 
forces of Armenia and Nagorno-Karabakh. 
Senior Armenian authorities admit they give 
substantial equipment and weaponry. Nago- 
rno-Karabakh authorities also acknowledge 
that Armenian officers assist with training.”43
In its final report on the outcome o f the presi­
dential elections in Armenia in 1998, the O f­
fice for Democratic Institutions and Human 
Rights (ODIHR) of the Organization for Se­
curity and Cooperation in Europe (O SC E ) 
expresses its “extreme concern that one o f 
the mobile boxes has crossed the national 
borders of the Republic o f Armenia to collect 
votes of Armenian soldiers posted abroad 
(Kelbajar) [in Azerbaijan]”.44
The Human Rights Watch/Helsinki report 
entitled “Seven years o f conflict in Nagorno
43 International Crisis Group, "Nagorno-Karabakh: Viewing the 
conflict from the ground". Europe Report No. 166, 14 September
2005, pp. 9 and 10.
44 0SCE/0DIHR Final Report of 9 April 1998, see OSCE website: 
http://www.osce.org/ documents/odihr/1998/04/1215_en.pdf.
Karabakh”, prepared in 1994 following a visit 
to the region —  including the area of hos­
tilities —  by representatives o f this human 
rights organization, states outright that the 
available evidence outweighs the Armenian 
authorities’ denials. Adducing a wealth of
Azerbaijani town Shusha. Yukhari Govhar Aga 
Mosque (Andre Widmer)
facts based both on their own observations 
and on interviews with soldiers from the Ar­
menian armed forces conducted during their 
visit to Nagorno Karabakh, the report s au­
thors unequivocally conclude: “As a matter 
o f law, Armenian army troop involvement 
in Azerbaijan makes Armenia a party to the 
conflict and makes the war an international 
armed conflict, as between the government 
o f Armenia and Azerbaijan.”45
45 Human Rights Watch/Helsinki, "Seven years of conflict in 
Nagorno-Karabakh" (1994), pp. 67-73.
Azerbaijani town Shusha. Present Day (Andre Widmer).
In addition, the econom y o f Nagorno 
Karabakh is closely tied to Armenia and, 
to a large extent, depends on its financial 
infusions. As noted by the Crisis Group, 
“State loans” provided by Armenia since 
1993 constituted 67.3 per cent o f Nago­
rno Karabakh’s budget in 2001 and 56.9 
per cent in 2004. To date, nothing has 
been repaid against these loans. Moreover, 
“[a] 11 transactions are done via Armenia, 
and products produced in Nagorno-Kara- 
bakh often are labeled ‘made in Armenia 
for export”.46
Resolution 1416 (2 0 0 5 ) adopted on 
25 January 2005  by the Parliamentary 
Assembly of the Council o f Europe ac­
knowledges the continued occupation 
of considerable parts o f the territory of 
Azerbaijan and the conduct o f ethnic 
cleansing. The Assembly also draws at­
tention to Armenia’s obligations under 
international law and points out “that the 
occupation of foreign territory by a m em ­
ber state constitutes a grave violation o f 
that state’s obligations as a m em ber o f the
46 International Crisis Group, "Nagorno-Karabakh: Viewing
the conflict from the ground", pp. 12 and 13.
Council o f Europe”.47 The resolution also 
contains an appeal for compliance with 
Security Council resolutions, in particu­
lar, by withdrawing military forces from 
any occupied territories.48
Accordingly, in view of Armenia’s involve­
ment in it, the conflict falls within the pur­
view o f international law and, in particu­
lar, the principle of the territorial integrity 
o f States. International practice demon­
strates that there is no legal foundation 
to irredentist claims, which all too often 
are based on the ethnic affinity between 
the population of a parent country and 
the inhabitants of a territory which has 
separated from it. The irredentist nature 
of the Armenian Azerbaijani conflict and 
the application to it of international law 
are also reaffirmed, inter alia, in the Secu­
rity Council resolutions on the conflict. 
W hile these resolutions may not directly 
invoke the responsibility of Armenia, they 
do nonetheless contain a number of tell­
ing phrases, such as the “inadmissibility
47 PACE resolution 1416 (2005), entitled "The conflict over 
the Nagorno-Karabakh region dealt with by the OSCE Minsk 
Conference", 15 January 2005, para. 2.
48 Ibid., para. 3.
of the use of force for the acquisition o f  ter­
ritory” and “occupied territories” which are 
generally used in connection with interna­
tional armed conflicts. Thus, Adam Roberts 
stresses, with reference to the principles o f 
treaties and other legal texts on the occupa­
tion, that “an occupation is essentially o f an 
international character”.49
Ihe situation in the occupied territories of 
Azerbaijan
It is clear that Armenia is seeking to achieve a 
transfer of sovereignty over Azerbaijani terri­
tories that it seized through military force and 
in which it has carried out ethnic cleansing. 
As there is no likelihood that such a transfer 
will be agreed to by Azerbaijan, whose offi­
cials have repeatedly stated that national ter­
ritory cannot be a subject o f com prom ise,50 
the one hope remaining for Armenia is to 
solve the problem outside a legal framework, 
namely by bringing about a situation in which 
recognition of a fait accompli is inevitable. 
These plans are being implemented through 
efforts to alter the demographic com position 
of the population in the occupied territories 
and prevent a return to the pre-war situation.
In a letter dated 11 November 2 0 0 4  from the 
Minister for Foreign Affairs o f the Republic 
of Azerbaijan addressed to the Secretary- 
General of the United Nations, attention 
is drawn to Armenia’s concerted efforts to 
transfer its population into the occupied ter­
ritories, the exploitation of Azerbaijan’s natu­
ral resources and the destruction and appro­
priation of its historical and cultural heritage,
49 Adam Roberts, “What is a military occupation?", 55 British 
Yearbook of International Law (1985), pp. 249-305, at p. 255.
50 See, for example, Elmar Mammadyarov, Towards peace in the 
Nagorno Karabakh region of the Republic of Azerbaijan through 
reintegration and cooperation, 17 Accord (2005), pp. 18-19.
as well as other illegal activities carried out 
to consolidate the status quo o f the occupa­
tion and to prevent the expelled Azerbaijani 
population from returning to their places of 
origin, thereby imposing a fait accompli.51
Deeply concerned by the far-reaching im­
plications o f these activities, Azerbaijan re­
quested that the situation in its occupied 
territories should be addressed within the 
framework o f the United Nations General 
Assembly. Accordingly, on 29 October 2004 
the General Assembly decided to include in 
its agenda the item entitled “The situation in 
the occupied territories o f Azerbaijan”.52 This 
item was considered on 23 November 2004 
during the fifty-ninth session of the Assem­
bly.53
A fact-finding m ission o f the Organization for 
Security and Cooperation in Europe (O SC E) 
visited the occupied territories o f Azerbaijan 
from 30  January to 5 February 2005. On the 
basis o f material provided by Azerbaijan and 
obtained during an investigation of the situa­
tion on the ground, the mission produced a 
detailed report which confirmed the facts of 
the settlem ent o f the occupied territories.54
The following year was marked by further es­
calation o f the situation in the occupied ter-
51 Letter dated 11 November 2004 from the Permanent Repre­
sentative of Azerbaijan to the United Nations addressed to the 
President of the General Assembly, transmitting a letter dated 11 
November 2004 from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Re­
public of Azerbaijan regarding the illegal activities carried out in 
the occupied territories of the Republic of Azerbaijan and provid­
ing information on the transfer of population into the occupied 
territories of Azerbaijan. United Nations document A/59/568.
52 Forty-sixth plenary meeting, 29 October 2004, A/59/PV.46.
53 Sixtieth plenary meeting, 23 November 2004, A/59/PV.60.
54 Letter dated 18 March 2005 from the Permanent Representa­
tive of Azerbaijan to the United Nations addressed to the Secre-
tary-General. Annex II: Report of the OSCE fact-finding mission
to the occupied territories of Azerbaijan surrounding Nagorno-
Karabakh (A/59/747-S/2005/187).
ritories o f Azerbaijan. From mid-May 
2006, a portion o f these territories along 
the line o f contact was swept by large-scale 
fires, which caused significant harm to the 
environment and biodiversity in Azer­
baijan. The Azerbaijani side stated that 
the magnitude and character o f the fires 
and the way they had spread confirmed 
that they were of intentional and artificial 
origin.55 Having considered the situation 
in the occupied territories o f Azerbaijan, 
the United Nations General Assembly ad­
opted at its sixtieth session the resolution 
submitted by Azerbaijan on the question. 
The resolution expressed serious concern 
about the fires in the affected territories 
and, inter alia, stressed the necessity to ur­
gently conduct an environmental opera­
tion to suppress the fires and to overcome 
their detrimental consequences.56
On the basis of that resolution, the occu­
pied territories were visited by an O SC E- 
led environmental assessment mission to 
the fire-affected territories in and around 
the Nagorno-Karabakh region from 2 to 
13 October 2006. The mission concluded 
that “[t]he fires resulted in environmental 
and economic damages and threatened 
human health and security”.57
55 Letter dated 28 July 2006 from the Permanent Repre­
sentative of Azerbaijan to the United Nations addressed to 
the Secretary-General, transmitting a letter dated 28 July 
2006 from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic 
of Azerbaijan regarding the wide-scale fires in the occupied 
territories of Azerbaijan (A/60/963).
56 General Assembly resolution 60/285 of 7 September 
2006, entitled "The situation in the occupied territories of 
Azerbaijan".
57 Letter dated 20 December 2006 from the Permanent 
Representative of Belgium to the United Nations addressed 
to the Secretary-General. Annex: OSCE-led environmental 
assessment mission to the fire-affected territories in and 
around the Nagorno-Karabakh region. Report to the OSCE
Upon the request of the Republic of Azer­
baijan, concerned about continued illegal 
activities perpetrated by the Republic of 
Armenia in the occupied territories of 
Azerbaijan, including the illegal settle­
ment practices, economic exploitation 
and devastation of these territories, the 
O SC E M insk Group Co-Chairs conduct­
ed a Field Assessment Mission (FAM) to 
the occupied territories of Azerbaijan sur­
rounding its Nagorno-Karabakh region 
from O ctober 7-12 2010, with the aim to 
assess the overall situation there.
The FAM revealed once again the contin­
uation o f the policy of illegal settlement 
by the ethnic Armenians in the occupied 
territories o f Azerbaijan as well as infra­
structure changes and economic activities 
conducted in these territories in violation 
o f Forth Geneva Convention and addi­
tional Protocols relative to the Protection 
o f Civilian Persons in Time of War of 12 
August 1949, to which Armenia joined in 
1993.
The conclusion that the status-quo in the 
occupied territories is unacceptable was 
the key statement o f the FAM, which 
urged to avoid any activities in the occu­
pied territories that would change the de­
mographic, social, or cultural character of 
areas affected by the conflict (such as con­
tinued illegal settlement, infrastructure 
developments, economic exploitation, 
cultural changes, etc), or would make it 
impossible to reverse the status-quo and 
achieve a peaceful settlement.
Chairman-in-Office from the Coordinator of OSCE Economic 
and Environmental Activities. United Nations document 
A/61/696.
A legal assessment of activities in the 
occupied territories of Azerbaijan
The policy being pursued by Armenia in the 
occupied territories o f Azerbaijan, which is 
aimed at achieving a transfer o f sovereignty 
over these territories, is well known in inter­
national practice. Such attempts have been 
made on more than one occasion in the past, 
leading the international community to draw 
up regulations to effectively counteract them.
International law is not applicable only to the 
inhabitants of the occupied territory; it also 
protects the separate existence of the State, 
its institutions and its laws.58 International law 
also prohibits actions which are based solely 
on the military strength of the occupying 
Power and not on a sovereign decision by the 
occupied State.59 A generally established rule, 
upheld by lawyers and confirmed on many oc­
casions by the decisions o f international and 
domestic courts, is that the occupation of a 
territory in time of war is temporary in nature 
and thereby does not entail a transfer of sov­
ereignty. Provisions relating to occupation, in 
particular the relevant articles o f the Hague 
Regulations concerning the Laws and Cus­
toms of War on Land and the Geneva Con­
vention relative to the Protection of Civilian 
Persons in Time of War, are premised on the 
short-lived nature of a situation of occupation 
and remain in force for the duration of a war, 
even in the event o f a ceasefire or a truce. The 
occupation of a territory jus in bello does not 
entail the right to annex that territory, since jus 
contra bellum forbids any seizure of territory 
based on the use of force.60
58 Jean Pictet (gen. ed.), p. 273.
59 Ibid.
60 Eric David, Principes de droit des conflits armes (Principles of 
the Law of Armed Conflicts), (Moscow: MKKK, 2000), pp. 376-378;
According to the traditional concept of occu­
pation (article 43 of the Hague Regulations 
concerning the Laws and Customs of War on 
Land), the occupying authority must be con­
sidered as merely being a de facto adminis­
trator.61 Furthermore, occupants should use 
their powers only for the immediate needs of 
administration and not for long-term policy 
changes.62 Therefore, the occupying Power 
is obliged to respect the laws of the occupied 
State unless “absolutely prevented” (article 
43 of the Hague Regulations concerning 
the Laws and Customs of War on Land). In 
other words, the occupying authority is not 
entitled to modify the legislation in force, ex­
cept in cases motivated by military necessity 
or maintenance o f public order.63
As noted above, all o f Armenia’s hopes for the 
recognition of an eventual fait accompli, and 
thus of the transfer o f sovereignty over the 
occupied territories o f Azerbaijan, involve an 
altering of the demographic composition of 
the occupied territories and prevention of a 
return to the pre-war situation. Indeed, the 
available information shows that Armenia 
has pursued a policy and developed practices 
that call for the establishment of settlements 
in the occupied Azerbaijani territories. There 
have been reports o f a programme called “Re­
turn to Artsax” whose purpose is to artificial­
ly increase the Armenian population in the 
occupied Azerbaijani territories to 300,000 
people by 2010. A working group set up to 
implement this resettlement programme un­
der the leadership o f the Prime Minister o f
Jean Pictet (gen. ed.), p. 275.
61 Jean Pictet (gen. ed.), p. 273.
62 See, for example, Thawing a Frozen Conflict: Legal Aspects of 
the Separatist Crisis in Moldova — A Report from the Association 
of the Bar of the City of New York, p. 69.
63 Eric David, p. 381.
Armenia includes both Armenian officials 
and representatives of non-governmental 
organizations operating in Yerevan.64
During the working visit to Nagorno 
Karabakh on 2 and 3 September 2000 of 
Andranik Margaryan, the former Prime 
Minister of Armenia, an agreement was 
concluded between the latter and the 
representative of the subordinate regime 
in the occupied territories which also in­
cludes provisions on the transfer of popu­
lation to the occupied territories of Azer­
baijan.65 In an interview on 18 December 
2003 the Prime Minister confirmed that 
“Armenia and NKR are within the com­
mon economic space” and that their 
“main purpose is the settlement of NKR 
and development of its investment field 
by means of creating the favourable re­
gime for economic subjects”.66
It should be noted in that connection that 
the sixth paragraph of article 49 of the 
Geneva Convention relative to the Pro­
tection of Civilian Persons in Time of War 
prohibits transfers of population to occu­
pied territory. State practice has made that 
provision one of the norms of customary 
international law applied in cases of in­
ternational armed conflict.67 The provi­
sion was intended to prevent a practice 
adopted during the Second World War 
by certain States, which transferred por-
64 See United Nations documents А/Б9/568 and A/59/720- 
S/2005/132.
65 See the "Noyan Tapan" report dated 5 September 2000 
and the "Mediamaks" report dated 6 September 2000.
66 See websites www.gov.am/ruversion/premier_2/print. 
html?=299&url and http://www.menq.am/ pls/dbms/mnp. 
show_npitem?pnp=128&pfile=359977&pnew=y&plgg=3.
67 Jean-Marie Henckaerts and Louise Doswald-Beck, Cus­
tomary International Humanitarian Law (Cambridge: Cam­
bridge University Press, 2005), vol. I: Rules, p. 462.
tions of their own population to occupied 
territory for political and racial reasons 
or in order, as they had claimed, to colo­
nize those territories.68 At the Trial of the 
Major War Criminals before the Interna­
tional Military Tribunal in Nuremberg in 
1946, the Tribunal found two of the de­
fendants guilty o f attempting to “German­
ize” occupied territories.69
The legislation and military regulations 
and codes o f many States, including Ar­
menia, include provisions prohibiting 
a party to a conflict from deporting or 
transferring part o f its population to ter­
ritory under its occupation. Official an­
nouncements and practice reflected in 
accounts also confirm the prohibition on 
transferring civilian population to occu­
pied territory.70
Attempts to change the demographic com­
position of the population of occupied ter­
ritory have been condemned by the United 
Nations Security Council,71 the United Na­
tions General Assembly,72 the United Na­
tions Commission on Human Rights73 and 
other international bodies.
68 Jean Pictet (gen. ed.), p. 283.
69 Jean-Marie Henckaerts and Louise Doswald-Beck, p. 463.
70 Ibid., p. 462.
71 See, for example, Security Council resolutions 446 of 22 
March 1979; 452 of 20 July 1979; 476 of 30 June 1980; 465 
of 1 March 1980; 677 of 28 November 1990; 752 of 15 May 
1992 and 787 of 16 November 1992.
72 See, for example, General Assembly resolutions 36/147 of
16 December 1981; 37/88 С of 10 December 1982; 38/79 D of 
15 December 1983; 39/95 D of 14 December 1984; 40/161 D 
of 16 December 1985 and 54/78 of 22 February 2000.
73 See, for example, resolution 2001/7, of 18 April 2001, of
the United Nations Commission on Human Rights. See also
the report of the Special Rapporteur of the United Nations
Commission on Human Rights Subcommission on Preven­
tion of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities entitled
Human rights and population transfer, United Nations docu­
ment E/CN.4/Sub.2/1997/23, p. 19, para. 65.
The International Committee of the Red 
Cross (IC R C ), in its verbal note of 10 No­
vem ber 2000  addressed to the Permanent 
M ission of Azerbaijan to the United Nations 
O ffice and other international organizations
settlement in order, inter alia, to address the 
problem of the settlers and to avoid changes 
in the demographic structure of the region”. 
The Co-Chairs pointed out in particular that 
“prolonged continuation of this situation
Azerbaijani town Agdam. Present Day (Andre Widmer).
at Geneva, shared “the concern ... as regards 
the cooperation agreement’ between Arme­
nia and Nagorno Karabakh whereby, accord­
ing to the ‘Noyan-Topan’ news agency, there 
will be a sharp increase in the population of 
Nagorno Karabakh ...”. In this regard, ICRC 
made it clear that “it ... endeavours to direct 
its humanitarian assistance in a way that does 
not help to consolidate territorial gains by 
one party to a conflict and that will not en­
courage resettlement which could be an ob­
stacle to the return of forcibly displaced per­
sons to their homes”.
In their recommendations, based on the con­
clusions contained in the report of the OSCE 
fact-finding mission on illegal settlement, the 
Co-Chairs o f the OSCE Minsk Group “dis­
couraged any further settlement of the oc­
cupied territories” and urged the parties to 
“accelerate negotiations towards a political
could lead to a fait accompli that would seri­
ously complicate the peace process”.74
In addition, Armenia, as the occupying Pow­
er, is aiming to consolidate the results of eth­
nic cleansing and denying the right of return 
to those forced to resettle by encouraging 
various forms of economic activity in the oc­
cupied territories, directly affecting property 
rights. It should be recalled in this connec­
tion that international law, in particular the 
Hague provisions concerning the laws and 
customs of war on land (articles 4 6 ,5 2 ,5 3 ,5 5  
and 56) and the Geneva Convention relative 
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time 
of War (articles 53 and 147), imposes on the
74 Letter dated 18 March 2005 from the Permanent Repre­
sentative of Azerbaijan to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, Annex I, "Letter of the OSCE Minsk Group
Co-Chairs to the OSCE Permanent Council on the OSCE Minsk
Group fact-finding mission to the occupied territories of Azerbai­
jan surrounding Nagorno-Karabakh", United Nations document
A/59/747-S/2005/187.
«41
f? ~ 9
»
occupying Power an obligation to respect 
property located in occupied territory. 
That rule applies both to the physical in­
tegrity and to the ownership of such prop­
erty.75 Specific provisions of the Charter 
of the International Military Tribunal 
at Nuremberg (article 6 (b ))76 and the 
Rome Statute of the International Crimi­
nal Court (article 8) also cover protec­
tion of property.77 Undoubtedly, the ap­
plicable instruments o f international law 
should also include human rights conven­
tions for which an occupying Power holds 
the primary responsibility for fulfillment 
in occupied territories.78
From a legal point of view, the previous 
owners of property located in occupied 
territory are legitimate. As a result, any 
economic activity undertaken by natural 
or legal persons jointly with an occupy­
ing Power or under the tutelage of that 
Power’s local authorities is illegal and per­
formed at their own risk. There is no point 
in hoping that such economic activity will 
be sanctioned after the final resolution of 
the conflict or that those involved will be 
able to escape responsibility. It goes with­
out saying that all agreements which pro­
vide the basis for altering the economic 
value of property will be challenged and 
abrogated once Azerbaijani sovereignty 
over the occupied territories is restored.
75 Eric David, p. 389.
76 Judgment (extracts). The Charter Provisions see text in 
Adam Roberts and Richard Guelff (eds.), pp. 177-178, at p. 
177.
77 Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Ex­
tract), 17 July 1988. See text in Adam Roberts and Richard 
Guelff (eds.), pp. 667-697, at p. 676, article 8(2)(a)(iv).
78 See, for example, Legal Consequences of the Construc­
tion of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, paras.
102-113.
Advocating otherwise would be tanta­
mount to justifying the crimes committed 
and violating the peremptory norms of 
international law.
Neutral States which fail to take all neces­
sary and feasible action to prevent their 
nationals from seizing property in occu­
pied territories are considered to be pro­
viding indirect assistance for the occu­
pier’s illegal activities and are therefore to 
be considered accountable in ways which 
could include being forced to provide 
compensation for the injury inflicted.79
Responsibility under international law
As stated in the Articles on Responsibil­
ity of States for Internationally Wrong­
ful Acts, developed by the International 
Law Commission, “[e]very internation­
ally wrongful act o f a State entails the 
international responsibility of that State”. 
Such an act o f a State is deemed to occur 
when conduct consisting of an action or 
omission: (a) is attributable to the State 
under international law; and (b) consti­
tutes a breach of an international obliga­
tion of the State.80 As early as 1928, in its 
ruling in the Factory at Chorzöw  case, the 
Permanent Court o f International Justice 
described the principle o f international 
responsibility as one of the principles of 
international law and, furthermore, of the 
general understanding of the law.81
79 Loukis G. Loucaides, "The Protection of the Right to 
Property in Occupied Territories", International and Com­
parative Law Quarterly 2004, 53(3), pp. 677-690, at p. 686.
80 Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally 
Wrongful Acts, arts. 1 and 2. See also llaşcu and others v. 
Moldova and Russia, ECHR Judgment of 8 July 2004, para. 
314, EHCR Portal, UUDOC Collection.
81 Factory at Chorzöw (Claim for Indemnity) Case (Germany 
v. Poland) (Merits), P.C.I.J. Series A (1928) No. 1, Permanent
The principle o f responsibility is closely 
bound up with the principle o f the con­
scientious fulfillment o f obligations under 
international law (pacta sunt servanda). It 
is important to note that a breach that is of 
an ongoing nature relates to the entire pe­
riod over which the act was performed and 
remains at variance with obligations under 
international law. Furthermore, in the event 
that a State breaches its obligations under in­
ternational law through a series o f wrongful 
acts or omissions, the breach extends over 
the entire period starting with the first o f the 
acts or omissions in the series and continues 
for as long as they are repeated and remain 
at variance with the State’s obligations under 
international law.82
The responsibility o f the State is incurred for 
any act or omission of its authorities which 
occurs either within or beyond its national 
borders. An internationally wrongful act is 
also perpetrated by the organs of a State or 
by its agents, acting ultra vires or contrary to 
instructions.83
As noted above, there is a convincing body 
o f evidence attesting to the use o f force by 
Armenia against the territorial inviolability 
o f Azerbaijan and the exercise by Armenia of 
effective overall military and political control 
o f the occupied territories o f Azerbaijan. This
Court of International Justice, see in Martin Dixon and Robert 
McCorquodale, Cases and Materials on International Law (Ox­
ford: Oxford University Press, 3rd ed., 2003), p. 404. See also 1.1. 
Lukashuk, Mezhdunarodnoe pravo. Osobennaya chast' (Moscow: 
Walters Kluwer, 3rd ed., 2007), p. 376.
82 llaşcu and others v. Moldova and Russia, paras. 320-321. See 
also Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrong­
ful Acts, art. 14, para. 2, and art. 15, para. 2.
83 llaşcu and others v. Moldova and Russia, para. 319. See also 
Ireland v. United Kingdom, ECHR Judgment of 18 January 1978, 
para. 159, ECHR Portal, HUDOC Collection; Articles on Responsi­
bility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts, article 7.
control is applied both by the armed forces of 
Armenia and through the puppet regime set 
up by it in the occupied territory, which, by 
performing the functions of a local adminis­
tration, owes its existence to the support, in 
military and other terms, of the occupying 
State.
Armenia’s responsibility arises as the conse­
quence both o f the internationally wrong­
ful acts of its own organs and agents in the 
occupied territories and the activities of its 
local administration. Furthermore, there is 
responsibility even in the event of consent 
to, or tacit approval of, the actions of this ad­
ministration.84
Armenia’s international responsibility, which 
is incurred by its internationally wrongful 
acts, involves legal consequences manifested 
in the obligation to cease these acts, to offer 
appropriate assurances and guarantees that 
they will not recur and to provide full repa­
ration for injury in the form of restitution, 
compensation and satisfaction, either singly 
or in combination.85
As stated in the commentary to the draft 
Articles on Responsibility of States for In­
ternationally Wrongful Acts, “[e]very State, 
by virtue of its membership in the interna­
tional community, has a legal interest in the 
protection of certain basic rights and the ful­
fillment of certain essential obligations”.86 A
84 See LouLzidou v. Turkey, EHCR Judgment of 23 March 1995, 
para. 62; Louizidou v. Turkey, EHCR Judgment of 18 December 
1996, para. 52; Cyprus и Turkey, ECHR Judgment of 10 May 2001, 
para. 77; llaşcu and others v. Moldova and Russia, paras. 314-319, 
ECHR Portal, HUDOC Collection.
85 See Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally 
Wrongful Acts, arts. 28, 30, 31 and 34-37.
86 Draft Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally 
Wrongful Acts with commentaries (2001), comment to art. 1, 
para. 4.
Azerbaijani town Shusha. Student Hostel (Andre W idmer).
significant role in securing recognition 
of this principle was played by the deci­
sion of the International Court o f Justice 
in the Barcelona Traction case. This iden­
tified the existence of a special category 
o f obligations —  obligations towards the 
international community as a whole. The 
International Court o f Justice states: “By 
their very nature the former [the obliga­
tions of a State towards the international 
community as a whole] are the concern 
of all States. In view o f the importance of 
the rights involved, all States can be held 
to have a legal interest in their protection; 
they are obligations erga om nes”.ю Ac­
cordingly, serious breaches o f obligations 
flowing from peremptory norms o f gen­
eral international law may have additional 
consequences affecting not only the State 
bearing the responsibility, but also all
87 Case Concerning the Barcelona Traction, Light and Power 
Company, Limited (Belgium v. Spain), I.CJ. Judgment of 5 
February 1970, I.CJ. Reports 1970, para. 33. See also 1.1. Lu- 
kashuk, pp. 379-380.
other States. Inasmuch as all States have 
a legal interest, they are all entitled to in­
voke the responsibility o f the State which 
has breached its responsibility erga omnes. 
Furthermore, States must cooperate with 
a view to ending such breaches by lawful 
means.88
It is generally recognized that the category 
o f  serious breaches o f obligations under 
perem ptory norms o f general internation­
al law includes, among others, aggression, 
genocide and racial discrimination.89
As stated in the Articles on Responsibil­
ity o f States for Internationally Wrongful 
Acts, “No State shall recognize as lawful 
a situation created by a serious breach 
[of obligations under peremptory norms 
o f general international law] ..., nor ren-
88 1.1. Lukashuk, pp. 379-380, 394-396; Draft Articles on Re­
sponsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts with 
commentaries (2001), commentary to art. 1, para. 4.
89 Draft Articles on Responsibility of States for Internation­
ally Wrongful Acts with commentaries (2001), commentary 
to art. 40, para. 4.
der aid or assistance in maintaining that 
situation.”90
A longside Arm enia’s responsibility as the 
State w hich unleashed war against Azerbai­
jan , under the usual norms and treaty rules of 
international criminal law, certain acts perpe­
trated  in the context o f an armed conflict are 
view ed as international criminal offences and 
responsibility for them is borne on an indi­
vidual basis by those participating in the said 
acts, their accomplices and accessories.
A  distinction should be drawn between the 
tw o stages in the perpetration during a con­
flict o f  the m ost serious international offenc­
es such as genocide, crimes against humanity 
and m ilitary crimes. The first stage can be sit­
ed during the active military campaign, which 
had such tragic consequences for the civilian 
A zerbaijani population. The events which 
to o k  place at that time were sufficiently well 
covered by international organizations, non­
governm ental human rights bodies and the 
m edia. The second stage relates to the situa­
tio n  in the occupied territories o f Azerbaijan. 
C oncern  about the extent to which the rules 
o f  international law were being observed in 
those territories was heightened when an 
item  on the issue was placed on the agenda 
o f  the United Nations General Assembly and 
w hen the resolution on the situation in the 
occupied territories of Azerbaijan was adopt­
ed at the Assembly’s sixtieth session.
A t the same time, when considering this is­
sue and elaborating measures to prevent un­
lawful activities in the occupied Azerbaijani 
territories, it is essential that the situation 
b e  appraised from the standpoint o f interna-
90 See Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally 
Wrongful Acts, art. 41.
tional law. Thus, measures undertaken by the 
occupying Power to change the demographic 
composition of the population of the occu­
pied territories, including by moving, both 
directly and indirectly, civilians into the oc­
cupied territory,91 the destruction or appro­
priation of State and private property in the 
occupied territory,92 attacks against cultural 
properties93 and effects on the environment,94 
are categorized as military offences —  in 
other words, serious breaches of the law of 
armed conflicts.
In addition, depending on the specific cir­
cumstances, a single action may constitute a 
number of offences. Thus, the military crimes 
committed by the Armenians during the con­
flict in some cases compound other crimes 
of war, such as genocide and crimes against 
humanity, or are coterminous with them. 
For example, the massacre in February 1992 
o f the civilian Azerbaijani population of the 
town of Khocaly, which constituted a serious 
breach o f the law of armed conflicts, may also 
be categorized as genocide.95
91 Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 
1949, and Relating to the Protection of Victims of International 
Armed Conflicts (Protocol I), 8 June 1977. For text see Adam Rob­
erts and Richard Guelff (eds.), pp. 419-479, at p. 471, Article 85 (4) 
(a); Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, 17 July 1998, 
p. 677, Article 8 (2) (b) (viii).
92 Geneva Convention Relative to the Protection of Civilian Per­
sons in Time of War, 12 August 1949, p. 352, Article 147; Rome 
Statute of the International Criminal Court, 17 July 1998, pp. 676- 
677, Article 8 (2) (a) (iv).
93 Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 
1949, and Relating to the Protection of Victims of International 
Armed Conflicts (Protocol I), 8 June 1977, p. 471, Article 85 (4) (d); 
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, 17 July 1998, at 
p. 677, Article 8 (2) (b) (ix).
94 Geneva Convention Relative to the Protection of Civilian Per­
sons in Time of War, 12 August 1949, p. 352, Article 147; Rome 
Statute of the International Criminal Court, 17 July 1998, p. 677, 
Article 8 (2) (b) (xiii).
95 Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime 
of Genocide, General Assembly resolution 260 A (III), 9 Decem­
ber 1948. For text, see United Nations Centre for Human Rights,
Meeting of the Head of the OSCE Mission with 
Azerbaijani Community of the Nagorno-Karabakh region of the Republic of Azerbaijan
The international community, acting 
chiefly through the United Nations, has 
proclaimed and set down in international 
instruments a compendium o f fundamen­
tal values, such as peace and respect for 
human rights. The consensus on them was 
reflected in the adoption in 1948 of the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 
according to which “recognition of the 
inherent dignity and of the equal and in­
alienable rights of all members of the hu­
man family is the foundation of freedom, 
justice and peace in the world”. At the 
same time, the Universal Declaration em­
phasizes that “disregard and contempt for 
human rights have resulted in barbarous 
acts which have outraged the conscience 
of mankind”.96
Regrettably, that even more than 60 years
Human Rights: A Compilation of International Instruments, 
ST/HR/l/Rev.5, vol. 1 (Second Part), New York and Geneva, 
United Nations 1994, pp. 673-677.
96 Universal Declaration of Human Rights, General Assem­
bly res. 217 A (III), 10 December 1948. For text see United Na­
tions Centre for Human Rights, Human Rights: A Compilation 
of International Instruments, ST/HR/l/Rev.5, vol. 1 (First Part), 
New York and Geneva, United Nations, pp. 1-7, at p. 1.
after the adoption of the Universal Decla­
ration o f Human Rights, the conspicuous 
“silence” in certain international criminal 
proceedings serves to accentuate a defi­
ciency characteristic o f the international 
community today: the gap between the 
theoretical values o f law and harsh reality, 
which impedes the application in prac­
tice of the rich potential o f international 
law standards. At the same time, if one 
is to be consistent in upholding univer­
sally accepted values, it is essential to take 
steps to inhibit any brazen attempt to re­
ject these and not to permit lawlessness, 
including by prosecuting their supposed 
perpetrators.97 It is clear that there can be 
no long-term and sustainable peace with­
out justice and respect for human dignity, 
rights and freedoms.
97 See, for example, Antonio Cassese, International Crimi­
nal Law (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003), p. 446.
Conclusion
Although the mediation efforts conducted 
for a long tim e within the framework o f the 
O S C E  have not always been consistent and 
have yet to yield results, Azerbaijan contin­
ues to be com m itted to solving the Armenia- 
A zerbaijan conflict peacefully and in a con­
structive manner.
The strategy o f the government o f Azerbaijan 
is aim ed at the liberation o f all occupied ter­
ritories, the return o f the forcibly displaced 
population to the places o f their origin, and 
the establishm ent o f durable peace and sta­
b ility  in the Nagorno-Karabakh region of 
A zerbaijan.
The ultim ate objective o f the settlement pro­
cess is to elaborate and define the model and 
legal framework o f the status of the Nagorno- 
Karabakh region within the internationally 
recognized borders o f Azerbaijan. Azerbai­
jan  believes that the process o f definition of 
any status shall take place in normal peaceful 
conditions with direct, full and equal partici­
pation o f the entire population of the region, 
nam ely the Armenian and Azerbaijani com­
m unities, and in their constructive interac­
tion  with the government of Azerbaijan, 
exclusively in the framework of a lawful and 
dem ocratic process.
A  num ber o f important steps have to be taken 
to reach a stage where the parties concerned 
can start to consider the self-rule status for 
the Nagorno-Karabakh region within Azer­
baijan.
Firstly, the consequences of military occupa­
tion  and ethnic cleansing must be eliminated.
Unjustified delay on the return of territories 
can complicate the already difficult settle­
ment process.
Secondly, the Azerbaijani Community of the 
Nagorno-Karabakh should return to their 
homes as it was before the outbreak of the 
conflict. It is clear that the status may only 
be defined through the direct participation 
of both Azerbaijani and Armenian commu­
nities, living side-by-side in Nagorno-Kara­
bakh.
Thirdly, a regime o f interaction between 
the central authorities of Azerbaijan and lo­
cal authorities o f both communities of the 
Nagorno-Karabakh region of the Republic 
of Azerbaijan must be established, until the 
new legal status of the self-rule for the region 
is elaborated.
Another important element is the rehabili­
tation and economic development of the 
region. This step is essential for the process 
of normalization, peaceful coexistence and 
cooperation between the two communities. 
It should include restoration and develop­
ment of economic links between the two 
communities, as well as between the central 
authorities of Azerbaijan and its Nagorno- 
Karabakh region, restoration and opening of 
the communications for mutual use by both 
sides in both directions. This will in particu­
lar provide a connection with Armenia for 
the Armenian population of the Nagorno- 
Karabakh region, and for Azerbaijan with 
its Autonomous Republic of Nakhichevan, 
through the Lachin road.
The fifth element entails cooperation 
between the two communities in the 
humanitarian sphere, including the im­
plementation of special programs on edu­
cation and tolerance.
As for the implementation of the peace 
agreement to be signed between Arme­
nia and Azerbaijan, it will be guaranteed 
by the commitments undertaken by the 
two sides under the Agreement, and by 
relevant international guarantees, includ­
ing those by the great powers and interna­
tional organizations.
While, it is obvious that the success of the 
peace process depends on the construc­
tive approaches of both sides, as well as 
on the active contribution of the interna­
tional community, especially the OSCE 
Minsk Group and its Co-Chairmen.
However, it is very difficult to hope for a 
substantial breakthrough based on the po­
sition on which Armenia currently persists. 
Indeed, the military actions against Azer­
baijan were aimed from the very begin­
ning at seizing the territories by means of 
force and the fundamental change of their 
demographic composition. Therefore, it is 
for the purpose of unilateral secession that 
Armenia wants to retain control over some 
occupied districts surrounding Nagorno- 
Karabakh, prevents the displaced Azer­
baijani population from returning to their 
homes and thus excludes equal consider­
ation of the opinions of both communities.
It is clear that this approach of Armenia 
cannot serve as a sound basis for Arme- 
nia-Azerbaijan conflict resolution. To ar­
gue otherwise would be tantamount to
accepting the consequences of breaches 
of the rule of law and human rights, or, 
in other words, prevalence of force over 
justice. Asking Azerbaijan to make peace 
with Armenia under these conditions is 
like requesting a person who has been 
backstabbed to extend a hand of friend­
ship to a perpetrator of the crime while 
the knife is still in his back.
While being committed to the peaceful 
settlement of the conflict, Azerbaijan, 
however, will never compromise its ter­
ritorial integrity and thus accept a fait-ac- 
compli based solution, which the Arme­
nian side is trying to impose. As a result, 
Armenia will be exposed to various pres­
sures because of such attitude and this po­
sition in the region will open Armenia to 
outside intercession that Armenia is not 
ready to deal with.
The Armenia-Azerbaijan conflict can only 
be solved on the basis of respect for the 
territorial integrity and inviolability of 
the internationally-recognized borders of 
Azerbaijan, and peaceful coexistence of 
Armenian and Azerbaijani communities 
in the Nagorno-Karabakh region of the 
Republic of Azerbaijan, fully and equally 
enjoying the benefits of democracy and 
prosperity.
Azerbaijani Community of the Nagorno-Karabakh region 
of the Republicof Azerbaijan
Address: Baku city, Narimanov district,
Gullu Qadirovbayova str. 9,
AZ1060, Azerbaijan 
Tel: (00994 12) 489 95 06,496 92 38 
Fax: (00994 12) 496 92 40 
E-mail: info(2)karabakh.az
Circulation: 500 
Order: 086
