Ministry of Culture and Tourism
of the Republic of Azerbaijan
HAVVA MAMMADOVA
KHODJALY:
MARTYRS AND WITNESSES
Armenian terrorism as an
integral part of the international one
BAKU - 2006
Аз.83.3
H 12
Translator: Aliyev Javanshir Aziz oglu
Editor: Rahimova Vusala Novruz gyzy
Proof-reader: Valiyev Hafiz Heydar oglu
Havva Mammadova: Khodjali: Victims and Witnesses. Publishing
House "House of Tales", Baku 2005, 248 pp.
In this book there are used of materials, submitted by the Ministry
of State Security of Azerbaijan Republic, the State Committee on
affairs of the citizens taken prisoners, disappeared without a trace and
taken hostage of Kodjali district Executive Power.
The illustrations are taken from the photo archive of Azerbaijan
State News Agency (AzerTadj) and the individual albums of the inhab-
itants of Khodjali.
ISBN 9952-21-023-Х
© Havva Mammadova, 2006
© Ministry of Culture and Tourism
of the Republic of Azerbaijan 2006
3
BY THE AUTHOR
"Heroic and courageous sons of our
nation fighting for the sake of protection
of our lands have become martyrs. But
the Khodjaly tragedy has significant
place in all of these events. From one
hand it's a sample of faith of each
Khodjaly inhabitant to own land, nation
and Motherland. From other hand, it's a
genocide caused by the nationalistic and
barbarian forces of Armenia against
Azerbaijan as well as an unprecedented
expression of bigotry"
Heydar Aliyev
Khodjaly… In 1992 the name of this ancient settlement of
Azerbaijan spread all over the world and the tragedy happened
here remained in the history of mankind as one of the most mur-
derous events.
The memory of the horrible massacre known as Khodjaly
tragedy has been flying over the planet shaking hearts and sad-
dening minds. The night from 25th to 26th of February in 1992 the
Armenian forced groups with participation of the 366th shooting
regiment of the notorious soviet army made the Khodjaly town
ruins and site of fire. Hundreds of peaceful inhabitants including
women, old men and children were brutally murdered, young
and old alike as well as tortured, crippled and became hostages.
This crime was the next expression of the purposeful
Armenian policy of genocide and expansion against the
Azerbaijan people. It's specifically notable that it wasn't the first
events when Khodjaly became a target for Armenian bullets.
During the 20th century this ancient settlement of Azerbaijan was
collapsed by Armenians thrice. Unfortunately, these infringe-
ments were concealed about and didn't receive publicity.
Probably namely this intentionally implanted historical swoon
made possible reiteration of the events happened in Garabagh
in the beginning of the century again in the end of the last cen-
tury.
Thus, it's too necessary to declare to the world community
about the true of Khodjaly genocide belonging to the biggest
tragedies of the 20th century.
During the recent years our scientists, writers and journal-
ists created a number of scientific and publicistic works and
works of art regarding Garabagh and especially Khodjaly, its
integral part, the tragedy of this area and people exposed to hor-
rors of evil caused by Armenian occupants. Hereby the services
rendered by Z.Sultanov, N.Yagubov, A. Khodjaly, A.Guluzadeh,
S.Muslumgyzy, G.Girghyzly and others are of notable signifi-
cance.
Engaging in scientific research of the Garabagh history I
also wrote a number of articles devoted to the Khodjaly tragedy.
But the event I was exposed to during my business-trip to
Europe excited me to intensify my efforts and to work with pen
again.
The main purpose of my visit to Holland in May of 2002 was
meeting with compatriots residing abroad as well as informing
the foreign public regarding the Garabagh events and Khodjaly
tragedy.
Until this time numerous articles devoted to this topic were
published in European magazines; now I had got an opportuni-
ty to realize this work in vivid intercourse and contact. In each
meeting I declared detailed information regarding the conflict in
the Upper Garabagh especially accenting to the Khodjaly
tragedy and interested in attitude of foreign interlocutors to
these events.
4
Jadyl Gundoglu, editor of the "Dayirman" Newspaper pub-
lished in Europe and Fatma-khanym Agdash, employee of the
Dutch Parliament rendered a special assistance to me in this
work. I met with secretaries of the permanent parliamentary
commission on human rights and deputy current in the matters
regarding the Southern Caucasus. According to them, I was the
first female representative of Azerbaijan visited in connection
with matters of Garabagh whereas the chambers of the Dutch
parliament were incessantly plied by seven or eight Armenian
female appellants.
- But what they appeal against? - I interested.
- They say that Azerbaijan has occupied Garabagh
belonging to Armenia, that Azerbaijan is an occupant state and
those exposed to the Khodjaly massacres were Armenians(?!).
Now "we, Armenian women outcast from native hearth summon
to consider Azerbaijan as an aggressor state. Armenia is in state
of blockade and starves and we need in material and moral sup-
port."
While working on the historical sources I met enough sam-
ples of falsifications and mythical figments of Armenian histori-
ans regarding own histories. But the facts I heard during the
meetings in Holland ensured me again that the guileful
Armenian propaganda goes on to the fullest. Unfortunately, the
majority of people abroad hasn't precise knowledge and true
conception regarding the fact that Armenians trying to create the
image of "long-suffering" and persecuted nation as well as "vic-
tim of genocide", permanently submit territorial pretensions to
neighbor states hereby resorting to diversions, terror, crimes
especially against Azerbaijan exposed to direct aggression.
Whilst Garabagh, a native land of Azerbaijan is under occu-
pation of implacable enemy, while this blessed area of our
Motherland isn't free of aggression and our refugee compatriots
aren't back own homes each of us is liable to have effort to the
world community the truth regarding the Armenian aggression
5
and its severe results as well as render aid to rehabilitation and
certification of justice.
It's our most saint duty in front of the occupied and collapsed
cities and towns, destroyed historical and cultural monuments,
spirits of our ancestry and their graves ruined by enemy, our
martyrs and at last, in front of own conscience.
I believe that the instigators and culprits of the Khodjaly
genocide will certainly stand to international justice and be
imposed to the worthy penalty. Each instrument and certification
of the Khodjaly genocide as well as memories of living witness-
es of these events turning into accusatory fact make the day of
justice nearer as well.
I'm sure that the territorial integrity of our Motherland will be
restored, and Khan Shushinsky's voice singing "The Garabagh
Shikasta" will fly over Garabagh and our national holidays will be
held in Jydyr-duzu. This day isn't so far!
Havva Mammadova
May-December, 2002
6
WHAT THE HISTORY
T A L K S A B O U T
HOARY MEMORY OF KHODJALY
The Azerbaijan land is one of the most ancient natural habi-
tats of the mankind. The Azykh cave, one of the most ancient
settlements of human being as well as Khodjaly, so valuable
ancient artifacts of the civilization are settled in the territory of
Azerbaijan.
A natural museum rich of monuments of material cultures
noted in the historical literature as Khodjaly-Gadabay or Gandja-
Garabagh culture has been historically established in the territo-
ry of this Garabagh town. It's a heritage created by Azerbaija-
nies, our ancestors and protected of yore to our time.
A number of scientific researches and investigations were
devoted to Khodjaly and its ancient history as well as archeolog-
ical and material-cultural monuments by numerous scientists of
the world including Azerbaijani investigators. The first data
regarding the Khodjaly monuments in the scientific literature are
specified in 80-s of the 19th century by J. Weisengraf, a member
of the Russian geographical society.
The archeological digs realized at the last century under
supervision of I.Narimanov, J.Khalilov, I. Meshaninov, B.Piotrov-
sky, G.Kushnaryov, H.Aslanov, R.Vahidov, N.Mykhnevich,
A.Mustafayev, R.Goyushov, A.Jafarov and other investigators
provide extensive data regarding the ancient history and mate-
rial culture of Khodjaly.
Khodjaly is located in 14th kilometer to northeast from the
Khankandy town, on the spurs of the Garabagh chine. Previous
monuments of the Khodjaly-Gadabay culture belonging to 13th -
7th centuries B.C. were discovered here. Numerous cultural
monuments belonging to the later Bronze Age and the early Iron
Age (13th - 7th centuries B.C.) have been discovered here to our
time. These relics predominantly present as stone crypts and
8
tumuli. Five types of tumuli superceding each other have been
discovered during researches. Various types of ceramic vessels
and weapons (sword, dagger, lance, arrow tip, halberd) as well
as golden, bronze, shell, glass adornments and those made of
other materials and bronze implements have been found here.
Cuneiform inscription on the agathic bead found in tumulus
belonging to Adadnirary, Assyrian king, and the ceramic utensil
with image of lion, and the terracotta and glass beans as well as
golden decorations and cylindrical seal and other things certify
the economic and cultural links of the local aboriginals with the
countries of the Near East.
The monuments of the Khodjaly-Gadabay culture consist of
relic abodes, workshops, graves and sanctuaries (pagan tem-
ples). Rashid Goyushov writes in his work titled "Khodjaly is the
cultural center of the ancient world": "Khodjaly attracted atten-
tion of scientists of the world still in the last century with the
assortment of own monuments and their specific features as
well as the treasure of material and cultural relics. These monu-
ments got known to E.Resle, a German archeologist, M.Khani-
kov, a Russian orientalist, English F.Buyer and French A.
Bergait. The Khodjaly monuments covering the 17th - 12th cen-
turies B.C. and probably, more far periods consist of complex
abodes, stone tumulus graves, various types of tumuli, cyclone
constructions and complexes. As a result of the archeological
digs it was discovered that the clan abode were constructed in
the shape of oblong constructions with triangle section.
Sometimes the length of such abodes reached 17-18 meters
and the wide 8-10 meters: they were divided by special borders
into several sections. In the end of the Bronze Age and start of
the Iron Age i.e. towards the new millennium the floors of such
abodes were already covered with special white solution and
they began to get altered with big family houses. Circled pise-
walled semidugouts belonging to the spoken period also were
discovered. Although all of these constructions look primitive
9
they visually certify that the local aborigines had certain con-
struction technique.
Cyclone-type constructions were met in the territory of
Khodjaly. Some scientists consider that these constructions
were constructed as stationary abodes or as outpost on big
trade ways; other ones think that a great part of the cyclones
were constructed as sanctuaries. In opinion of some scientists,
the cyclones are lodges on sown areas or garden-plots. At last,
there's an assumption that these constructions were envisaged
for storage of cattle of nomads. But the results of the recent
researches discovered that not all of the cyclone constructions
established on sides of the migration roads of the Little
Caucasus had the same destination and served especially for
three purposes:
1. Guarding the trade ways;
2. Temporary protection of inhabitants from attack of enemies;
3. Perpetuation of saint places. Later most of these con-
structions were used as abodes or stables for storage of cattle.
The relic graves and material attributes of culture have a
great significance for investigation of the manner of life and the
level of cultural development of the aborigines of the Khodjaly-
Gadabay region. The archeological discoveries found in them
clarified that there were several types of graves and the most of
them are tumuli. The latter in its turn differ from each other with
construction and structural composition; these are soil and
stone ones as well as those constructed from solution of soil and
stone ones.
The types of graves are also various. Sometimes crypts sur-
rounded with circle hence and other times stone sarcophagi
were constructed under a tumulus. The digs in the Khodjaly
tumuli allowed to get a conclusion that three or four millenniums
ago two burying rituals existed in this territory. Sometimes bod-
ies of the deads were buried in the ground and other times they
were burnt and their ashes were buried. In the both cases both
10
family and single grave tumuli got constructed. Sometimes more
than fifty skeletons were discovered in family tumuli.
The deads burning ritual existed for a short time. In the sci-
entists' opinion this custom maintained by several nations of the
world hitherto was connected to fire-worship. The both burying
ceremonies allow conclude regarding belief in the other world on
the appearance that the deads or their ashes were buried
together with valuables, adornments and personal things.
Ancestors believed that those left for the other world will have
another life there; the temporary life will be substituted with the
eternal beyond. So, attending a funeral a dead was buried
together with corpse of pets, utensils, personal things, dress and
weapons… There were cases when a dead was buried togeth-
er with his slain near relation. In the epoch of class-stratification
while mourning for died chieftain one or two of his slaves also
got killed for serving him in the other world…"
So, the data regarding the results of the archeological digs
realized in the territory of Khodjaly certify the thoughts regarding
antiquity of this natural habitat and create quite full imagination
of the centuries-old chronology of habitability of this area.
The scientists researched and investigated the cultural
monuments of Khodjaly and various relic constructions in this
region had arrived at a conclusion that the Khodjaly culture as
well as the manner of life of the aborigines dwelling here were
closely connected to the near and far countries and first of all
with eastern ones and their cultural progress.
11
FROM HISTORY OF ARMENIANS' TERRITO-
RIAL PRETENSIONS AGAINST AZERBAIJAN
In start of the 20th century, after establishment of three states
in the Transcaucasia i.e. the Republics of Azerbaijan, Georgia
and Armenia the latter commenced having efforts for spreading
own borders and submit territorial pretensions against its neigh-
bors. In order to realize the delusion of establishment of "The
Great Armenia" Armenia commenced a war against Azerbaijan
and Georgia. Essentially, the Armenian nationalists incessantly
had aggressive infringements of neighboring states for the sake
of realization of the idea of "The Great Armenia" nurtured long
since as well as the extolled dashnak ideology; our "long-suffer-
ing" neighbors tried to realize own intention without aversion to
the means as well as violating the rights of the neighboring peo-
ple and hounding them out of their native lands not avoiding even
terror and physical torments occupying alien lands step by step.
The territory of the Republic of Armenia proclaimed in 1918 is
nine-thousand square kilometers. It was factually established on the
native Azeri lands i.e. in the territory of the former Erivan khanate
(later the Erivan province). Later, in the expense of the lands of neigh-
bors especially Azerbaijan occupied by various ways its territory
reached twenty-nine thousand square-kilometers. The present Upper
Garabagh conflict is the next component of theArmenian inclinations
on realization of the plans for establishment of "The Great Armenia".
The conflict provoked and commenced in 1988 is nothing more nor
less than an undisguised territorial pretension of Armenia against
Azerbaijan; however, they try to wear it in pseudohistorical camou-
flage and all strained motivations not bearing any critics.
As a result of this conflict twenty per cent of the Azerbaijan
12
territory i.e. the Upper Garabagh and seven contiguous regions
have been occupied by Armenians and still are under occupation.
Armenian nationalists don't consider the norms of the internation-
al right; it's more than ten year that theArmenian governors ignore
four resolutions of the UN obliging immediately vacate the lands
occupied in the progress of the Upper Garabagh conflict.
In order to vindicate own predatory actions and expansion-
ist policy the ideologists of "The Great Armenia" falsify the histo-
ry and ethnography of Garabagh in various books as well as his-
torical researches and publications, distortedly present its
demographic view and culture trying to challenge the fact that
Azerbaijanians are native inhabitants of this region.
As and historical and ethnic enclave Garabagh anciently
appeared in the Albanian state of Azerbaijan. As a result
Azerbaijan, including Garabagh appeared under the yoke of the
Arabian caliphate. In 9th and 10th centuries it was a part of the
state of Sadjy dynasty, in 10th century appeared in the state of
Salaries, in 11th and 12th century was under rule of Shaddadies,
in 12th and 13th centuries under jurisdiction of the Atabey-Eldegiz
State and since the second half of the 13th century to 14th one in
was a part of the Hulakies (Elkhanies) state.
Since the end of the 17th century to the middle of the 18th
century when Azerbaijan was divided into feudal khanates
Garabagh and Gandja appeared in the territory of the Garabagh
baylarbaylik. The Garabagh khanate of Azerbaijan being
enough powerful governmental constitution existed from the
middle of the 18th century to the start of the 19th century.
Reliable and precise data regarding the history of Garabagh
are included to various sources; more entire data is of Mirza
Jamal Garabaghy, regional chronist, in his work titled "The
History of Garabagh".
In the first chapter of this work titled "About native habitats,
ancient towns and rivers of Garabagh" he writes: "Judge by
those written in the ancient historical books the borders of the
13
14
Garabagh county are the Araz river starting from the
"Khudafarin" 1 bridge from one side (Synyg korpu 2 is located
among Gazakh, Shamsaddin and Damirchy-Hasanly localities;
Russian governmental officers renamed it as "Red Bridge");
from other side it's the Kur river interflowing to the Araz river
near to the Javad village and flows into the Caspian Sea. From
the north the border of Garabagh with Yelizavetpol (Gandja)
consists of the Goran river up to the flood-lands of the Kur
river… The western side has high Garabagh mountains named
Kushnak, Salvarty and Arikly. At that period Garabagh was divid-
ed into seventeen districts i.e. Sisian, Demirchy-Aslanly,
Kunara, Bargushad, Vahabyurd, Kabirly, Talysh, Javanshir,
Khachyn, Chylabard, Kabirly, Khyrdapara-Dyzakh, Otuz-iki,
Iyirmi-dord, Garachorlu, Varand, Dyzakh and Achanturk.
Inhabitants of twelve districts excluding several villages entirely
consisted of Azerbaijanians. Five Armenian melikates3 were
established in the territory of Garabagh. The Dyzakh, Varand,
Chylabard, Khachyn and Talysh melikates were totally named
as "Khamsa" ("Quinary"). Some of their inhabitants were
Christians, rather Armenians.
The history of establishment of these melikates is sortly is
that the Khachyn melikate was established in Garabagh in 18th
century by heirs of Hasan Jalalyan, Albanian ruler.
The Varand melikate was established in 1603. Their (inhab-
itants') ancestors are from Geuycha district. The first ruler was
melik Shahnazar. The Dyzakh melikate was established in the
beginning of 18th century. They (the melikate people) had come
from the Lory county of Armenia. The first ruler was Melik Yegan.
The Gulustan (Talysh) melikate was established in the begin-
ning of 18th century. The inhabitants consisted of strangers from
1 "Khudafarin" (literally "Thank God!") is a bridge across the Araz river
on the border of Azerbaijan and Iran.
2 "Sinig korpu" means "Broken bridge".
3 Melik - owner.
Shyrvan. The first ruler was melik Usub.
The Chylabard melikate appeared in 1637. Its inhabitants
had come from the Zangazur county. The first owner was melik
Allahgulu.
All of these melikates located in the territory of the
Garabagh khanate and depended upon the khan. However, the
Armenian meliks evaded independence from the Garabagh
khan and resorted to the Russian government.
It's noticeable that in 1780 Ivan Lazarev, Armenian on
nationality, and Josef Argutinsky wrote two reports to
A.V.Suvorov and recommended him to occupy Garabagh. They
noted that if a person able to become ruler would be found it
would be possible to reconstruct Armenian state here. In 1781
melik Adam and melik Beglar, Garabagh owners sent three
secret notifications to 2nd Ekaterina and A.V.Suvorov asking to
direct troops against Ibrahim-khan and occupy Garabagh.
Ibrahim-khan took measurements against centrifugal aspi-
ration of the Armenian meliks. Joining to unit with Varand malik
Shahnazar and Khachyn melik Mirzakhan he commenced the
fight against the Gulustan malik Abovg Beglaryan, Goraberd
melik Medjnun Israelyan, Dyzakh melik Bakhtang Avanyan and
Ovannes, Catholicos of the Gandzor monastery. It was a difficult
fight. Since 1783 G.A.Potyomkyn, one of the columns of the
Ekaterina's foreign policy, began to interfere to the Garabagh
matters via Georgia.
On 19th of May 1783 he wrote to 2nd Ekaterina: "In the first
opportunity I'll pass power in Garabagh to Armenians and
ordered regarding us to create a Christian state in Asia."
But Ibrahim-khan, in order to strengthen own positions and
deprive Armenians from opportunity to put the Russian govern-
ment against him sent a letter to price Potyomkyn expressing his
readiness to accept the charge of Russia.
In start of the 19th century the Garabagh khanate was
annexed by Russia and turned into Garabagh province; togeth-
15
er with other regions of the northern Azerbaijan this county
remained in constitution of the Russian empire.
On 10th of April 1840 the tsar signed order regarding adminis-
trative reform in Transcaucasia. Upon this order Transcaucasia
(Southern Caucasus) was divided into two parts i.e. the Georgian-
Imeret province with center in Tiflis and the Caspian district with
center in Shamakhy. The major part of the territory of the Northern
Azerbaijan and especially the Garabagh lands remained in the
constitution of the Caspian district.
In 1867 the Elizabethpol province was formed including the
former Garabagh lands outlined as Shusha and Zangazur
uyezds. Two more uyezds i.e. Javanshir and Jabrayil ones pre-
viously covering the Garabagh lands were included into the
Elizabethpol province.
Thus, the Garabagh lands became integral parts of the
above-mentioned uyezds.
Armenians often referred to the demographic principles in
own territorial pretensions against Azerbaijan. In their opinion,
Armenians were the native inhabitants of these territories.
However, the historical sources prove absolute mendacity of
these assertions. Armenians have never been aboriginals of
these territories. They were removed to Garabagh firstly by
Arabians and further by Russian powers. In the both cases the
ruling mother countries had effort in the person of removed
Armenians to provide faithful "fifth column". The events of the
newest modern history prove that the Armenian factor, now as
before, remains in hands of certain circles of Russia as a tool
acting as destructive power.
By the mass removal of Armenians to the Azerbaijan lands
during the Russian-Persian campaign in 1804-1813 and 1826-
1828 as well as the Russian-Turkish war in 1828-1813 Russia
established a real base allowing to Armenians to realize own
cruel actions. Location of Armenians removed from Turkey and
Persia having chauvinist interests and fully meeting expecta-
16
tions of the "long-suffering" colonists became a "delayed-action
mine" on the most productive lands of Azerbaijan. Armenians
naming themselves as "persecuted" and "unprotected" people
and basing on own lands began to hanker after the neighboring
territories. N.N.Shavrov had noted in the book titled "New threat
to the Russian matter in Transcaucasia": "… Upon termination
of the war in 1826-1828, during two years we located over 40
000 Persian and 84 000 Turkish Armenians and settled them on
the best State lands in Elizabethpol and Erivan provinces where
the Armenian inhabitants were insignificant, i.e. in Tiflis,
Borchaly, Akhaltsyk and Akhalkalak uyezds… The Upper part of
the Elizabethpol province as well as the banks of the Gokchy
lake are populated by these Armenians… From 1.300 thousand
of Armenians presently residing in Transcaucasia over 1 000
000 bodies don't belong to the native inhabitants of the district
and are located by us" (Baku, "Elm", 1990 (reprinted publica-
tion), page 63-64).
Mass colonization of Caucasus, and partially, Azerbaijan by
Armenians inspirited by tsarism, had political purposes. The
Armenian ethnic layer, i.e. the Christian mass had to act as
"counterpoise" to the Moslem inhabitants and support of
Orthodox mother center. This policy entirely suited also the
Armenian nationalists; however, despite of the stable effort of
the latter Russia failed to establish an artificial "Christian State"
in Garabagh. The demographic situation acted an obstacle. The
cameral census of enumeration held in Garabagh in 1823 spec-
ified that the Garabagh melikates had only 4366 Armenian fam-
ilies and it amounted 21,7 per cent of the total amount of the
Garabagh inhabitants. Besides it, there were 15729
Azerbaijanian families in Garabagh and it amounted 88,3 per
cent. In the center of Garabagh i.e. Shusha town Armenians
amounted 27,5 percent of inhabitants.
According to statistics of 1917, 38 per cent of the former
Erivan province were Moslems and 60 per cent were
17
Armenians; totality of the Moslem inhabitants in the Sharur-
Daralayaz district was 66,7 %, in Shurmely - 63,6%, in
Nakhchivan - 59%. In Erivan city itself Moslems amounted
43,4% of total amount of inhabitants.
In accordance with the Caucasian calendar, 242 thousand
Armenians and 322 Azerbaijanians resided in the territory of
Garabagh in 1917. However, according to expert of the Ministry
of Internal Affairs of the Azerbaijan Republic, these figures did-
n't express the real ratio because the index of number of
Armenian inhabitants included many thousands of Armenian
artisans and workers not belonging to the settled inhabitants of
the region and spread through space from Baku to Rostov.
Singly Baku had 30 000 Garabagh Armenians. In opinion of the
mentioned expert "The report on getting allotments in
Transcaucasia" dated on 1912 and the agricultural census of
1917 describe the demographical view more precisely: 170 000
Armenians and 415 000 Moslems.
The facts prove that Moslem, i.e. Azerbaijanian inhabitants
were majority in the territories Armenians pretend to. Thus, the
mentioned historical documents and data specify that alien
Armenians located on the best and productive lands of Azerbaijan
considered themselves as their "native owners" and used to do
their best for realization of their cruel political aims and plans.
The end of the 19th century and start of the 20th one were the
period of balanced discrimination, ousting and driving out
Azerbaijanians resulting in physical carnages, massacres,
massed persecution, deportations, direct armed charges,
slaughter and butchery - both in the start of the last century and
at the end of 20th one - the matter in moral and physical geno-
cide against our people.
George and Caroline McCartney, American historians note
in their work titled "Armenian and Turkish people" that the geo-
graphical territory named Armenia historically belongs not to
Armenians but Azerbaijanians. So, all toponymies in this territo-
18
ry have Turkish origin. But Armenians had continuous effort to
alien them in own name; especially, since 1935; this
"Armenianization" goes on hitherto. Most of the innovated
Armenian toponimies have nothing with the former Armenian
history. In essence they are created by means of translation or
shovel of the native Azerbaijanian names.
Since location of Armenians in Azerbaijan including the ter-
ritory of Garabagh the new period of realization of their nation-
alistic policy commenced. A number of nationalistic organiza-
tions were established for this purpose. One of them was the
"Armenacon" Organization established in 1885 by Partakalan in
France. However, this organization failed to exist for a long time.
Then, two years later a "Gnchak" ("Bell") Party led by Avetis
Nazarbekyan was established. The basis of the program of this
party was the idea of establishment of "The Great Armenia" and
the first target was occupation of the Azerbaijan lands. The lead-
ers of the party realizing these purposes as hard-hitting com-
menced large-scale propagandizing work in several European
cities.
The most active fighter of the idea of "The Great Armenia"
was the "Dashnaksutyun" Party established in 1890 in Tiflis and
continuing the fight for realization of own aggressive expansion-
ist intentions till the present. Leaders of the dashnak party were
S.Zavaryan, Kh.Bikelyan, S.Zoryan, etc. Its publication body
was the "Droshak" ("Banner") newspaper published in Geneva
and widely propagandizing nationalism.
The party had established over 3000 acting groups in vari-
ous countries.
Since 20th century "Dashnaksutyun" expanded own activity
in Transcaucasia and especially, in Azerbaijan. The first Russian
revolution happened in 1905-1907; the tsarism took all possible
measurements trying to strengthen its shaking throne. One of
the measurements for prevention of the danger the empire was
exposed to the custodians considered as the ancient principle
19
"separate and dominate" i.e. kindling international discord. The
autocracy ideologists were absolutely aware of the deep contra-
dictions between Armenians and Azerbaijanians in
Transcaucasia a significant role in occurrence of which was the
tsarism policy. Manipulating these detonators during the
increasing revolutionary storm the functioning satraps provoked
to action of Armenians against Azerbaijanians and upon their
secret order the "long-suffered" neighbors got armed and com-
menced the war against the peaceful Azerbaijanians.
Gariby, a Georgian author had written in his "Golden Book"
that before establishment of the "Dashnaksutyun" Party
Transcaucasia was in peace and concord. Armenians,
Azerbaijanians and Georgians used to live in good-neighborliness
during centuries (Despite of the above-mentioned historically con-
ditioned contradictions tolerance and honor of righteous people
prevailed). No outbreak of international feud appeared during long
centuries. Gariby writes: "Dashnaks came and tried to establish
independent Armenia consisting of Armenians".
This is the hidden motive of the Armenian-Moslem slaugh-
ter commenced in 1905-1906.
Mammad Said Ordubady, a witness of these tragic events
had written in his book titled "Bloody Years": "It was explosion of
the conflict bomb long since penetrated into crowd of the both
people. All Caucasian world was burnt by fire of cruel impact of
this bomb. Thus, the war between Azerbaijanians and
Armenians commenced and lasted about two years".
The first collision happened in Baku and later the feud wave
passed to Shusha, Zangazur, Erivan, Nakhchivan, Ordubad,
Echmiadzin as well as Javanshir and Gazagh uyezds…0n 9th of
August 1907 the Gandja (Elizabethpol) Governor reported to
Peterburg that about hundred thousand horde of fighters were
directed to the paltry villages of Azerbaijan. It might be said that
all refugees from Turkey and local cutthroats joined to this horde".
Mir-Mohsun Navvab witnessing this slaughter, cruelty and
20
massacre with his own eyes wrote in his documentary book
which unfortunately, failed to be published during the author's
life: "Armenians which used to have intercourse and eat with
inhabitants of Shusha and all surrounding villages of Azerbaijan
including Malibayli, Karkidjahan, Khodjaly and other ones before
the events in Shusha suddenly attacked Moslems in toykhanas1
and places of their gathering and even while their praying in
mosques caused massed massacre.
Besides the Armenian dashnaks the emissaries coming
from Armenians also participated in these slaughters".
The "Difayi" Party established by Azerbaijanians had a great
role in repulse to the Armenian terror. It was established in 1905
in Gandja by Ahmad-bay Aghayev (Aghaoglu). The party has
branches in Gandja, Shusha and other settlements of Garabagh.
TheAzerbaijan people under the leadership of advanced intellec-
tuals and compatriots resolutely resisted to the Armenian nation-
alists using patronage of tsarist officers. Armenians were obliged
to retreat and expect for new available situation.
In 1914 the World War I commenced. Dashnaks deployed
impetuous activity deciding to benefit the war for realization of
own nationalistic ideas. They were inherited in this intension by
the promises of the Entente states purposing own interests.
Armenians were promised autonomy in terms of fighting
against Turkey. The "Dashnaksutyun" Party activated in the
years of war strengthened the fight against Azerbaijan.
Thus, Armenians, trusting in the promises by the western
powers and hoping for aid of the tsarist Russia concentrated the
main strike on Azerbaijan; the way to the illusory "Great
Armenia" was full of blood of new innumerable victims and
corpses of thousands Azerbaijanians, defenseless old men,
women and children…
21
1 Toykhana - tent of wedding-party
In February 1917 the second Russian revolution happened.
This social cataclysm revived the Dashnak hopes with new
power. In October of the same year national congress of
Dashnak leaders gathered in Turkey. The result was more
aggravation of the political state and tension in the Southern
Caucasus and Azerbaijan. Dashnak activists rising on sheet the
map of mythic "Great Armenia" commenced antiazerbaijanian
campaign in Azerbaijan and through Southern Caucasian and
passed to total terror. Later, in March of 1918 the Armenian
armed gangs caused bloody massacres on peaceful inhabitants
in Baku, Nakhchivan, Garabagh, Guba, Shamakhy… over 12
000 Azerbaijanians were murdered only in Baku.
Dashnaks caused massed evil deed also in Shusha and
surrounding areas of compact settlement of Azerbaijanians. The
archive documents specify the tragedy Khodjaly was exposed to
at that period. In 1918 Armenians surrounded this ancient village
and commenced with ultimate requirement: All inhabitants were
required to leave their residences and get out of the village. The
Khodjaly inhabitants weren't going to obey this impudent and
insulting dictate and rose to protect own land. The forces were
unequal. The cutthroats armed to the teeth burst into the village,
murdered it inhabitants and burnt all residences.
The larger-scale tragedies happened in Javanshir, Jabrayil
and Zangazur uyezds contiguous with Garabagh. Azerbaijan vil-
lages turned into ashes and thousand inhabitants were
destroyed.
The dashnak gangs were followed by the professionally
trained troops of not unknown General Andronyk pouring blood
of innocent Azerbaijanians in Zangazur. According to the official
documents and data 115 villages were burnt here. 400
Azerbaijanians praying on afternoon namaz were burnt alive
together with mosque. The sad number of Zangazur victims was
10 068 people; 60 000 inhabitants were moved from own resi-
dences by brutal fighters. They cut women's and girls' breasts,
22
severed heads and parts of body; butchers didn't spare even
infants.
Over two-hundred villages were razed to the ground in the
Erivan province in 1918.
Abysh-bek Galabekov, one of the witnesses of these bloody
events graduating from the Shusha Real School in 1905 had
written: "I saw with my own eyes the tortures caused by
Armenians against us, Moslems, in the Armenian-Azerbaijanian
wars in 1905-1906 and 1918-1920, during the Novruz holiday.
Though they were episodically destroying Moslems also upon
the slaughters caused in 1905-1906, they were actively pre-
pared for the massacres happened in March 1918.
Simultaneously, they committed horrible carnages in Baku,
Shamakhy, Guba, Goychay, Garabagh, Salyan, Lankaran, etc.
The March butcheries were led by Bolshevik divisions armed on
S.Shaumyan's order.
At the end of May 1918, upon disbandment of the
Transcaucasian Seym, the "Dashnaksutyun" Party declaring
independence of Armenia commenced realization of own
nationalistic idea. In 1918-1920 the Dashnak government used
to address from the position of provoking to unjust war against
Turkey, Azerbaijan and Georgia. Geriby, a Georgian author
wrote in 1919: "Dashnaks came and caused international feud
and aggravated the Armenian-Moslem contradictions…"
Dashnaks passed to armed infringement in order to occupy
the native Azerbaijanian lands of Garabagh and Nakhchivan.
The Azerbaijanians residing in Armenia on own native lands
were firstly exposed to aggression. The peaceful inhabitants of
these settlements were removed from own residences in mass-
es by means of weapons; refugees left for mountains and
searched for shelters in other regions. The places of compact
settlements of Azerbaijanians i.e. Echmiadzyn, Erivan, Surmely,
Sharur were occupied by Armenians.
On 8th of January 1919 at the meeting of the Azerbaijan
23
Parliament the chairman reported to the deputies that "The par-
liament has received a letter from inhabitants of the Erivan
province." The letter specified that "Till 1st of June 1918 the
Armenian troops in the Erivan province had destroyed and burnt
over 200 Azerbaijanian villages and thousands of inhabitants left
for mountains died from cold and hunger. The left Azerbaijanian
villages are settled by Armenians from Turkey".
In own note directed to the Armenian Government Fataly-khan
Khoysky, the Prime-Minister of the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic
definitely required termination of the aggressive policy against
Azerbaijanians. However, the neighboring republic didn't obey the
requirement and normalization of relations was impossible.
24
OCCUPATIONCOMMENCEDFROMKHANKENDY
On 13th of February 1988 in 10.00 o'clock a.m. Armenians
gathered in the first meeting held in Khankendy, i.e. center of the
UGAR requiring joining Upper Garabagh to Armenia. At that
time Heydar Aliyev's absence as authoritative, experienced and
resolute leader was felt with special acuteness. Our compatriots
thought through sorrow: "If he was here these scoundrels would-
n't dare to hint at such an intention…"
Unfortunately, at that time our known national leader unfair-
ly dismissed by Gorbachov from the position of Member of the
Political Bureau was out of job and under control in far
Moscow… Historical "claimants" hankering after our lands ben-
efited this circumstance and commenced bloody actions named
"Events in Garabagh and surroundings".
The meetings in Khankendy commenced in February 1988
were the first act of the political scenery planned by the Kremlin
and Yerevan supervision in "co-authorship" with dashnak "elec-
torate" in Khankandy.
It was the prologue of the fascist bacchanalia of the
Armenian nationalism.
Let's remember the previous events.
Since the period when Heydar Aliyev was nominated for the
higher echelon of the Soviet Administration the republican
power gradually lost control over the autonomous region. It
ended in that the representatives of the republican power from
Baku expired to be considered not only by the First Secretaries
of social committee and regional ones but also the common eco-
nomic supervisors. In essence the official Baku in the county
supervision system lagged behind and surrendered own posi-
tions to Yerevan. Hereby rendered the ministers of Armenia dis-
posing to the UGAR as well as all possible executors and emis-
25
saries. All nuances of economy, culture and economic life were
determined namely by the masters of ceremonies from Yerevan.
Natural resources and treasures of our republic i.e. marble,
granite, timbering, grape, crops, butter, oil and meat got export-
ed to Yerevan.
Hundreds of organization men with dashnak stuffing flew to
the autonomous region in the guise of "specialists" and appoint-
ed to key positions. The State Safety Committee and the
Regional Police Board were turned into headquarter of the
"Dashnaksutyun" Party. Most productive ground areas of the
region were presented to professors from Yerevan and Moscow
constructing here manors and villas. Armenian policemen
arrested innocent Azerbaijanians and forged cases against
them and Armenian judges imprisoned them. These were hun-
dreds. More than twenty Azerbaijanians were murdered by
unpunished Armenians.
A lot of our compatriots suffering with comparatively light dis-
eases became victims in "healing" hands of dashnak
Aesculapiuses. In Armenian meetings and holidays local physi-
cians such as Gukasyan, Dadamyan, Atayan, Balayan, Mirzoyan
cynically praised themselves: "I have sent to the world beyond
turks (Azerbaijanians) in number of hair on my head…"
The Azerbaijanian staffs were ousted and ejected. There
were brought restorers and skilled craftsman from Armenia,
Russia, France, Italy. The architectural view of Khankendy was
entirely "Armenized". The regional center was turned into any
opening day with monuments, busts of Armenian writers and
public figures. The characters, crosses and ornaments on the
Albanian monuments were brought to accordance with Armenian
attributes. Our aliened songs were sounded through the town
day and night in performance by self-named Armenian singers
and they were posed as "national" repertoire.
Songs devoted to butcher Andronic rich of nostalgia for
bloody "prowess" of the famous murderer were uninterruptedly
26
heard in residences, kindergartens, restaurants and in halls of
theatre and cinema.
Anniversaries of the literary adherents of dashnakism such
as Silva Kaputikyan, Sero Khanzadyan, Zory Balayan and tens
of other national figures were celebrated with pomp in the
region, and each town, village and collective turned into their
apotheosis and each celebration was apology of dashnakism.
The regional administration was demonstrating itself unruly
to our central republican power with own arbitrary actions and
psychologically preparing the Armenian inhabitants to promotion
of cruel scenery. In particular, it was studying the reaction of the
Azerbaijan administration to these provoked events. Upon some
time, a short after Heydar Aliyev's leaving the membership of the
Political Bureau, Aghabekyan, Gorbachov's favorite declared
from Paris to the entire Europe that UGAR is economically con-
nected directly to Armenia and thus, it had to be joined to
Armenia.
When K.U.Chernenko was elected as General Secretary of
the Central Committee of Communist Party of the Soviet Union
after Andropov, Armenians couldn't hide own perplexity: "It's
impossible, because Gorbachov should be elected." When, at
last, their expectations were realized it caused national exulta-
tion: "At last our Mikhail became the owner of the Kremlin!"
Shahin Martirosyan, doctor of philosophic sciences and the
Chief of the Marxism-Leninism Chair of the regional institute in
Khankandy commented this event with these words: "Hitherto
the history acted against the Armenian people. Henceforth a
great Armenian era commences in the history".
A short after Gorbachov's assignment the "Krunk" Dashnak
Organization led by Arkady Manucharyan legalized own activity;
the party and Soviet bodies, trade unions and Komsomol cells
turned into subsections and concrete executors of "Krunk".
Already not B.Gevorkov, the First Secretary of the Regional
Committee but "Krunk" was in command. Simultaneously, it was
27
held in Yerevan the sequence of conferences devoted to the
national problems where the personages famous with dashnak
suggestions from the autonomous region were invited to the
conference. The emissaries came from Yerevan and Moscow
realized works in each organization and collective day and night.
In the guise of "population census" they collected signatures
under the application directed to Gorbachov. They expressed to
the General Secretary their irrepressible dream (rather require-
ment) to "join" the Upper Garabagh to Armenia (Undoubtedly,
upon previous prompt of the Kremlin protector).
A program of actions on realization of this mission was
developed. Future meetings, demonstrations, walkouts, expatri-
ation and in case of necessity, extirpation of the Azerbaijanian
inhabitants were programmed with ritual and propagandist pro-
vision. All Garabagh Armenians from seven-year child to ninety-
year old man were swearing for faith to the idea of "miatsum"
("reunification") and not lag behind even in case of death.
Thereby only Gorbachov's special "order" would be enough.
But the General Secretary should before shovel a lot in the
managing level. I had witnessed that Armenians expressed
enviable awareness of Gorbachov's further actions. A week later
his assignment as the General Secretary they forecasted: "He
will correct Stalin's errors, separate the Upper Garabagh from
Azerbaijan and join to Armenia, modify all membership of the
Political Bureau, excluding Shevardnadze, and become the
Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Council, restore cap-
italism and become the first president of the country."
There supposals realized. Therefore, the matter wasn't in the
forecast but the Gorbachov's plans entirely known to Armenians.
A part of Armenians credulous or ambitious ones gained a
fancy: They began to assign that Gorbachov wouldn't be satis-
fied with separation of the Upper Garabagh but hold the territo-
ry of Azerbaijan till Yevlakh as well as seven counties of Turkey,
a part of Georgia and some lands of Iran and by this way he
28
would established "The Great Armenia", and USA and France
will support him in this affair.
Approximately in 1989 dashnak Ayrikyan, one of the "co-
authors" of the Garabagh events answering to question of a
Turkish magazine "Aren't you really afraid of Turkey?" said: "If
the Armenian inhabitants consisting of three-million people
wage war to the Center (i.e. Moscow) why should Armenia be
afraid of Turkey?"
At that period a television announcer quoted the words said
by psychologist of the Central Reconnaissance Bureau: "It's
exactly three years that I watch Gorbachov via TV-screen. He's
not engaged in the reorganization commenced by him; he
serves any secret target. The reorganization is a way of realiza-
tion of this target".
Let's remember the Gorbachov's politic "balanced act". In
the first own address on the higher power echelon i.e. in the
report made in the Plenum of the Central Committee of
Communist Party of the Soviet Union held in April 1985 he
pathetically said: "the Soviet Union had a historical injustice
since the day of own establishment. Not all people were reward-
ed with own rights. Share of a people was gained by another
one…" The implication of this "slip of tongue" becomes enough
clear: the General Secretary meant Armenians under "deprived"
people, and the "historical injustice" was remaining of the Upper
Garabagh in constitution of Azerbaijan. This conjecture coin-
cides with the words said by Armenians upon Gorbachov's
assignment!
The news regarding the earthquake happened in Armenia
on 7th of December 1988 reached to Gorbachov in New York at
the of the UN General Assembly session; the emotional experi-
ence prevented the "tried friend of the Armenian people" to
address in the session with enough clear articulation. He imme-
diately returned to Moscow and rejected to stay for the further
necessary protocol measurements: "My people are exposed to
29
a great misfortune and I've to be there".
Upon return he eviscerated both the treasures of the Union
and all republics, mobilized logistic means and human
resources and sent to Armenia. He appealed to leaders of the
world countries asking to help Armenia. Directed the govern-
mental establishment to Yerevan with business-trip and left for
there himself together with his wife. Raisa Maximovna, returning
from Yerevan, visited in Moscow clinic the Armenian children
suffered by the earthquake. All above-mentioned facts have
view of natural reaction of the state leader.
But such a participation wasn't made in case of the earth-
quake happened in Tajikistan on 23rd of January 1989 resulted
in numerous human victims and destructions.
The fact that those times supervision of our republic failed to
rumble the proarmenian essence of the Gorbachov's "democra-
tic" rhetoric and politic hypocrisy going on credulously trusting in
objectivity of the Center and not taking strict prophylactic and
preventive measurements acted in favor of separatists. Such
position allowed to unleash meeting bacchanalia in Khankendy
(specified in the Soviet map as "Stepanakert"). On the fifth day
of the meeting "promotion" the chairman of the "Krunk" declared
to the meeting participants: "We've got solidarity telegrams from
all party and Soviet bodies of Armenia, Upper Garabagh and all
Armenian organizations all over the world. We'll use all means
for achievement own targets and pass all stages. Moscow is
with us and our requirements will be fulfilled within a short time".
A day before 500 Armenian families going to leave the
autonomous region brought to the railway station containers with
own belongings. They said: "Upon these our actions
Azerbaijanians wouldn't store and feed us". These were common
and ordinary toilers and fair people abusing the instigators of the
misfortune: "All of these works are done by several dashnaks. If
the powers suspend them on their tongues in the view of honored
people these scoundrels would be put an end to."
30
Although the republican government had an effort to prevent
from dangerous result of the events it acted slowly.
Walkouts were terminated and the expansion of Armenia
was prevented for the time being and the social status of the
Azerbaijan inhabitants in the autonomous region was restored…
But the administration led by Kamran Baghirov had an unforgiv-
able mistake allowing Armenians from Baku and Sumgayit to
Khankendy.
When it was supposed that the affairs get better uninterrupt-
ed meetings commenced in Khankandy. The separatists were
inspired: "Congratulations, Vezirov will come to lead Azerbaijan
and Arutunyan - to lead Armenia. Our requirements will be set-
tled positively". About a month later this forecast began to gain
real outlines. All power in the region was trusted to Volsky, head
of the Special Management Committee. Volsky consideriong
himself as a competent master and Gorbachov's emissary ful-
filled own suzerain's orders diligently. The economy of the
autonomous region was rapidly reoriented to Armenia. In the
guise of aid from the neighbor republic under accompaniment of
the military contingent weapon and ammunition was brought
from Yerevan and supplied to fighters; in the presence of new
"master" the Azerbaijanian residences were burnt and our com-
patriots were murdered. Over 60 houses were burnt within three
days since 18th of September 1988 and the remained property
thrown out also got in fire. Hundreds of our innocent compatriots
were cruelly beaten and shot; 16 000 Azerbaijanians were
deprived of residence and shelters.
Azerbaijanians became outcasts in Azerbaijan, in their
motherland.
These were the results of the rowdy Armenian xenophobia
and nationalisms as well as "successes" of brutal separatists
and dashnak policy.
31
THE KHODJALY
G E N O C I D E
TRAGEDY
The Khodjaly genocide is one of the most horrible events in
the history of the Azerbaijanian-Armenian and Upper Garabagh
conflict commencing in 1988. This bloody massacre might be
considered as one of the most malicious tragedies happened in
the 20th century. The name of Khodjaly, an Azerbaijanian town
stood in the sad row of the names of Baby-Yar, Khatyn, Lydice,
Songmy…
Until the February tragedy happened in 1992 Khodjaly had
seven-thousand people. There were also refugees moved from
Khankendy on 18th of September 1988 from Khankendy and the
Azerbaijanians moved from Armenia in the same November as
well as mesheti-turks moved from Fergana in 1989 also had set-
tled in Khodjaly.
At the night from 25th to 26th of February 1992 the Armenian
armed divisions with direct participation of the shooting regiment
No. 366 dislocated to Khankendy attacked the Khodjaly town.
The brutal chasteners attacked the peaceful town with profes-
sional refinement: Firstly the town was shot by artillery and
heavy armored weapons. Khodjaly began to blaze. The fire cov-
ered all houses turning them into ash. The protectors of the town
and the local inhabitants were obliged to leave the town. At five
o'clock a.m. the town was occupied.
The inhabitants spearing themselves from the brutal gangs
run to mountains, suburb forests trying to reach the Aghdam
town. Near the Nakhchivanyk village on an open location a part
of refugees were met by hail of bullets; Armenians shot and mur-
dered everybody.
Khodjaly inhabitants left for forests and waste grounds in
the night darkness suffered huge torments and crucifixions. A
desponded mother constricted own six-month infant… A year-
old child was crying and sucking bloody mixture from cut breast
33
of his mother…
Girls were taken prisoners and as hostages. The people
obliged to hide in forests during weeks got died of cold and star-
vation. Among the persons were those becoming an alive target
trying to pass over tillage…
As a result of barbarity of the Armenian armed formations
613 peaceful people were killed, 487 people were mutilated,
1275 Khodjaly inhabitants including old men, women, children,
taken as hostages were subject to inconceivable tortures, humil-
iation and mockery. Fate of 150 inhabitants is unknown yet.
Among those killed 106 people are women, 63 people are
infants, 76 people becoming invalids are underage boys and
girls. Eight families have been entirely destroyed, 24 children
have become completely orphans and 130 infants have lost one
of the parents. Only 335 dead people succeeded to be buried.
Memories of that horrible night are mortification of frozen legs of
two-hundred people and mutilation of thousands Khodjaly
inhabitants.
Everybody has to know and remember the tragic account of
the Khodjaly sacrifices:
613 people were killed including
106 women,
63 children,
70 old men,
487 people were wounded, including
76 children.
1275 people were taken as hostages,
150 people disappeared without a trace.
25 children lost both parents and
130 ones lost one of the.
8 families were completely disturbed.
34
REFERENCE
regarding the genocide caused against the inhabi-
tants of Khodjaly town by Armenian armed formations
and the officers of the shooting regiment No. 366 of the
former Soviet Army
Taking advantage of the "reorganization" process com-
menced in the social and political life of the Soviet Union since
the middle of 1980-s the Armenian nationalists adhering realiza-
tion of the idea of the mythic "Great Armenia" stirred up the pur-
poseful antiazerbaijanian policy including large-scale of brutal
and criminal remedies including informational war, discretization
of the Azerbaijanian nation and its intellectual wealth as well as
terror, ethnic purge and physical destruction.
At the end of 1987 and during 1988 there commenced
organized armed attacks on villages and regions in Armenia
where over 200 000 Azerbaijanian people lived. They were
exposed to blackmails, massacres and slaughters. Our compa-
triots were forcedly moved from own residences and lands;
simultaneously, movement of Azerbaijanians from the Upper
Garabagh commenced on the same scenery.
In 1988 the houses of Azerbaijanians in Khankendy began to
blaze; mockeries, humiliations, violence and massacres having
the same aim also commenced. Due to connivance and proar-
menian policy of the Central power of USSR about 15 000
Azerbaijanian people were forcedly moved from Khankendy.
During 1988-1991 armed fighters directed from Armenia to the
Upper Garabagh and by their aid a massed terror and massacres
were caused against the Azerbaijanian inhabitants.
The shooting regiment No. 366 of the former Soviet Army dislocat-
ed in Khankendy "joined" to these terrorist actions sinceOctober 1991.
The settlements with compactly residing Azerbaijanian
35
inhabitants were blocked and exposed to shooting, and the
inhabitants having effort to get out of the surrounding circle were
waited for by fighting ambushes on road and in forests shooting
directly at the unprotected people. On 24th of September 1991
the Armenian fighters with help of the armored weapons of the
regiment No.366 attacked the Imarat-Garvand village of Agdere
region settled by Azerbaijanians; part of the inhabitants was
destroyed with special cruelty, the rest could run away leaving
own property. The village was robbed and turned into ash.
On 30th of October of the same year fighters using weapons
and with participation of officers of the regiment No.366 occu-
pied the Tug and Selakatin villages. Akhulu village was occupied
on 12th of November, Khodjavend on 19th of November and
Jamilly village on 15th of December. Part of inhabitants was killed
and the other part was spared running away. Only ruins
remained from the villages.
Brutal Armenian bandits meeting no resistance commenced
attacks to big Azerbaijanian villages since 1991. Nabilar
(21.12.91), Meshaly (23.12.91), Hasanabad (25.12.91), Geybali
(28.12.91), Malybayli, Upper and Lower Gushchu (12.02.92)
and Garadaghly (15.02.92) villages were occupied, burnt and
robbed as a result of new attacks. The occupation was accom-
panied by massed murder of Azerbaijanians, massacres of
houses and destructions. Singly in Garadaghly village the
Armenian fighters killed over 80 Azerbaijanian people and tens
of inhabitants were taken as hostages.
Khodjaly town located between Khankandy and Askaran
was the second biggest Azerbaijanian settlement of UGAR after
Shusha. Khodjaly got the status of town in 1990. According to
data of 1991 its inhabitants aggregated 7000 people. The only
airport in the region located nearby this town. Due to the attacks
to the town at the end of 1991 more than half of its inhabitants
were obliged to leave it without own properties.
Khodjaly was blocked by Armenian armed formations. All
36
roads were closed. The town lost the ground communication with
the outer world. Power supply was cut off. Since November 1991
inhabitants could have communication with the great earth only
via telephone, hear the news from radio and information could be
brought only by helicopters. The helicopter MI-8 of the civil avia-
tion with over 40 Azerbaijanians on the board was shot in the air-
space of the autonomous region on 18th of January 1991. Upon
this diversion and death of passengers the air communication
with Khodjaly also was interrupted.
The town cut off from the outer world where the self-defense
division existed having only 50-60 guns and riffles became sur-
rounded by armed fighters supported by armored weapons and
up-to-date shooting means.
The circle was getting narrower and on 25th of February 1992,
about at 10.00 o'clock p.m. the fighters supported by personal staff
and means of the regiment No.366 commenced attack on the town.
The 2nd battalion of the regiment led by major Seyran
Mushegovich Ohanyan, 3rd battalion (commander Yevgeny
Nabokikh), chief of headquarter of the 1st battalion Valery Chitchiyan
and over thirty officers and ensigns of Armenian nationality served
in the regiment participated in the storm. They used tanks, ACP,
weapons, howitzer D-30 and other technique.
The held investigations collected data regarding the
Armenian militaries and commanding staff of the shooting regi-
ment causing criminal action of genocide against Azerbaijanians
as well as the concrete crimes committed by them.
According to testimonies of Abbasov Alamdar Mammadvali
oglu, an inhabitant of Khodjaly town interrogated as witness on
the case it was clarified that when 150 inhabitants of Khodjaly
succeeded to burst through the encirclement began to move
towards Aghdam they were ambushed by armed Armenians
which brutally beat a part of refugees thereby and took the rest
ones as prisoners. They stored them under arrest exposing
them to daily beatings and massacres. Abbasov Alamdar and
37
Salahov Mammad Abdul oglu were brought to Camera for
Previous Imprisonment in Askaran region under pretence of
exchange with prisoners, beaten with armature and tortured.
They broke Abbasov's two ribs but Salahov not bearing beatings
and torments died on his arms.
One of the Armenians seized them nearby the Dahraz vil-
lage was named Serjik (Sergey); he used to live in Sumgayit.
Abbasov remembered among own tormentors also riot squad
servants coming from Yerevan i.e. Manvel and Garik.
Abbasov Elbrus Alamdar oglu, an inhabitant of Khodjaly
taken by Armenians as prisoner specified in own testimonies that
being in incarcerationin the Camera for Previous Imprisonment in
Stepanakert he and other prisoners were exposed to continuous
torments by sergeants Artur and Slavik as well as lieutenant
named Felix. These fiends tormented and murdered Novruzov
Alesker and Shaliyev Vekil, inhabitants of Khodjaly. One of these
tormentors was a captain from Yerevan.
The testimonies by Mammadov Zulfi Ibrahim oglu,
Sevdimaliyev Abbasali Mammadali oglu, Eyvazov Dadash Ali
oglu and other Khodjaly inhabitants witnessing drudgery of the
hostages and discharged by means of exchange also specify
data regarding Armenians exposing Azerbaijanians to mas-
sacres and tormenting and killing them.
Participation of the officers of the 366th regiment in the geno-
cide actions against the Azerbaijanian inhabitants of the UGAR,
and, in particular, Khodjaly inhabitants together with the
Armenian armed formations is proved by the following facts and
evidences collected in the progress of investigation.
Upon testimonies by Tushov Sergey Danilovich, former
Deputy Chief of the Headquarter of 1st battalion of the 366th
regiment it was clarified that since the end of September 1991
upon the order of Zarvigarov, regiment commander, Ohanyan
Seyran, commander of the 2nd battalion, Yevgeny Nabokikh,
commander of 3rd battalion, Igor Lychodey, commander of
38
artillery division, Igor Miroshnychenko, commander of the logis-
tic company and Smagin, commander of the tank section were
on the military duty during which they exposed the Azerbaijanian
settlements in UGAR to fire. Sergey Tushov declared that
Seyran Ohanyan himself told him that he used to command the
Armenian fighters during occupation of Karkidjahan and
Malybayli villages. In the night from 25th to 26th of February 1992
the military actions on occupation of Khodjly was led by Yevgeny
Nabokikh, commander of 3rd battalion. Above-mentioned
Seyran Ohanyan, chief of headquarter of the 1st battalion
Valeriy Chitchiyan and other Armenians also participated in the
attack on the town.
FROM MATERIALS OF THE INVESTIGATION GROUP
ON RESEARCH OF THE KHODJALY TRAGEDY
Mammadova Tamara Salim gyzy, Dadashova Asli Babir gy-
zy, Amirova Mahi Babir gyzy and Nuraliyeva Dilara Orudj gyzy
were exposed to putting-out eyes and cut of breasts.
Salimov Bahadur Mikayil oglu and Aslanov Igbal Gulu oglu were
exposed to putting-out eyes, cut of sexual organs and burning alive.
Behbudova Suraya Yusif gyzy was shot at genital.
Karimova Firangul Mammad gyzy was chopped to pieces
and exposed to putting-out eyes and cut of ears and breasts.
Mammadov Yasha Yusif oglu was held captive during occu-
pation of Khodjaly and exposed to physical and moral mas-
sacres. Women were sneered at and taunted in sights of cap-
tives. Not bearing the humiliation Yasha spitted on one of the
bandit's face. The he was tied to tree and shot and his corpse
was thrown on ground and driven over by car.
FROM MEDICAL EXAMINER'S CONCLUSION
Analysis of the traces of wounds and mutilations discovered
on bodies of the people killed and mortified by Armenian bandits
39
during occupation of Khodjaly town in the night from 25th to 26th
of February 1992:
181 corpses passed medical examination including 13 juve-
nile children. 130 of them male and 51 are female.
Characteristics of wounds and mutilations:
a) of missile wound - 20;
b) of bullet wound - 151;
c) of impact of dull tool - 10.
Affection of head - 40;
To thoracic cavity - 74;
To abdominal cavity - 17;
To extremities -11.
Three corpses had frozen extremities, thirty-three people
had signs of sneer and taunts - women had cut breath, nostrils
and ear lobes and fire shoot at genitals. Besides it, there are
cases of putting out eyeballs, breakage of teeth and cut of male
genitals. 31 corpses had various specific affections put on vari-
ous fields of body i.e. bullet wounds and traumas exposed by
piercing and cutting instruments. 10 corpses, besides fire-shoot-
ing wounds, had signs of crushing by driving over on military
cars.
Professor R.M.Yusifov,
Head Medical Examiner
40
MEDICAL EXAMINER'S CONCLUSION
1. Mehdiyev Shefa Baba oglu. Worker, 54 years old. Dead
of bullet wound in thorax.
2. Khalilova Lala Tahir gyzy. 4 years old. Dead of bullet
wound in thorax.
3. Salimov Mikayil Bahadur oglu. 22 years old. Dead of
missile wound in skull.
4. Aliyev Arif Khanlar oglu. Soldier of the National Army. 22
years old. Dead of bullet wound in thorax.
5. Amirov Tavakkul Bakhysh oglu. Worker. 40 years old.
Dead of bullet wound in thorax.
6. Naghiyev Yusif Shirin oglu. Worker. 64 years old. Dead
of bullet wound in thorax.
7. Unidentified male corpse. 22-27 years old. Dead of per-
forating wound in head.
8. Unidentified male corpse. 20-30 years old. Dead of mis-
sile wound in head. Hard breakage of skull bone.
9. Unidentified male corpse. 25-30 years old. Torn wounds
in skull and upper lip as well as bullet wound in the front part of
the neck.
10.Unidentified male corpse. 20-25 years old. Dead of mis-
sile wound in thorax backside and torn wounds in face, neck and
chest.
11.Unidentified corpse of girl. 14 years old. Dead of bullet
wound in head.
12.Allahverdova Gamza Gardash gyzy. 50 years old.
Housewife. Dead of gunshot wound in stomach.
13.Allahverdova Teyuba Nabi gyzy. 50 years old.
Housewife. Dead of bullet wound in head.
14.Mammadov Vagif Shamil oglu. 39 years old. Worker.
Dead of bullet wound in head.
15.Mahmudova Roza Safar gyzy. 60 years old. Housewife.
41
Dead of bullet wound in stomach.
16.Chobanov Tapdig Khadidja oglu. 40 years old. Worker.
Dead of bullet wound in head.
17.Orudjov Fazil Anvar oglu. 31 years old. Worker. Dead of
bullet wound in thorax.
18.Karimov Manaf Tanriverdi oglu. 23 years old. Dead of
missile wound in head and extremities.
19.Zeynalov Mammad Masi oglu. 35 years old. Dead of bul-
let wound in extremities.
20.Saganov Ilgar Alekper oglu. . 53 years old. Dead of bul-
let wound in extremities.
21.Azimova Parvana Huseyn gyzy. 45 years old.
Housewife. Dead of bullet wound in thorax.
22.Azimov Hasanbala Shahmurad oglu. 57 years old. Dead
of bullet wound in head.
23.Mammadov Eldar Amirkhan oglu. 34 years old. Worker.
Dead of bullet wound in head.
24.Karimova Firangiz Mutallim gyzy. 60 years old.
Housewife. Dead of bullet wound in thorax.
25.Alekperov Aydin Tavakkul oglu. 12 years old. School
pupil. Dead of bullet wound in head.
26.Nabiyeva Sara Akper gyzy. 24 years old. Missile wound
of the right thigh and fragmentation of the right arm.
27.Eyvazov Hidayat Ali oglu. Dead of multiple wounds in
head, the left eye is put out, bullet wounds in stomach and thigh.
28.Khanmammadov Barat Kamil oglu. 23 years old. Worker.
Dead of bullet wound in chest.
29.Iskenderov Aliabbas Gara oglu. 24 years of. Dead of
bullet wound in back.
30.Khamakova Gulchohra. Dead of bullet wounds in thorax
and stomach. Right wrist is severed.
31. Hasanov Shohlat Usub oglu. Dead of bullet wound in
thorax. Upper extremities are cut off.
32.Mikayilov Araz. Dead of wounds in chest, stomach and
42
right tight.
33.Mammadov Rasim Salim oglu. Dead of missile wound in
head destroying the skull.
34.Unidentified male corpse. About 25-30 years. Bullet
wound in chest; ear lobes and genital are cut off; signs of cut
wounds on the chest.
35.Unidentified male corpse. About 20-25 years. Bullet
wound in chest; cut wounds on head; eyeballs are put out.
36.Badalov Tofig. Crushed by tank, corpse is burnt, eyes
are put out and ears are cut.
37.Abyshov Ali Abdul oglu. Signs of contusions from strikes
with dull tool, numerous breakage of skeleton.
38.Azimov Natig Abbasgulu oglu. Dead of bullet wound in
back.
39.Safiyeva Gozal. Dead of bullet wounds in various parts
of body.
43
POLITICE STIMATION
OF THE KHODJALY
G E N O C I D E
ADDRESS OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
AZERBAIJAN REPUBLIC
to the families of victims of the Khodjaly genocide
Dear Khodjaliens!
Respected compatriots!
Two years ago i.e. on 26th of February 1992 we witnessed a
horrible barbarity in Khodjaly town unexampled all over the
world. Armenian armed bandits destroyed Khodjaly town keep-
ing it in complete blockade during months. Unprotected citizens
were murdered with cynical cruelty and even infants and unable
old-men as well as women and children weren't spared. The
Khodjaly genocide directed against the Azerbaijan people
entirely in own inconceivable cruelty and brutal carnage meth-
ods is a vandalism act having no analogue in the history of
mankind. Simultaneously, this genocide is a historical crime
against the mankind wholly.
Our moral and physical loss is irreplaceably hard.
Unfortunately, the discords existing in the first years of our inde-
pendence and the anarchy in the politic life of Azerbaijan as well
as the political ambitions apathetic to our national destiny and
the ambitious scrapes among politic groups had a significant
impact on the tragedies occurred in our life. As a result, black
pages were written in our history. The people were exposed to
recalcitrant spiritual wounds. The Law Machinery of the
Republic does continuous work in direction of discovery of the
felons. You may be sure that nobody can avoid the responsibil-
ity for the caused crime.
Everything has an end in the life, including the grief and tor-
45
ment of the war we was obliged to get involved to. I'd like to
ensure our people that the day of real independence of our saint
Motherland and discharge of our grounds from occupation is
around the comer. Joining closely we will win in this trial of the
life and everybody will turn to own native residence.
Upon the Decree of the National Meeting of the Azerbaijan
Republic the 26th day of February is "The date of Khodjaly geno-
cide and national mourning" and all international organizations
are notified regarding it. Today each point of our Motherland
remembers the saint memory of the Khodjaly sacrifices.
I bow again in front of the saint memory of the sacrifices of
Khodjaly genocide and I express condolences to the Azerbaijan
people.
May all our martyrs rest in peace!
Heydar Aliyev,
the President of the Azerbaijan Republic
1st of March 1994
46
ORDER OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
AZERBAIJAN REPUBLIC
REGARDING ANNOUNCEMENT OF
SILENCE MINUTE
IN THE MEMORY OF SACRIFICES OF THE
KHODJALY GENOCIDE
On 26th of February the Armenian Armed Forces caused
the unexampled Khodjaly genocide against the Azerbaijan peo-
ple.
This act of massed and brutal bloodshed being the next
bloody page of the purposeful reactive policy of the Armenian
occupants aimed at the state independence and territorial
integrity of Azerbaijan was a crime not against the
Azerbaijanian people but also the entire mankind and will
remain in its history as a black stain.
In order to do homage to the sacrifices of the Khodjaly
genocide I hereby order:
To announce silence minute in the territory of the
Azerbaijan Republic as a sign of memory of the sacrifices of
the Khodjaly genocide annually on 26th of February at 5.00
o'clock p.m.
Heydar Aliyev,
the President of the Azerbaijan Republic
Baku city, 25th of February 1997
47
DECREE
OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE AZERBAIJAN
REPUBLIC DECORATING THE PERSONS
EXCELLED IN DEFENSE OF KHODJALY
I. To confer the rank of "National Hero of Azerbaijan" to the
following persons for the bravery and courage and deservedly
fulfillment of own obligations for the Motherland expressed
while protecting the territorial integrity of the Azerbaijan
Republic and fighting against Armenian occupants as well as,
partially, rescuing peaceful inhabitants during the Khodjaly
genocide:
1. Mammadov Movsum Shahin oglu - employee of the police
section of Shusha
2. Novruzov Alesker Khanlar oglu - fighter of self-defense
detachment of Khodjaly (posthumously)
3. Rustamov Fizuli Salah oglu - fighter of self-defense detach-
ment of Khodjaly (posthumously)
4. Salimov Araz Bahadur oglu - fighter of self-defense detach-
ment of Khodjaly (posthumously)
II. To decorate the following persons with the "Azerbaijan
Banner" Order for excelling while protecting the territorial
integrity of the Azerbaijan Republic and defending our lands
from Armenian occupants and rescuing peaceful inhabitants
during the Khodjaly genocide:
1. Aslanov Bakhtiyar Gulu oglu - inhabitant of Khodjaly
2. Veliyev Firdovsi Fazil oglu - military man (posthumously)
3. Guliyev Taleh Zekara oglu - fighter of self-defense detach-
ment of Khodjaly (posthumously)
4. Azizov Ibrahim Nariman oglu - fighter of self-defense
detachment of Khodjaly (posthumously)
48
5. AliyevFiridun Isa oglu - employeeof the police section of Khodjaly
6. Askarov Khazani Karam oglu - employee of the police sec-
tion of Shusha (posthumously)
7. Mammadov Elman Jamal oglu - Chief of the Executive
Power of Khodjaly region
8. Mammadov Elbrus Azid oglu - fighter of self-defense
detachment of Khodjaly (posthumously)
9. Mammadov Khosrov Bilal oglu - fighter of self-defense
detachment of Aghdam (posthumously)
10.Radjabov Sarvar Mahammad oglu - fighter of self-defense
detachment of Khodjaly.
11. Salimov Khagani Siyavush oglu - employee of the police
section of Khodjaly
12.Safiyev Elkhan Nasib oglu - fighter of self-defense detach-
ment of Aghdam (posthumously)
13. Usubov Aliyar Kamran oglu - employee of the police sec-
tion of Khodjaly (posthumously)
14.Hasanov Rovshan Gachay oglu - fighter of self-defense
detachment of Aghdam (posthumously)
15.Huseynov Murshud Samad oglu - inhabitant of Khodjaly
(posthumously)
III. To decorate the following persons with the "Bravery"
Medal for deservedly fulfillment of own civil obligations
expressed while protecting the territorial integrity of the
Azerbaijan Republic and fighting against Armenian occupants
as well as, partially, rescuing peaceful inhabitants during the
Khodjaly genocide:
1. Abbasov Taleh Umudvar oglu - fighter of self-defense
detachment of Khodjaly (posthumously)
2. Abdullayev Mahir Tanriverdy oglu - fighter of self-defense
detachment of Kosalar (posthumously)
3. Abyshov Elshad Giyas oglu - fighter of self-defense detach-
ment of Khodjaly (posthumously)
4. Abyshov Gabil Movsum oglu - inhabitant of Khodjaly
49
(posthumously)
5. Aghayev Rasim Mirsalam oglu - employee of the police
section of Kosalar (posthumously)
6. Allahverdiyev Ziyadkhan Salah oglu - fighter of self-defense
detachment of Khodjaly (posthumously)
7. Allahverdiyev Ilham Bakhsheyish oglu - inhabitant of
Khodjaly (posthumously)
8. Allahyarov Etibar Balaoghlan oglu - inhabitant of Khodjaly
(posthumously)
9. Baghirov Batman Yagub oglu - employee of the police sec-
tion of Khodjaly (posthumously)
10.Baghirov Elshan Hasan oglu - employee of the police sec-
tion of Khodjaly (posthumously)
11. Bilalov Namig Mahammad oglu - fighter of self-defense
detachment of Khodjaly (posthumously)
12.Valiyev Ali Imran oglu - employee of the police section of
Khodjaly (posthumously)
13.Garayev Ilham Suleyman oglu - employee of the linear
police section of the Khodjaly airport (posthumously)
14.Gasimov Yashar Gaytaran oglu - fighter of self-defense
detachment of Khodjaly (posthumously)
15.Guliyev Islam Idris oglu - inhabitant of Khodjaly (posthu-
mously)
16.Guliyev Natig Valieddin oglu - fighter of self-defense
detachment of Khodjaly (posthumously)
17.Guliyeva Zohra Latif gyzy - fighter of self-defense detach-
ment of Khodjaly (posthumously)
18.Abdulov Elmar Iskandar oglu - fighter of self-defense
detachment of Khodjaly (posthumously)
19.Aliyev Arif Khanlar oglu - fighter of self-defense detachment
of Khodjaly (posthumously)
20.Aliyev Eldar Karysh oglu - inhabitant of Khodjaly (posthu-
mously)
21.Aliyev Abulfat Ali oglu - employee of the linear police sec-
tion of the Khodjaly airport (posthumously)
22.Aliyev Ilham Bahadur oglu - inhabitant of Khodjaly (posthu-
50
mously)
23.Aliyev Sarkhan Islam oglu - employee of the police section
of Khodjaly
24.Alimammadov Namig Shahmaly oglu - fighter of self-
defense detachment of Khodjaly (posthumously)
25.Alimammadov Faig Shahmaly oglu - fighter of self-defense
detachment of Khodjaly (posthumously)
26.Zeynalov Eldar Aslan oglu - fighter of self-defense detach-
ment of Khodjaly (posthumously)
27. Imani Malik Aghayir oglu - inhabitant of Khodjaly (posthu-
mously)
28. Iskandarov Ziyaddin Savalan oglu - employee of the police
section of Aghdam (posthumously)
29. Ismayilov Bahram Matlab oglu - employee of the police
section of Khodjaly (posthumously)
30.Karimov Firuz Samran oglu - fighter of self-defense detach-
ment of Khodjaly (posthumously)
31.Mehdiyev Murad Shafa oglu - fighter of self-defense
detachment of Khodjaly (posthumously)
32.Mehdiyev Fikrat Buruzlu oglu - fighter of self-defense
detachment of Kosalar (posthumously)
33.Mehraliyev Ali Mursal oglu - inhabitant of Khodjaly (posthu-
mously)
34.Madatov Sadig Ogtay oglu - employee of the police section
of Khodjaly
35.Mammadov Razmik Suren oglu - fighter of self-defense
detachment of Khodjaly (posthumously)
36.Mammadov Rasif Salman oglu - fighter of self-defense
detachment of Khodjaly (posthumously)
37.Mammadov Sarvar Elman oglu - fighter of self-defense
detachment of Kosalar (posthumously)
38.Maharramov Murad Jamil oglu - fighter of self-defense
detachment of Khodjaly
39. Muradov Shahid Latif oglu - employee of the police section
40.Naghiyev Natig Ismayil oglu - fighter of self-defense
detachment of Khodjaly
51
41.Nasirov Ramiz Kamal oglu - fighter of self-defense detach-
ment of Khodjaly
42.Rzayev Felmar Shahmar oglu - inhabitant of Khodjaly
43.Rustamov Eldar Amir oglu - inhabitant of Khodjaly (posthu-
mously)
44.Usubov Zakir Kamran oglu- fighter of self-defense detach-
ment of Khodjaly (posthumously)
45.Usubov Zahir Abilgasym oglu- fighter of self-defense
detachment of Khodjaly
46.Farzaliyev Janan Binnat oglu - employee of the linear
police section of the Khodjaly airport (posthumously)
47.Hagverdiyev Davud Mashty oglu - fighter of self-defense
detachment of Khodjaly (posthumously)
48.Hadjiyev Yashar Hadji oglu - employee of the police section
of Khodjaly
49.Hadjiyev Rza Latif oglu - employee of the linear police sec-
tion of the Khodjaly airport
50.Hanifayev Bahman Salman oglu - inhabitant of Khodjaly
(posthumously)
51.Hasanov Yemen Kazym oglu- fighter of self-defense
detachment of Khodjaly
52.Hasanov Mehdy Ramil oglu - inhabitant of Khodjaly
(posthumously)
53.Hasanov Sheuhrat Usub oglu - inhabitant of Khodjaly
(posthumously)
54.Humbatov Hatam Gurban oglu - fighter of self-defense
detachment of Khodjaly (posthumously)
55.Huseynov Chingyz Usub oglu - fighter of self-defense
detachment of Khodjaly (posthumously)
56.Shukurov Vagif Rasul oglu - fighter of self-defense detach-
ment of Khodjaly (posthumously)
57.Shukurov Murad Alysh oglu - inhabitant of Khodjaly
Heydar Aliyev,
the President of the Azerbaijan Republic
Baku city, 25th of February 1997
52
D E C R E E
OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE AZERBAIJAN
REPUBLIC REGARDING THE GENOCIDE OF
AZERBAIJANIANS
Achievement of independence of the Azerbaijan Republic
made possible restoration of the objective view of the historical
past of our people. The secret realities kept under yoke of pro-
hibition for a long time get discovered and the real essence of
the falsified facts becomes clarified.
The genocide realized against the Azerbaijanian people
time and again and failing to get worthy political and legal value
for a long period is one of such undiscovered pages of the his-
tory.
Deployment of the Azerbaijanian people and repartition of
our historical lands commenced since the Gulustan and
Turkmanchay Treaties concluded in 1813 and 1828. The contin-
uation of the national tragedy of the parted Azerbaijanian people
was occupation of its lands. As a result of realization of this pol-
icy Armenians were resettled to the Azerbaijan lands within
shortest period. The genocide policy became an integral part of
occupation of the Azerbaijanian lands.
Although the Armenians settled in the territories of the
Iravan, Nakhchivan and Garabagh khanates were a minority in
comparison with the local Azerbaijanians they succeeded in
ward of own protectors to establish an administrative and terri-
torial unit named "The Armenian county". Such an artificial terri-
torial partition created prerequisites for realization of the policy
of expatriation of Azerbaijanians from own land and their
destruction. The idea of "The Great Armenia" commenced to be
propagandized. In order to "substantiate" the efforts of establish-
53
ment of this far-fetched state in the Azerbaijan lands large-scale
programs directed to creation of falsified history of the Armenian
people were realized. Distortion of the history of Azerbaijan and
entirely of Caucasus was a necessary component of these pro-
grams.
The Armenian occupants inspired of illusions on establish-
ment of "The Great Armenia" not hiding own intentions conduct-
ed a number of large-scale bloody actions against
Azerbaijanians in 1905-1907. Brutality of Armenians commenc-
ing in Baku covered all Azerbaijan and the Azerbaijanian villages
in the territory of present Armenia. Hundreds of settlements
were destroyed and razed to the ground and thousands of
Azerbaijanians were brutally murdered. The organizers of these
events preventing from discovery of the essence of these crimes
as well as worthy political and legal evaluation and hiding own
adventurist territorial pretensions formed negative image of
Azerbaijan.
Benefiting from the situation upon the First World War as
well as the overturns happened in Russia in February and
October 1917 for own purpose Armenian had efforts to gain real-
ization of own plans under the banner of bolshevism. The Baku
Commune under the slogan of fight against the counter-revolu-
tionary elements commenced since March 1918 to realize own
criminal plan aiming to liquidation of Azerbaijanians from the
Baku province. The crimes committed by Armenians those days
remained in the memory of the Azerbaijanian people forever.
Thousands of peaceful Azerbaijanians were destroyed only due
to own nationality. Armenians burnt houses and people alive.
The destroyed national architectural treasuries, schools, hospi-
tals, mosques and other erections, and a big part of Baku was
turned into ruins.
The genocide of Azerbaijanians was committed in the Baku,
Shamakhy and Guba uyezds, in Garabagh, Zangazur,
Nakhchivan, Lankaran and other regions of Azerbaijan with spe-
54
cial cruelty. Peaceful inhabitants were destroyed in masses, vil-
lages were burnt and national cultural monuments were col-
lapsed in these territories.
The events happened in March 1918 were in the centre of
attention upon declaration of the Azerbaijan Democratic
Republic. For the purpose of investigation of this tragedy the
Council of Ministers took regulations on 15th of July 1918 regard-
ing establishment of extraordinary investigating commission.
The commission investigated the March tragedy firstly studying
the Armenian brutalities in Shamakhy as well as the hard crimes
committed by them in the Iravan province. A special structure
was established at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in order to
inform the world society the real progress of the events. In 1919
and 1920 the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic commemorated
31st of March as national grieving day. At bottom, it was the first
effort of politic evaluation of the genocide policy against
Azerbaijanians and annexation of our lands. However, over-
throw of the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic didn't allow com-
plete this work.
Armenians benefiting from sovietization of Transcaucasia in
own scurrilous purposes in 1920 announced Zangazur and sev-
eral lands of Azerbaijan as the territory of the Armenian SSR. As
its result, new methods were elaborated for enlargement of the
policy of deportation of Azerbaijanians from these territories. For
this purpose Armenians succeeded acceptation of special regu-
lations of the USSR Council of Ministers dated on 23rd of
December 1947 "Regarding resettlement of kolkhoz workers
and other inhabitants of Azerbaijan from the Armenian SSR to
the Kur-Araz lowland of the Azerbaijan SSR", and achieved real-
ization of massed deportation of Azerbaijanians from our native
lands on the governmental level in 1948-1953.
Since 1950-s the Armenian nationalists with help of own
protectors commenced an unbridled campaign of spiritual
aggression against the Azerbaijanian people. In the books and
55
magazines periodically spread in the former Soviet State they
had effort to prove belonging of the most striking masterpieces
of our national culture, classical heritage and architectural mon-
uments to the Armenian people. Besides it, they strengthened
efforts of formation of negative image of Azerbaijanian all over
the world. Gaining the view of "miserable and wretched
Armenian people" they intentionally falsified the events hap-
pened in the region in start of the century: those committing
genocide against Azerbaijanians introduced themselves as vic-
tims of genocide.
Our compatriots being exposed to persecutions were
removed in masses from Iravan town where the most part of
inhabitants were Azerbaijanians as well as other regions of the
Armenian SSR. Armenians roughly violated the rights of
Azerbaijanians, made obstacles for education in native lan-
guage and realized the repression policy. The names of
Azerbaijanian villages were modified and there was the process
of change of the ancient toponymies to modern names.
The falsified Armenian history was raised to level of state
policy in order to create a foundation of upbringing the Armenian
youth in spirit of chauvinism. Our growing generation educated
in spirit of the great humanist ideals of Azerbaijanian literature
and culture became under fire of persecution of the extremist
Armenian ideology.
The ideological base for the political and military aggression
was established by the policy of libelous slanders on the spiritu-
al values as well as national honor and dignity of the
Azerbaijanian people. Armenians distorted the historical facts in
the Soviet press deluding the social opinion.
The Government of the Azerbaijan Republic failed to oppor-
tunely value the anti-Azerbaijanian propaganda conducted by
Armenians using the opportunities of the Soviet regime and
strengthening since the middle of 80-s.
The Republic also failed to politically value exactly also the
56
expatriation of hundred thousands of Azerbaijanians at the first
stage of the Upper Garabagh conflict commenced in 1988. Anti-
constitutional regulations of Armenians regarding inclusion of
the Upper Garabagh Autonomous Republic of Azerbaijan into
the structure of the Armenian SSR as well as discharge of this
county from Azerbaijan by means of the Special Management
Committee constituted by Moscow were met by our people with
indignation being exposed to necessity to conduct serious politic
actions. Despite of the fact that at the meetings held in the
Republic at that time the policy of occupation of our lands was
strictly blamed, the Azerbaijan supervision didn't renounce own
passive position. It resulted in introduction of troops to Baku in
January 1990 owing to suppress the strengthening public move-
ment. Hundreds of Azerbaijanians were killed and wounded as
well as exposed to various types of physical pressure and got
mutilations.
In February 1992 Armenians committed an unexampled
massacre over the inhabitants of Khodjaly town. This bloody
tragedy introducing to our history as Khodjaly genocide resulted
in destruction and capture of thousands of Azerbaijanians and
the town was razed to the ground.
As a result of the adventurous policy commenced by the
Armenian national separatists in the Upper Garabagh at present
more than a million of our compatriots have been expatriated
from native residences by Armenian aggressors and are obliged
to live in tents. During occupation of our land by the Armenian
armed forces twenty percent of our territory was victim and thou-
sands of our compatriots became invalids.
All tragedies of Azerbaijan happened in 19th and 20th cen-
turies were accompanied by occupation of lands and were vari-
ous stages of the genocide policy deliberately and purposefully
conducted by Armenians against Azerbaijanians. The political
evaluation was tried only in connection with only one of these
events i.e. March slaughter in 1918. The Azerbaijan Republic
57
considers as will of history the necessity of political evaluation of
the genocide actions and logically completion of the measure-
ments the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic failed to realize com-
pletely.
In commemoration of all genocide tragedies committed
against the Azerbaijan people I hereby take the decree:
1. Announce 31st of March as the Day of Azerbaijanian
genocide
2. Recommend to the Milli Medjlis of the Azerbaijan
Republic to consider the matter of holding special session
devoted to the events connected to genocide of Azerbaijanians.
Heydar Aliyev,
the President of the Azerbaijan Republic
Baku city, 26th of March 1998
58
A D D R E S S
to the Azerbaijan people in view of the
tenth anniversary of the Khodjaly genocide
Dear Khodjaliens!
Today I address to you in view of the Khodjaly genocide
becoming a sad and tragic page in the history of our people.
This cruel and brutal genocide act is included to the history of
mankind as one of the most horrible massed terrorist acts.
The Khodjaly tragedy is a continuation and the bloodiest
page of policy of ethnic purge and genocide regularly realized by
the Armenian chauvinists and nationalists against
Azerbaijanians during about two-hundred years. This miserable
policy being supported by authoritative ranks of several states
consequently continued at the period of tsar's Russia and Soviet
Power and expatriation of our people from native residences
upon overthrow of the USSR and their becoming refugees and
resettlers were accompanied by massacres. The results of the
ethnic purge and genocide policy of the aggressive Armenian
nationalists and crazed ideologists of "The Great Armenia" were
felt totally by two millions Azerbaijanians in different periods.
The aggressive policy commenced by the Armenian sepa-
ratists in the Upper Garabagh upon achievement of the inde-
pendence of Azerbaijan caused destruction of numerous vil-
lages and settlements and murder of tens thousands of innocent
people as well as expatriation of hundreds thousands of our
compatriots from native residences. However, the Khodjaly
tragedy was the most horrible one. Besides the Armenian
aggressors the responsibilities for failure of prevention of these
bloody events and occurrence of the tragedy of Khodjaly
remaining unprotected in front of the brutal enemy armed to the
59
teeth, are undertaken by that-time supervision of Azerbaijan as
well as various forces fighting for the sake of power by all illicit
methods. In essence, instead of rendering emergent aid to the
protectors of the town and notifying the world society regarding
the tragedy in details raising the alarm the persons ruling the
Republic at that time had effort to hide the real scopes of the
Khodjaly genocide from the people demonstrating full disability
and indifference to fate of the people. Nothing had been done for
notification of the essence of Khodjaly tragedy and discovery of
its culprits also in the future, but in contrary, this tragedy became
a method of mutual accusations and political fights among the
power and the opposition.
The Armenian chauvinists and ideologists purposed far-
reaching objects committing the Khodjaly genocide the ana-
logue of which on scope and horror is few in the world history.
The purpose was occupation of the Upper Garabagh and other
Azerbaijanian lands, detriment of the fighting spirit of our people
for independence and territorial integrity. However, the hateful
enemy failed to realize own intensions. Indeed, the tragedy
shocked the entire Azerbaijan people and delivered incurable
wounds and moral injures to the inhabitants of Khodjaly, howev-
er, the Khodjalians expressed a real heroism even the day of the
tragedy. They bravely fought in the unequal battle with the
Armenian-Soviet military formations and didn't surrender to the
enemy and it was pages of honor in the heroic history of our
people.
At present the Azerbaijan government and people have the
obligation to notify the states and parliaments of the world as
well as the wide society all truth regarding the Khodjaly geno-
cide and the brutalities committed by Armenians in the Upper
Garabagh including all its scopes and horrors, and achieve
admission of the tragedy as an act of real genocide. It's our civil
and human liability for the sake of memory of the Khodjaly mar-
tyrs. Furthermore, real international political and legal evaluation
60
as well as worthy punishment of its ideologists, organizers and
executors are necessary condition for protection of the entire
mankind from such cruel acts in the future.
At present the Azerbaijan state, our citizens and compatriots
abroad take important measurements for notification of the
Khodjaly tragedy all over the world and achievement of its
admission as real genocide act. This tragedy gets submitted for
discussion by parliaments of various countries and international
organizations and brought to attention to the world society. The
present task is realization of these works more regularly, conse-
quently and purposefully and achievement of international polit-
ical and legal evaluation of this tragedy.
In this sad day of tenth anniversary of the tragedy I pay hom-
age to saint memories of the Khodjaly martyrs. May all our mar-
tyrs rest in peace! I'd like to ensure the near relations of martyrs
and entirely the Azerbaijan people that justice will triumph and
the ideals the martyrs and heroes of Khodjaly fought for i.e. the
independent and indivisible Azerbaijan Republic will live forever!
Heydar Aliyev,
the President of the Azerbaijan Republic
Baku city, 25th of February 2002
61
MARTYRS
OF KHODJALY
THE LIST OF THE PEOPLE DIED AT THE KHODJALY 
TRAGEDY1 
 
1. Abbasov Salah Ismayil oglu 1909 
2. Abbasov Taleh Umidvar oglu 1961 
3. Abbasova Antiga Heydar gyzy 1935 
4. Abyshov Etibar Movsum oglu 1965 
5. Abyshov Ali Abdul oglu 1918 
6. Abyshova Maruza Mahammad gyzy 1930 
7. Abdullayev Yusif Godja oglu 1932 
8. Aghayev Zahid Sattar oglu 1963 
9. Aghayev Allahverdy Sattar oglu 1982 
10. Allahverdiyeva Teyuba Nabi gyzy 1933 
11. Allahverdiyeva Valida Astan gyzy 1963 
12. Allahverdiyeva Irada Astan gyzy 1965 
13. Allahverdiyev Hidayat Bahram oglu 1936 
14. Allahverdiyev Bahram Hidayat oglu 1976 
15. Allahverdiyeva Kifayat Huseynali gyzy 1942 
16. Aghayarova Zuleykha Yunus gyzy 1965 
17. Aslanova Gulshan Geyum gyzy 1972 
18. Allahyarova Gamza Garash gyzy 1940 
19. Allahyarova Shafiga Zeynal gyzy 1969 
20. Allahyarov Etibar Balaoghlan oglu 1968 
21. Aslanov Gulu Bahram oglu 1927 
22. Aslanov Igbal Gulu oglu 1970 
23. Abyshov Elshad Giyas oglu 1967 
24. Allahverdiyev Salah Imamgulu oglu 1918 
25. Abbasova Sughra Alish gyzy 1917 
26. Abbasova Hamayil Chanysh gyzy 1940 
27. Abbasov Valiaddin Umidvar oglu 1963 
                                                            
1 Among the martyrs of Khodjaly there were also over hundred people from over 
three-hundred builders and specialists of other fields coming to Khodjaly from 
various regions of our Republic. However, due to failure of fixation of their data in 
the stored documents it was impossible to make a list of the names of people in 
this row. 
 
28. Aghayarova Sevindj Isa gyzy 1985 
29. Aghayarov Sadyg Shirkhan oglu 1932 
30. Aghalarova Gully Surkhay gyzy 1934 
31. Allahverdiyev Novruz Salah oglu 1947 
32. Allahverdiyev Mahir Novruz oglu 1974 
33. Aghayarov Nabi Isak oglu 1981 
34. Aghayarov Roman Isak oglu 1986 
35. Abyshova Madina Bedirkhan gyzy 1908 
36. Aslanova Elnara Tofig gyzy 1978 
37. Allahverdiyev Ziyadkhan Saleh oglu 1967 
38. Abyshova Mahbuba Gurban gyzy 1960 
39. Abyshova Chinara Nazim gyzy 1982 
40. Abyshova Minara Rahim gyzy 1910 
41. Abyshov Mobil Movsum oglu 1968 
42. Abyshov Saadat Niyaz oglu 1967 
43. Abyshov Nadir Movsum oglu 1966 
44. Abyshova Maryam Mashady gyzy 1932 
45. Abyshov Chingiz Nazim oglu 1985 
46. Abyshova Gulzar Gulali gyzy 1964 
47. Allahverdiyev Mumush Bahram oglu 1923 
48. Aghayev Vidadi Sadjeddin oglu 1960 
49. Abyshov Eyvaz Talib oglu 1950 
50. Allahverdiyev Ilham Bakhsheyish oglu 1963 
51. Abdullayeva Maya Saleh gyzy 1908 
52. Abbasov Eyvaz Kamran oglu 1983 
53. Abbasov Elkhan Kamran oglu 1970 
54. Atakishiyev Farman Rahman oglu 1970 
55. Aghayev Rasim Mirsalam oglu 1967 
56. Abdullayeva Sevindj Sarhad gyzy 1986 
57. Abdullayev Mahir Tanryverdi oglu 1971 
58. Allahverdiyev Vidadi Mursal oglu 1977 
59. Bilalov Namig Mahammad oglu 1961 
60. Butko Dmitry Nikolayevich 1930 
61. Behbudova Suraya Ibrahim gyzy 1930 
62. Behbudova Gulnaz Yusif gyzy 1962 
63. Behbudova Gulbahar Yusif gyzy 1968 
64. Baghirova Zahra Sary gyzy 1930 
65. Baghirova Naila Hasan gyzy 1956 
66. Baghirov Bahman Yagub gyzy 1966 
67. Baghirov Elshan Hasan oglu 1965 
68. Babyshov Ali Rais oglu 1968 
69. Bebzinov Zeynali Mammad oglu 1926 
70. Behbudov Vagif Yusif oglu 1963 
71. Binaliyev Alishir Gulali oglu 1967 
72. Binaliyev Jabbar Gulali oglu 1969 
73. Boranov Magsud Ali oglu 1928 
74. Babayeva Fenar Farman gyzy 1943 
75. Bayramov Zahid Tapdyg oglu 1965 
76. Bayramov Rovshan Zahid oglu 1969 
77. Bahmanova Dilara Maharram gyzy 1950 
78. Bahmanov Akif Vagif oglu 1974 
79. Babirov Tofig Nifti oglu 1966 
80. Babayev Gadir Askar oglu 1935 
81. Babayev Babir Askar oglu 1942 
82. Babayeva Gariba Mukhtar gyzy 1938 
83. Babayev Bakir Babir oglu 1965 
84. Bayramov Jalal Samad oglu 1948 
85. Jabbarov Azad Pirgulu oglu 1968 
86. Jabrayilova Samaya Sary gyzy 1950 
87. Javadov Ali Musul oglu 1953 
88. Jafarova Khazangul Ali gyzy 1951 
89. Jafarov Muscyib Safiyar oglu 1895 
90. Jafarov Nusrat Fazil oglu 1975 
91. Jafarova Rafiga Iman gyzy 1937 
92. Jafarov Samir Tadjir oglu 1987 
93. Jafarov Mahammad Valikishi oglu 1995 
94. Jafarova Baghdad Hatam gyzy 1910 
95. Javadov Vagif Alysh oglu 1966 
96. Jabbarov Khydyr Sadraddm oglu 1969 
97. Javadov Ahmad Amir oglu 1973 
98. Chobanov Tapdyg Hadisa oglu 1949 
99. Chobanova Nazaket Tapdyg gyzy 1984 
100. Eyvazov Hidayat Ali oglu 1964 
101. Abdulov Mazahir Yagub oglu 1960 
102. Abdulov Zahid Elmar oglu 1973 
103. Abdulov Elmar Iskandar oglu 1949 
104. Abdulov Savalan Garash oglu 1937 
105. Azizov Azim Mashadi oglu 1911 
106. Azizova Zarifa Alekper gyzy 1953 
107. Azizov Huseyn Nariman oglu 1956 
108. Azizov Mehman Gudrat oglu 1959 
109. Azimov Akif Seydulla oglu 1961 
110. Azimov Natig Abbas oglu 1986 
111. Azimov Hasanbala Shahmar oglu 1935 
112. Azimova Parvana Huseyn gyzy 1947 
113. Azimova Dilara Seydulla gyzy 1956 
114. Aliyev Eyyub Sary oglu 1928 
115. Aliyev Alekper Alisan oglu 1915 
116. Aliyeva Suraya Bayram gyzy 1934 
117. Aliyev Eldar Karysh oglu 1963 
118. Aliyev Islam Abdulali oglu 1933 
119. Aliyeva Sahar Charkaz gyzy 1932 
120. Aliyev Arif Khanlar oglu 1970 
121. Aliyev Abulfat Ali oglu 1963 
122. Aliyev Tavakkul Bakhysh oglu 1955 
123. Aliyev Bakir Shiraslan oglu 1973 
124. Aliyeva Dilara Orudj gyzy 1949 
125. Aliyev Elgiz Firdovsi oglu 1984 
126. Aliyev Firdovsi Isa oglu 1956 
127. Aliyeva Heyran Murshud gyzy 1962 
128. Aliyev Elchin Firdovsi oglu 1982 
129. Aliyev Aghali Nayib oglu 1932 
130. Aliyeva Suraya Behbud gyzy 1933 
131. Aliyeva Chichak Alekper gyzy 1931 
132. Aliyev Sabuhi Jahangir oglu 1978 
133. Aliyev Salim Jahangir oglu 1985 
134. Aliyeva Khaver Yusif gyzy 1957 
135. Aliyeva Svetlana Javanshir gyzy 1957 
136. Alekperova Zeynab Jumshud gyzy 1923 
137. Alekperov Tavakkul Alekper oglu 1956 
138. Alekperov Sakhavat Tavakkul oglu 1981 
139. Alaskarov Vahid Rashid oglu 1962 
140. Alimammadov Namig Shahmaly oglu 1962 
141. Alimammadov Faig Shahmaly oglu 1969 
142. Amirova Raya Gabil gyzy 1959 
143. Amirova Yegana Tavakkul gyzy 1957 
144. Asadov Yalchin Asif oglu 1986 
145. Ahmadov Elmar Nayib oglu 1963 
146. Ahmadov Namig Ilyas oglu 1968 
147. Ahmadova Durna Salman gyzy 1922 
148. Ahmadov Rafail Nayib oglu 1948 
149. Ahmadov Eldar Nayib oglu 1945 
150. Ahmadova Sarfinaz Mukhtad gyzy 1900 
151. Alekperov Askar Gurban oglu 1930 
152. Ahmadova Zubeyda Badal gyzy 1928 
153. Aliyev Elshan Sahadar oglu 1973 
154. Aliyev Anvar Zeynaly oglu 1959 
155. Aliyeva Yegana Maharram gyzy 1960 
156. Askarov Eldar Nizami oglu 1986 
157. Askarov Nizami 1960 
158. Aliyev Mikayil Atababa oglu 1957 
159. Azizov Fikrat Abbas oglu 1965 
160. Aliyev Ulfat Iman oglu 1974 
161. Aliyev Ilham Bahadur oglu 1966 
162. Alaskarov Mazahir Maharram oglu 1969 
163. Aliyev Ayaz Elman oglu 1970 
164. Ahmadov Vagif Islam oglu 1957 
165. Askarov Khagany Karim oglu 1962 
166. Aliyev Nadir Gachan oglu 1967 
167. Farzaliyev Janan Binnat oglu 1963 
168. Farzaliyev Gadim Farzali oglu 1956 
169. Hagverdiyeva Hawa Zeynalabdin gyzy 1932 
170. Hagverdiyev David Meshdi oglu 1970 
171. Hagverdiyev Shahin Meshdi oglu 1958 
172. Hadjiyev Alif Latif oglu 1939 
173. Hadjiyev Suleyman Latif oglu 1956 
174. Hadjiyev Tahir Hadji oglu 1960 
175. Hamdiyeva Mehriban Radjab gyzy 1934 
176. Hamidova Kifayat Chirag gyzy 1949 
177. Hamzayev Abdulla Keushaly oglu 1971 
178. Hanifayev Bahman Salman oglu 1937 
179. Hasanov Rovshan Gachay oglu 1977 
180. Hasanova Gunash Abdul gyzy 1984 
181. Hasanova Makhmar Alekper gyzy 1995 
182. Hasanov Elgun Nazim oglu 1964 
183. Hasanova Aygun Nazim gyzy 1988 
184. Hasanova Geuychak Heydar gyzy 1943 
185. Hasanova Latafet Hasan gyzy 1916 
186. Hasanov Imran Alekper oglu 1972 
187. Hasanova Gulcheuhra Yagub gyzy 1968 
188. Hasanov Ramil Ibrahim oglu 1940 
189. Hasanov Mehdi Ramil oglu 1962 
190. Hasanov Hasan Ibrahim oglu 1938 
191. Hasanov Ali Mursal oglu 1908 
192. Hasanov Sheuhrat Yusub oglu 1951 
193. Hasanova Tofiga Hasan gyzy 1955 
194. Hasanova Fitat Ahad gyzy 1990 
195. Hasanova Gatiba Mirsiyab gyzy 1929 
196. Hashimov Salim Karim oglu 1950 
197. Humbatova Firuza Musa gyzy 1957 
198. Humbatova Simuzar Jalil gyzy 1910 
199. Humbatova Sudaba Rashid gyzy 1967 
200. Humbatov Mughan Jalil oglu 1938 
201. Humbatov Hatam Gurban oglu 1940 
202. Humbatov Talysh Iskandar oglu 1967 
203. Humbatova Anaid Eldar gyzy 1967 
204. Huseynova Rasmiya Alexander gyzy 1930 
205. Huseynov Emin Alexander oglu 1960 
206. Huseynova Makhmar Gurban gyzy 1922 
207. Huseynov Chingyz Yusub oglu 1960 
208. Huseynov Bakir Mirsiyab oglu 1924 
209. Huseynov Mirsiyab Hazratgulu oglu 1934 
210. Huseynova Minash Jumshud gyzy 1960 
211. Huseynov Tofig Mirsiyab oglu 1950 
212. Huseynova Susan Huseyn gyzy 1938 
213. Huseynov Tadjir Huseyn oglu 1964 
214. Huseynova Nasiba Huseyn gyzy 1961 
215. Huseynova Novrasta Huseyn gyzy 1961 
216. Huseynov Huseyn Ismayil oglu 1967 
217. Huseynova Aziz Alish gyzy 1986 
218. Huseynova Khoshbakht Huseyn gyzy 1985 
219. Huseynov Murshud Samad oglu 1939 
220. Huseynov Allahverdi Gulu oglu 1941 
221. Huseynov Huseyn Faradj oglu 1971 
222. Huseynova Zinyat Yunus gyzy 1965 
223. Huseynov Rashid Huseyn oglu 1968 
224. Huseynova Maral Kamil gyzy 1956 
225. Huseynova Sarah Safar gyzy 1975 
226. Huseynova Saadat Gadim gyzy 1932 
227. Huseynov Vugar Hilal oglu 1936 
228. Huseynova Mehriban Allahverdy gyzy 1962 
229. Huseynov Radjab Elkhan oglu 1985 
230. Huseynov Makhshar Elkhan oglu 1967 
231. Huseynova Shabnam Elkhan gyzy 1990 
232. Hasanova Sevil Eyub gyzy 1979 
233. Hashimov Sheuvkat Shukur oglu 1981 
234. Humbatova Sevil Jalyl gyzy 1985 
235. Huseynova Emma Huseyn gyzy 1963 
236. Huseynov Zokhrab Huseyn oglu 1972 
237. Hasanova Khayala Eldar gyzy 1955 
238. Hasanov Tadjir Eldar oglu 1965 
239. Huseynova Nargiz Jabrayil gyzy 1963 
240. Huseynov Shakir Mustafa oglu 1956 
241. Huseynova Atraba Jabrayil gyzy 1932 
242. Hasanov Tofig Baylar oglu 1970 
243. Hasanov Vahid Movsum oglu 1958 
244. Hasanov Telman Elmar oglu 1939 
245. Huseynov Huseyn Shukur oglu 1956 
246. Hasanov Gabil Gasym oglu 1960 
247. Huseynova Gyzbes Mardan gyzy 1934 
248. Hasanov Elshad Gachay oglu 1949 
249. Hasanov Ramiz Allahverdi oglu 1971 
250. Humbatov Bahlul Museyib oglu 1937 
251. Khalilov Arzu Khalil oglu 1977 
252. Khalilov Araz Khalil oglu 1984 
253. Khudiyev Zahid Bahlul oglu 1965 
254. Khalilova Zarifa Zakara gyzy 1964 
255. Khalilova Lala Tahir gyzy 1988 
256. Khalilov Gachay Rahim oglu 1943 
257. Khudayarova Suraya Alish gyzy 1916 
258. Isfandiyarov Eldar Humbat oglu 1972 
259. Ilyasov Ahmad Mammad oglu 1968 
260. Ilyasov Mammad Ilyas oglu 1940 
261. Ismayilov Ingilab Alekber oglu 1962 
262. Ismayilov Ibish Karim oglu 1938 
263. Ismayilova Manzar Mashadi gyzy 1908 
264. Ismayilov Vidadi Latif oglu 1951 
265. Ibrahimov Alikhan Khalil oglu 1955 
266. Ibrahimova Fatma 1990 
267. Imani Aghayar Salman oglu 1929 
268. Imani Malik Aghayar oglu 1950 
269. Ismayilov Ismayil Bahman oglu 1957 
270. Imani Aghababa 1910 
271. Ismayilov Bahram Ablab oglu 1967 
272. Ismayilov Ilyas Bayram oglu 1938 
273. Ismayilova Sheuvkat Orudj gyzy 1940 
274. Ibadullayev Nadir Nabi oglu 1967 
275. Kazymov Asif Kazym oglu 1967 
276. Karimova Firangiz Mutallim gyzy 1930 
277. Karimov Soltan Samran oglu 1960 
278. Karimov Rashid Rahim oglu 1922 
279. Karimov Intigam Shahmaly oglu 1960 
280. Karimov Shamran Soltan oglu 1924 
281. Karimova Firangul Gurban gyzy 1934 
282. Karimov Frunz Samran oglu 1960 
283. Karimov Yalchyn 1950 
284. Kazymov Khalil Mahmud oglu 1938 
285. Hasanov Yashar Gaytaran oglu 1964 
286. Garayev Usubali Suleyman oglu 1961 
287. Gambarov Safar Garsalan oglu 1961 
288. Gambarova Matanat Hadjy gyzy 1967 
289. Gambarov Emin Safar oglu 1986 
290. Gambarova Esmira Safar gyzy 1985 
291. Gambarov Garsalan Garay oglu 1939 
292. Gambarova Valida Boran gyzy 1941 
293. Gambarov Nadir Garsalan oglu 1971 
294. Guliyev Zakir Latif oglu 1965 
295. Guliyeva Zohra Latif gyzy 1968 
296. Guliyev Tahir Soltan oglu 1956 
297. Guliyev Vugar Zahid oglu 1975 
298. Guliyev Zakara Garnish oglu 1932 
299. Guliyeva Shura Shamil gyzy 1936 
300. Guliyev Akbar Zakara oglu 1962 
301. Guliyeva Sevindj Akbar gyzy 1985 
302. Guliyev Taleh Zakara oglu 1967 
303. Guliyev Samir Taleh oglu 1990 
304. Guliyeva Ravana Garyaghdy gyzy 1979 
305. Guliyeva Nurana Garyaghdy gyzy 1981 
306. Guliyev Shukur Garyaghdy oglu 1985 
307. Guliyev Agil Sahib oglu 1963 
308. Guliyev Natig Valiaddin oglu 1972 
309. Guliyeva Sara Huseyn gyzy 1955 
310. Guliyev Elchin Balakhan oglu 1965 
311. Godjayev Guman Avaz oglu 1941 
312. Guliyev Mikayil Zahid oglu 1967 
313. Gasymova Rasmiya Agha gyzy 1960 
314. Gasymova Narmina Nizami gyzy 1986 
315. Gasymov Agha Bayram oglu 1930 
316. Guliyev Islam Idris oglu 1957 
317. Garayev Asif Garakishi oglu 1953 
318. Guliyev Shahbaz Askar oglu 1923 
319. Guliyev Farhad Safar oglu 1970 
320. Guliyev Shukur Barhudar oglu 1949 
321. Guliyeva Makhmar Khanlar gyzy 1930 
322. Guliyev Shamsi Ajdar gyzy 1970 
323. Guliyev Ganimat Ali oglu 1936 
324. Guliyeva Urba Hadjy gyzy 1936 
325. Guliyev Ismayil Ganimat oglu 1969 
326. Guliyev Matla Ganimat oglu 1963 
327. Gasimov Anvar Bahadur oglu 1925 
328. Mahmudova Roza Safar gyzy 1930 
329. Mahmudov Ahliman Behbud oglu 1941 
330. Mehdiyev Shafa Baba oglu 1941 
331. Mehdiyev Murad Shafa oglu „ 1964 
332. Mehraliyev Gulzar Gulali gyzy 1970 
333. Mehdiyeva Aysel Murad gyzy 1987 
334. Mehdiyeva Gulmira Murad gyzy 1989 
335. Mammadov Aydin Gurban oglu 1964 
336. Mammadov Zahir Ramiz oglu 1975 
337. Mammadov Ramil Jalal oglu 1948 
338. Mammadov Yasha Yusif oglu 1956 
339. Mammadov Shohlat Ibish oglu 1960 
340. Mammadova Gullu Abdat gyzy 1925 
341. Mamishov Talysh Huseyn oglu 1921 
342. Mammadov Vagif Shukur oglu 1940 
343. Mammadova Afila Ibrahym gyzy 1949 
344. Mammadov Azer Vagif oglu 1972 
345. Mammadov Jeyhun Vagif oglu 1975 
346. Mammadov Niyamaddin Vagif oglu 1978 
347. Mammadov Ogtay Shukur oglu 1957 
348. Mammadov Arif Ibad oglu 1956 
349. Mammadov Saday Suleyman oglu 1936 
350. Mammadov Safarali Mehdi oglu 1918 
351. Mammadov Vagif Shamil oglu 1951 
352. Mammadov Vasif Salman oglu 1965 
353. Mammadov Rasif Salman oglu 1967 
354. Mammadov Khosrov Bilal oglu 1949 
355. Mammadov Baylar Khanlar oglu 1935 
356. Mammadov Razmik Suren oglu 1965 
357. Mammadova Sheuvkat Eybad gyzy 1963 
358. Mammadova Maleyka Atash gyzy 1933 
359. Mammadov Talysh Imran oglu 1934 
360. Mammadova Saltanat Zulal gyzy 1931 
361. Mammadova Latifa Eybad gyzy 1958 
362. Mammadov Mammad Gadir oglu 1935 
363. Mamishov Shahin Talysh oglu 1959 
364. Maharramov Magsud Heydar oglu 1957 
365. Maharramov Tahir Agharza oglu 1956 
366. Maharramov Vagif Jamil oglu 1951 
367. Maharramov Nazly Vali gyzy 1953 
368. Mustafayev Vidadi Shafa oglu 1963 
369. Mustafayev Rza Bashir oglu 1948 
370. Mustafayeva Yakhshy Mehdigulu gyzy 1900 
371. Muradov Pasha Askar oglu 1939 
372. Muradova Ayshan Zohrab gyzy 1991 
373. Muradov Zahid Latif oglu 1965 
374. Muradov Elshan Kazym oglu 1971 
375. Muradov Gunduz Kazym oglu 1961 
376. Mammadova Sevil Huseyn gyzy 1971 
377. Mammadov Akbar Rahman oglu 1960 
378. Mammadov Allahverdi 1963 
379. Mammadov Nuraddin Vagif oglu 1958 
380. Mammadov Sadyg Allahverdi oglu 1986 
381. Mehraliyev Ali Shukur oglu 1984 
382. Mammadov Mammad Rahman oglu 1947 
383. Mammadov Sohbat Mammad oglu 1976 
384. Mammadov Kamil Amir oglu 1958 
385. Mehdiyev Ilham 1987 
386. Mehraliyev Orkhan Ali oglu 1971 
387. Mikayilov Agil Valikishi oglu 1969 
388. Musayev Ilgar Vagif oglu 1963 
389. Muradova Nurida Kazym gyzy 1931 
390. Mehdiyev Fikrat Burzu oglu 1968 
391. Mehdiyev Javanshir Isak oglu 1967 
392. Mirzayev Kamal Abbas oglu 1962 
393. Mammadov Sarvar Elmar oglu 1970 
394. Mammadov Zakir Gasym oglu 1966 
395. Mehraliyev Ali Mursal oglu 1964 
396. Naghiyev Yusif Shirin oglu 1928 
397. Naghiyeva Sara Ramiz gyzy 1969 
398. Nabiyev Mahaddin Hasan oglu 1952 
399. Nabiyev Hasan Garash oglu 1930 
400. Nabiyeva Sakina Nabatali gyzy 1930 
401. Nazarli Hikmat Baba oglu 1966 
402. Nasirova Tatyana Dmitriyevna 1952 
403. Hasanov Shiraslan Mamish oglu 1952 
404. Novruzov Alesker Khanlar oglu 1949 
405. Nuriyev Hafiz Yusif oglu 1962 
406. Nishana Khodjaly 1990 
407. Nadjafov Askar Hidayat oglu 1940 
408. Nasibov Ramiz Sary oglu 1961 
409. Novruzov Akbar Jannat oglu 1956 
410. Nuriyev Aydin Nariman oglu 1930 
411. Nadjafov Alov Nasib oglu 1966 
412. Novruzov Novruz Maharram oglu 1937 
413. Novruzova Adila Mahammad gyzy 1937 
414. Novruzov Zakir Novruz oglu 1971 
415. Novruzova Rahila Novruz gyzy 1975 
416. Novruzova Rubaba Novruz gyzy 1977 
417. Nurmammadov Huseyn Rza oglu 1927 
418. Nurmammadova Pakiza Islam gyzy 1936 
419. Orudjov Javan Janan oglu 1976 
420. Orudjova Malahat Ali gyzy 1975 
421. Orudjova Malak Ali gyzy 1968 
422. Orudjova Natavan Nabi gyzy 1989 
423. Orudjov Fazil Anvar oglu 1981 
424. Orudjova Irada Ali gyzy 1964 
425. Orudjova Tamara Yunus gyzy 1944 
426. Orudjov Telman Anvar oglu 1957 
427. Orudjova Khayala Telman gyzy 1986 
428. Orudjov Elman Anvar oglu 1956 
429. Orudjov Faig Ali oglu 1954 
430. Orudjova Gozal Heydar gyzy 1931 
431. Orudjov Miryusif Karim oglu 1940 
432. Orudjov Rafig Miryusif oglu 1972 
433. Pashayev Alexander Tapdyg oglu 1932 
434. Pashayev Aladdin Bahlul oglu 1961 
435. Pazliyev Gadim Pazly oglu 1953 
436. Rzayev Janpolad Yagub oglu 1965 
437. Rashidov Abil Mahammad oglu 1941 
438. Rashidov Nazim Adil oglu 1972 
439. Rustamov Fizuli Salah oglu 1966 
440. Radjabov Jabrayil Mehdi oglu 1961 
441. Rzayev Tapdyg Keuchari oglu 1964 
442. Rzayev Ildyrym Barat oglu 1970 
443. Rustamov Eldar Amir oglu 1988 
444. Sadygova Chichak Jalil gyzy 1928 
445. Salahov Mammad Abdul oglu 1931 
446. Salahova Zahra Aliabbas gyzy 1932 
447. Salimov Araz Bahadur oglu 1960 
448. Salimov Tofig Seydi oglu 1968 
449. Salimov Bahadur Mikayil oglu 1928 
450. Salimov Fakhraddin Bahadur oglu 1958 
451. Salimov Mikayil Bahadur oglu 1970 
452. Salimov Khazar Siyavush oglu 1974 
453. Salimova Adila Allahverdi gyzy 1930 
454. Salimov Seydi Mikayil oglu 1934 
455. Salimova Tamilla Aghamirza gyzy 1936 
456. Samadov Hamid Vaylar oglu 1958 
457. Samadov Tariyel Vaylar oglu 1964 
458. Safarova Pari Mukhtar gyzy 1930 
459. Safiyeva Geuzal Vali gyzy 1923 
460. Safiyev Elkhan Nasib oglu 1961 
461. Safiyev Sarvan Elkhan oglu 1991 
462. Suleymanova Nubar Lalakishi gyzy 1953 
463. Salahov Shakir Shamil oglu 1966 
464. Salahov Natig Faydaly oglu 1961 
465. Sadigov Vagif Imamverdi oglu 1952 
466. Safarov Ordukhan Aydin oglu 1961 
467. Safarov Osman Aydin oglu 1964 
468. Salahova Shakar Saday gyzy 1963 
469. Salimov Rafael Ilyas oglu 1970 
470. Samadov Gunduz Hidayat oglu 1957 
471. SadygovAvaz Asif oglu 1929 
472. Sadigova Geuncha Mammadbaghyr gyzy 1937 
473. Suleymanov Rashid Surkhay oglu 1951 
474. Safarov Shahverdi Bahlul oglu 1956 
475. Shahveranov Maharram Chovdar oglu 1930 
476. Shahmuradov Teymat Musa oglu 1962 
477. Shukurov Vagif Rasul oglu 1968 
478. Shukurov Akif Rasul oglu 1965 
479. Shukurova Antiga Isfandiyar gyzy 1934 
480. Shahmuradov Mubariz Ahhuseyn oglu 1952 
481. Shirinov Elshan Eldar oglu 1965 
482. Shirinov Elshan's six-month son 1991 
483. Shahmuradov Natig Amirkhan oglu 1963 
484. Shahmuradov Namig Amirkhan oglu 1965 
485. Shukurov Vakil Isfandiyar oglu 1947 
486. Shukurov Tofig Zakir oglu 1934 
487. Shahverdiyev Vugar Mammad oglu 1973 
488. Talybov Rahim Khudaverdi oglu 1908 
489. Usubov Zakir Kamran oglu 1965 
490. Usubov Aliyar Kamran oglu 1967 
491. Usubov Elshad Kamran oglu 1974 
492. Usubov Siyavush Ramiz oglu 1971 
493. Usubova Shargiya Usub gyzy 1948 
494. Valiyeva Nazila Kamil gyzy 1966 
495. Valiyev Aghasif Zakir oglu 1986 
496. Valiyev Firdovsi Fazil oglu 1966 
497. Valiyev Ali Iman oglu 1962 
498. Valiyeva Guldana Zakir gyzy 1989 
499. Yusifova Natavan Panah gyzy 1988 
500. Yusifov Hamid Mahaddin oglu 1962 
501. Zamanov Novruz Gulu oglu 1936 
502. Zeynalov Tofig Asian oglu 1959 
503. Zcynalov Eldar Asian oglu 1963 
504. Zeynalov Nadir Asian oglu 1968 
505. Zcynalova Aynura Tofig gyzy 1986 
506. Zeynalov Mammad Mikayil oglu 1948 
507. Zeynalov Osman Bahadur oglu 1959 
508. Zeynalov Tahir Bahadur oglu 1963 
 
LIST OF THE CHILDREN DIED AT THE KHODJALY 
TRAGEDY 
 
1. Aghayev Allahverdi Sattar oglu 1982 
2. Aghayarova Sevindj Isak gyzy 1985 
3. Aghayev Nabi Isak oglu 1981 
4. Aghayarov Raman Isak oglu 1986 
5. Abyshov Chyngiz Nazim oglu 1985 
6. Abyshova Chynara Nazim gyzy 1982 
7. Allahverdiyev Bahram Hidayat oglu 1976 
8. Allahverdiyev Mahir Novruz oglu 1974 
9. Aslanova Elnara Tofig gyzy 1978 
10. Jafarov Nusrat Fazil oglu 1975 
11. Jafarov Samir Tadjir oglu 1987 
12. Chobanova Nazaket Tapdyg gyzy 1984 
13. Aliyev Elchin Firdovsi oglu 1982 
14. Aliyev?Elgiz Firdovsi oglu 1984 
15. Aliyev Sabuhi Jahangir oglu 1978 
16. Aliyev Salim Jahangir oglu 1985 
17. Azimov Natig Abbasgulu oglu 1986 
18. Amirova Yegana Tavakkul gyzy 1986 
19. Hasanov Elgun Nazim oglu 1988 
20. Hasanova Aygun Nazim gyzy 1991 
21. Huseynov Radjab Elkhan oglu 1984 
22. Huseynova Shabnam Elkhan gyzy 1986 
23. Huseynov Mahshur Elkhan oglu 1991 
24. Hasanova Latafat Hasan gyzy 1976 
25. Humbatova Simuzar Jalil gyzy 1976 
26. Humbatova Anaid Eldar gyzy 1979 
27. Huseynov Emin Alexander oglu 1975 
28. Huseynova Naiba Huseyn gyzy 1982 
29. Huseynova Maral Kamil gyzy 1985 
30. Huseynova Saadat Gadim gyzy 1974 
31. Khalilova Lala Tahir gyzy 1988 
32. Guliyeva Parvana Garyaghdy gyzy 1979 
33. Guliyev Shakir Garyaghdy oglu 1985 
34. Guliyeva Nurana Garyaghdy gyzy 1981 
35. Gambarova Esmira Safar gyzy 1985 
36. Gambarov Emin Safar oglu 1986 
37. Guliyev Vugar Zahid oglu 1975 
38. Guliyev Samir Taleh oglu 1990 
39. Guliyeva Sevindj Akbar gyzy 1985 
40. Mammadov Jeyhun Vagif oglu 1975 
41. Mammadov Niyamaddin Vagif oglu 1978 
42. Mammadov Azer Vagif oglu 1974 
43. Mammadov Zahir Ramiz oglu 1975 
44. Mehdiyeva Gulmira Murad gyzy 1989 
45. Mehdiyeva Aysel Murad gyzy 1987 
46. Muradova Ayshan Zohrab gyzy 1991 
47. Orudjova Matanat Ali gyzy 1975 
48. Orudjov Javan Janan oglu 1976 
49. Orudjova Khayala Telman gyzy 1986 
50. Orudjova Natavan Nabi gyzy 1986 
51. Salimov Khazar Siyavush oglu 1974 
52. Safiyev Sarvan Elkhan oglu 1991 
53. Usubov Elshad Kamran oglu 1974 
54. Valiyev Aghasif Bakir oglu 1988 
55. Zeynalova Aynura Tofig gyzy 1986 
56. Yusifova Natavan Panah gyzy 1988 
 
LIST OF THE CHILDREN LOSING A PARENT AT THE 
KHODJALY TRAGEDY 
 
1. Alimammadov Parviz Namig oglu 1992 
2. Garayeva Lamiya Yusifali gyzy 1988 
3. Garayev Ramil Yusifali oglu 1990 
4. Guliyev Zahir Tahir oglu 1987 
5. Guliyev Shamkir Tahir oglu 1988 
6. Hasanova Natavan Reuvshan gyzy 1981 
7. Hasanov Ravan Reuvshan oglu 1985 
8. Hasanova Nigar Reuvshan gyzy 1990 
9. Pashayeva Guiana Elshad gyzy 1989 
10. Pashayeva llaha Elshad gyzy 1991 
11. Shahmuradova Khatira Neymat gyzy 1982 
12. Shahmuradova Keunul Neymat gyzy 1990 
13 Shahmuradov Elchin Neymat oglu 1992 
14. Ismayilov Intigam Ingilab oglu 1986 
15. Ismayilova Tunzala Ingilab gyzy 1988 
16. Ismayilov Alekper Ingilab oglu 1990 
17. Nasibov Fazil Ramiz oglu 1990 
18. Nasibova Jamila Ramiz gyzy 1988 
19. Guliyev Emin Akbar oglu 1988 
20. Guliyev Akbar Akbar oglu 1992 
21. Hagverdiyev Bakhtiyar David oglu 1978 
22. Hagverdiyeva Jeyhuna David gyzy 1979 
23. Hagverdiyeva Mehri David gyzy 1981 
24. Hagverdiyeva Solmaz David gyzy 1984 
25. Hagverdiyev Yashar David oglu 1986 
26. Huseynova Azada Rashid gyzy 1987 
27. Huseynov Samir Rashid oglu 1990 
28. Aliyev Tariyel Abulfat oglu 1986 
29. Aliyeva Gulnar Abulfat gyzy 1988 
30. Jabbarly Nidjat Azad oglu 1991 
31. Jabbarly Fuad Azad oglu 1990 
32. Mammadov Ruslan Mammad oglu 1987 
33. Mammadov Hasan Mammad oglu 1983 
34. Samadov Ilkin Tariyel oglu 1987 
35. Samadova Sevindj Tariyel gyzy 1988 
36. Karimli Kamran Sultan oglu 1994 
37. Salmanova Nahida Bahman gyzy 1987 
38. Samadov Elchin Hamid oglu 1981 
39. Bahmanov Sakhavat Vagif oglu 1980 
40. Huseynova Vusala Shakir gyzy 1983 
41. Huseynov Algayit Shakir oglu 1992 
42. Alaskarova Ayshan Vahid gyzy 1988 
43. Alaskarova Shahrun Vahid gyzy 1990 
44. Imani Foziya Aghababa gyzy 1981 
45. Imani Nasir Aghababa oglu 1987 
46. Mammadov Ali Ali oglu 1992 
47. Mahmudov Nidjat Akif oglu 1989 
48. Mahmudov Elchin Akif oglu 1991 
49. Gasymov Totig Yashar oglu 1980 
50. Gasymova Gulshan Yashar gyzy 1991 
51. Azimov Jeyhun Abbasgulu oglu 1981 
52. Kazymov Tural Asif oglu 1990 
53. Kazymova Peri Asif gyzy 1992 
54. Ismayilova Yegana Ismayil gyzy 1981 
55. Ismayilov Amil Ismayil oglu 1983 
56. Ismayilova Gunel Ismayil gyzy 1987 
57. Mehraliyev Nasimi Ali oglu 1980 
58. Mehraliyev Ilgar Ali oglu 1986 
59. Abbasova Saadat Taleh gyzy 1983 
60. Abbasov Zaur Taleh oglu 1986 
61. Abbasov Ziya Taleh oglu 1981 
62. Huseynov Samir Bakir oglu 1981 
63. Jafarova Samira Tadjir gyzy 1990 
64. Behbudov Vagif Vagif oglu 1992 
65. Ahmadova Vusala Elmar gyzy 1986 
66. Ahmadova Afsana Elmar gyzy 1987 
67. Ahmadova Salatyn Elmar gyzy 1991 
68. Aghayev Nidjat Vidadi oglu 1989 
69. Hadjiyeva Zarina Akif gyzy 1982 
70. Hadjiyeva Irada Akif gyzy 1990 
71. Mammadov Ismayil Vagif oglu 1988 
72. Mammadova Maya Vagif gyzy 1985 
73. Mammadova Vusala Vagif gyzy 1981 
74. Mammadova Suraya Vagif gyzy 1990 
75. Hasanov Babek Sheuhrat oglu 1980 
76. Huseynova Yasamen Tofig gyzy 1980 
77. Huseynova Afsana Tofig gyzy 1982 
78. Huseynov Murad Tofig oglu 1985 
79. Orudjova Lamiya Nabi gyzy 1988 
80. Abbasov Aladdin Kamran oglu 1981 
81. Abbasova Baneuvsha Kamran gyzy 1983 
82. Abbasov Nariman Kamran oglu 1986 
83. Abbasov Akbar Kamran oglu 1987 
84. Godjayeva Samira Loghman gyzy 1981 
85. Godjayeva Arif Loghman oglu 1985 
86. Godjayeva Gudrat Loghman oglu 1990 
87. Sadygova Chinara Huseyn gyzy 1989 
88. Sadygova Zulfiya Huseyn gyzy 1991 
89. Sadygov Elmaddin Vagif oglu 1985 
90. Sadygov Tapdyg Vagif oglu 1988 
91. Salahov Vusal Namig oglu 1990 
92. Salahova Ulviya Namig gyzy 1991 
93. Mehdiyeva Sevindj Javanshir gyzy 1991 
94. Mehdiyeva Ilaha Javanshir gyzy 1993 
95. Zeynalova Maya Mammad gyzy 1982 
96. Javadov Vatan Vagif oglu 1992 
97. Hadjiyeva Ayshan Allahverdy gyzy 1994 
98. Jabbarov Sadraddin Khydyr oglu 1991 
99. Jabbarov Khydyr Khydyr oglu 1992 
100. Abbasova Khayala Yunus gyzy 1982 
101. Abbasova Elnara Yunus gyzy 1984 
102. Abbasova Vafa Yunus gyzy 1987 
103. Javadova Geuychak Amir gyzy 1983 
104. Mirzayeva Kamala Kamal gyzy 1986 
105. Mirzayev Tural Kamal oglu 1987 
106. Hasanov Kamaleddin Vahid oglu 1986 
107. Hasanov Elmaddin Vahid oglu 1988 
108. Hasanova Aygun Vahid gyzy 1990 
109. Zeynally Zabit Tahir oglu 1990 
110. Zeynally Tahira Tahir gyzy 1991 
111. Shukurova Nazly Vakil gyzy 1985 
112. Shukurov Bazirgan Vakil oglu 1988 
113. Shukurova Shahnaz Vakil gyzy 1989 
114. Shukurov Javidan Vakil oglu 1990 
115. Ahmadov Valeh Vagif oglu 1986 
116. Ahmadov Taghy Valeh oglu 1990 
117. Ahmadov Vahid Vagif oglu 1991 
118. Zeynalova Sevda Osman gyzy 1986 
119. Zeynalova Elza Osman gyzy 1988 
120. Zeynalov Seymur Osman oglu 1990 
121. Zeynalova Aybeniz Osman gyzy 1991 
122. Aliyeva Khatira Ilham gyzy 1985 
123. Shahmuradov Farid Natig oglu 1985 
124. Amirkhanly Gunel Natig gyzy 1989 
125. Samadov Sabuhi Gunduz oglu 1986 
126. Samadov Parviz Gunduz oglu 1988 
127. Safarova Vusala Ordukhan gyzy 1986 
128. Safarova Vafa Ordukhan gyzy 1987 
129. Safarov Kanan Shahverdi oglu 1990 
130. Hasanov Rahman Telman oglu 1985 
131. Hasanov Mehman Telman oglu 1987 
132. Hasanova Hidjran Telman gyzy 1988 
133. Hasanov Felmar Telman oglu 1989 
134. Hasanova Tonga Telman gyzy 1991 
135. Guliyev Idris Islam oglu 1989 
136. Guliyeva Matanat Islam gyzy 1990 
137. Rzayeva Aynur Tapdyg gyzy 1990 
138. Rzayev Kanan Tapdyg oglu 1991 
139. Salahov Elshad Askar oglu 1983 
140. Salahov Elshan Askar oglu 1985 
141. Salahov Hadjy Askar oglu 1988 
142. Salahov Matanat Askar gyzy 1990 
143. Salahov Vusal Natig oglu 1986 
144. Salahova Ulviya Natig gyzy 1988 
145. Huseynov Galib Huseyn oglu 1983 
146. Huseynov Jeyhun Huseyn oglu 1985 
147. Huseynov Magsud Huseyn oglu 1987 
148. Huseynova Keunul Huseyn oglu 1989 
149. Garayeva Rafiga Asif gyzy 1989 
150. Garayev Maarif Asif oglu 1991 
151. Babayev Sayad Babir oglu 1986 
152. Babayeva Iltima Babir gyzy 1987 
153. Babayeva Minura Babir gyzy 1990 
154. Shukurova Zamina Vakil gyzy 1991 
155. Guliyev Anar Matlab oglu 1986 
156. Guliyeva Lala Matlab gyzy 1988 
157. Guliyev Alim Matlab oglu 1990 
158. Mehraliyev Ali Ali oglu 1990 
159. Humbatov Avaz Bahlul oglu 1986 
160. Guliyev Khazani Shukur oglu 1979 
161. Askarov Kanan Khazani oglu 1985 
162. Askarov Khayam Khazani oglu 1988 
163. Askarov Sanan Khazani oglu 1990 
164. Askarov Aghakishi Khazani oglu 1993 
165. Hasanov Nasir Tabil oglu 1987 
166. Hasanova Durdana Tabil gyzy 1989 
167. Hasanova Gandab Tabil gyzy 1991 
168. Bayramov Kamal Jalal oglu 1984 
169. Bayramova Zarifa Jalal gyzy 1985 
170 Bayramova Sveta Jalal gyzy 1980 
171. Mammadova Sara Gasym gyzy 1980 
172. Zeynalov Elnur Eldar oglu 1986 
173. Zeynalov Eyvaz Eldar oglu 1989 
174. Hasanov Murad Ali oglu 1982 
175. Hasanova Bahar Ali gyzy 1987 
176. Hasanova Geuzal Ali gyzy 1990 
177. Salimova Aygun Araz gyzy 1987 
178. Salimova Aytekin Araz gyzy 1986 
179. Salimov Ilgar Araz oglu 1989 
180. Alekperov Amid Tavakkul oglu 1982 
181. Zeynalov Elshad Tofig oglu 1981 
182. Usubov Elmir Zakir oglu 1991 
183. Usubova Narmin Zakir gyzy 1992 
184. Guliyeva Zarifa Taleh gyzy 1992 
185. Imani Nabib Malik oglu 1980 
186. Ismayilova Ulviya Vidadi gyzy 1992 
187. Safiyeva Susan Elkhan gyzy 1988 
188. Mammadov Ramil Yasha oglu 1980 
189. Mammadova Elnara Yasha gyzy 1981 
190. Mammadova Samira Yasha gyzy 1987 
191. Mammadov Amil Yasha oglu 1992 
192. Allahverdiyeva Gunel Ziyadkhan gyzy 1988 
193. Allahverdiyev Anar Ziyadkhan oglu 1990 
194. Allahverdiyev Gabil Ziyadkhan oglu 1992 
195. Allahverdiyev Elgiz Novruz oglu 1979 
196. Amirli Vusal Kamil oglu 1988 
197. Amirli Aytadj Kamil gyzy 1991 
198. Amirli Amil Kamil oglu 1992 
199. Muradov Zahid Zahid oglu 1992 
200. Chobanov Teymur Tapdyg oglu 1979 
201. Chobanov Seymur Tapdyg oglu 1980 
202. Hashimova Nishana Salim gyzy 1992 
203. Azizov Galib Huseyn oglu 1980 
204. Azizov Vugar Huseyn oglu 1984 
205. Azizova Rahila Ibrahim gyzy 1981 
206. Abbasova Zemfira Valiaddin gyzy 1987 
207. Abbasova Reyhan Valiaddin gyzy 1990 
208. Nabiyeva Tutu Mahaddin gyzy 1980 
209. Hasanov Ibrahim Ramil oglu 1981 
210. Karimova Firangiz Frunz gyzy 1986 
211. Mammadova Khatira Vasif gyzy 1992 
212. Karimov Intigam Intigam oglu 1992 
213. Hamdiyeva Gulnara Usdab gyzy 1986 
214. Hamdiyev Islam Usdab oglu 1987 
215. Hamdiyeva Gulara Usdab gyzy 1988 
216. Hamdiyeva Khalida Usdab gyzy 1991 
217. Azizov Alzamin Azim oglu 1980 
218. Aliyeva Khatira Ilham gyzy 1992 
219. Aliyeva Ulviya Rasim gyzy 1990 
220. Guliyev Shaig Shamsi oglu 1984 
221. Guliyeva Ilaha Shamsi gyzy 1986 
222. Guliyeva Shahnaz Shamsi gyzy 1988 
223. Novruzova Piyala Alesker gyzy 1981 
224. Novruzov Ulvi Alesker oglu 1983 
 
THE LIST OF THE CHILDREN LOSING BOTH PARENTS 
AT THE KHODJALY TRAGEDY 
 
1. Khalilova Hamayil Tahir gyzy 1987 
2. Khalilova Khayala Tahir gyzy 1992 
3. Gahramanova Nigar Tavakkul gyzy 1987 
4. Gahramanova Khazangul Tavakkul gyzy 1984 
5. Gahramanov Vusal Tavakkul oglu 1991 
6. Aliyev Mehdi Firdovsi oglu 1990 
7. Huseynova Afsana Tofig gyzy 1981 
8. Huseynova Yasamen Tofig gyzy 1980 
9. Huseynov Murad Tofig oglu 1983 
10. Orudjova Khatira Telman gyzy 1983 
11. Orudjova Kubra Telman gyzy 1989 
12. Orudjov Anar Telman oglu 1990 
13. Maharramova Vusala Vagif gyzy 1982 
14. Maharramova Sabina Vagif gyzy 1978 
15. Maharramov Vusal Vagif oglu 1985 
16. Maharramov Natig Vagif oglu 1980 
17. Maharramov Namig Vagif oglu 1986 
18. Ibrahimov Sabir Alikhan oglu 1981 
19. Ibrahimov Samir Alikhan oglu 1984 
20. Hamidova Nigar Sabir gyzy 1980 
21. Hamidov Mubariz Sabir oglu 1978 
22. Hamidov Mushfig Sabir oglu 1976 
23. Hamidov Eldaniz Sabir oglu 1980 
24. Huseynov Yashar Huseyn oglu 1978 
25. Huseynov Adalat Huseyn oglu 1983 
 
LIST OF THE FAMILIES WHOLLY DESTROYED AT THE 
KHODJALY TRAGEDY 
 
1. 
1. Mammadov Vagif Shukur oglu Father 1940 
2. Mammadova Afila Ibrahim gyzy Mother 1949 
3. Mammadov Jeyhun Vagif oglu Son 1972 
4. Mammadov Azer Vagif oglu Son 1975 
5. Mammadov Niyamaddin Vagif oglu Son 1978 
 
2. 
1. Karimov Samran Soltan oglu Father 1924 
2. Karimova Firangu Mother 1935 
3. Karimov Frunz Samran oglu Son 1960 
4. Karimov Soltan Samran oglu Son 1969 
 
3. 
1. Aliyev Firdovsi Isa oglu Father 1956 
2. Aliyeva Heyran Murshud gyzy Mother 1962 
3. Aliyev Elchin Firdovsi oglu Son 1982 
4. Aliyev Elgul Firdovsi oglu Son 1984 
 
 
4. 
1. Gambarov Garsalan Garay oglu Father 1939 
2. Gambarova Valida Boran gyzy Mother 1941 
3. Gambarov Nadir Garsalan oglu Son 1971 
 
5. 
1. Gambarov Safar Garsalan oglu Father 1961 
2. Gambarova Matanat Hadjy gyzy Mother 1967 
3. Gambarov Emin Safar oglu Son 1986 
4. Gambarova Esmira Safar gyzy Daughter 1986 
 
6. 
1. Huseynov Mirsahib Hazratgulu oglu Husband 1922 
2. Huseynova Minash Jumshud gyzy Wife 1934 
 
7. 
1. Hasanova Gunash Abdul gyzy Mother 1910 
2. Hasanova Gatiba Mirsiyab gyzy Daughter 1951 
 
8. 
1. Huseynov Huseyn Ismayil oglu Father 1934 
2. Huseynova Aziza Alysh gyzy Mother 1956 
3. Huseynov Khoshbakht Huseyn oglu Son 1963 
4. Huseynova Nasiba Huseyn gyzy Daughter 1982 
5. Huseynov Tadjir Huseyn oglu Son 1972 
 
THOUSE WHO ARE MISSING 
 
1. Aslanova Elnara Tofig gyzy 1978 
2. Asadov Yalchyn Asif oglu 1957 
3. Aliyev Firdovsi Isa oglu 1956 
4. Aliyeva Heyran Murshud gyzy 1962 
5. Aliyev Elchin Firdovsi oglu 1982 
6. Aliyev Elgiz Firdovsi oglu 1984 
7. Pashayev Aladdin Bahlul oglu 1961 
8. Karimov Intigam Shahmaly oglu 1960 
9. Azizov Azim Mashadi oglu 1911 
10. Mammadov Zahir Ramiz oglu 1975 
11. Mammadov Razmik Suren oglu 1965 
12. Hasanova Gunash Abdul gyzy 1910 
13. Hasanova Makhmar Alakbar gyzy 1942 
14. Hasanova Gatiba Mirsahib gyzy 1951 
15. Guliyeva Sara Huseyn gyzy 1955 
16. Guliyeva Ravana Garyaghdy gyzy 1979 
17. Guliyeva Nurana Garyaghdy gyzy 1981 
18. Guliyev Shukur Garyaghdy oglu 1985 
19. Huseynov Chingyz Usub oglu 1955 
20. Allahyarov Etibar Balaoghlan oglu 1968 
21. Aghayarov Nabi Isak oglu 1981 
22. Aghayarova Sevindj Isak gyzy 1985 
23. Aghayarov Roman Isak oglu 1986 
24. Mehdiyeva Gulmira Murad gyzy 1989 
25. Shahverdiyev Vugar Mammad oglu 1973 
26. Guliyev Zakir Latif oglu 1965 
27. Mammadov Saday Suleyman oglu 1936 
28. Gambarova Matanat Hadjy gyzy 1967 
29. Gambarov Safar Garsalan oglu 1961 
30. Gambarov Nadir Garsalan oglu 1971 
31. Gambarova Valida Boran gyzy 1941 
32. Gambarov Garsalan Garay oglu 1939 
33. Gambarova Esmira Safar gyzy 1985 
34. Gambarov Emin Safar oglu 1986 
35. Allahverdiyev Ziyadkhan Salah oglu 1957 
36. Allahverdiyev Novruz Salah oglu 1947 
37. Allahverdiyev Mahir Novruz oglu 1974 
38. Usubov Aliyar Kamran oglu 1967 
39. Usubov Elshad Kamran oglu 1974 
40. Usubov Zakir Kamran oglu 1965 
41. Usubov Siyavush Ramiz oglu 1971 
42. Zeynalov Tofig Asian oglu 1959 
43. Zeynalov Eldar Asian oglu 1963 
44. Safiyev Elkhan Nasib oglu 1961 
45. Hamidov Kifayat Chirag gyzy 1956 
46. Baghyrov Elshan Hasan oglu 1965 
47. Huseynova Mehriban Allahverdy gyzy 1965 
48. Huseynov Radjab Elkhan oglu 1984 
49. Huseynova Shabnam Elkhan gyzy 1986 
50. Huseynov Meshar Elkhan oglu 1991 
51. Mammadov Kamil Amir oglu 1958 
52. Mustafayeva Yakhshy Mehdigulu gyzy 1900 
53. Aliyev Ulfat Iman oglu 1974 
54. Huseynova Rasmiya Alexander gyzy 1968 
55. Huseynov Emin Alexander oglu 1975 
56. Aghalarov Sadyg Shirkhan oglu 1932 
57. Aghalarova Gullu Surkhay gyzy 1934 
58. Samadov Tariyel Baylar oglu 1964 
59. Abasov Valiaddin Umidvar oglu 1963 
60. Jafarov Mahammadali Valikishi oglu 1895 
61. Jafarova Baghdad Hasan gyzy 1910 
62. Salimova Odelya Allahverdi gyzy 1930 
63. Aliyeva Khavar Yusif gyzy 1928 
64. Aliyeva Svetlana Javanshir gyzy 1957 
65. Orudjov Fazil Anvar oglu 1981 
66. Salimov Seydi Mikayil oglu 1934 
67. Huseynova Makhmar Gurban gyzy 1949 
68. Mikayilov Mirsahib Hasrat oglu 1922 
69. Huseynova Minash Jumshud gyzy 1934 
70. Huseynov Bakir Mirsahib oglu 1956 
71. Behbudova Suraya Ibrahim gyzy 1930 
72. Behbudova Gulnar Yusif gyzy 1962 
73. Behbudova Gulbahar Yusif gyzy 1968 
74. Abyshova Mahbuba Gurban gyzy 1960 
75. Abyshova Chinara Nazim gyzy 1982 
76. Abyshov Chingyz Nazim oglu 1985 
77. Abyshova Madina Badirkhan gyzy 1908 
78. Karimov Sultan Samran oglu 1969 
79. Abyshova Minara Rahim gyzy 1910 
80. Abyshov Mobil Meuvsum oglu 1968 
81. Ismayilov Ibish Karim oglu 1938 
82. Maharramov Vagif Jamil oglu 1951 
83. Maharramova Basira Ali gyzy 1956 
84. Ismayilova Manzar Mashdi gyzy 1908 
85. Hasanov Reuvshan Gachay oglu 1958 
86. brahimov Alikhan Khalil oglu 1955 
87. Ibrahimova Fatima Mashadi gyzy 1959 
88. Abdulov Elmar Iskandar oglu 1949 
89. Abdulov Zahid Elmar oglu 1973 
90. Alakbarov Askar Gurban oglu 1930 
91. Aghayev Allahverdi Sattar oglu 1982 
92. Aslanova Gulsabah Gayyum gyzy 1972 
93. Hadjiyev Suleyman Latif oglu 1949 
94. Mammadov Vagif Shukur oglu 1940 
95. Mammadova Afila Ibrahim gyzy 1949 
96. Mammadov Azer Vagif oglu 1972 
97. Mammadov Jeyhun Vagif oglu 1975 
98. Mammadov Niyamaddin Vagif oglu 1978 
99. Alimammadov Vagif Shahmaly oglu 1962 
100. Hagverdiyev Shahin Mashdi oglu 1962 
101. Shahmuradov Neymat Musa oglu 1962 
102. Mammadova Saltanat Zulal gyzy 1931 
103. Mammadova Latifa Ibad gyzy 1958 
104. Aliyev Sabahi Jahangir oglu 1978 
105. Aliyev Salim Jahangir oglu 1985 
106. Orudjov Javan Janan oglu 1976 
107. Guliyev Natig Valiaddin oglu 1972 
108. Garayev Usubali Suleyman oglu 1961 
109. Abdilov Mazahir Yagub oglu 1960 
110. Salimova Tamila Aghamaly gyzy 1936 
111. Salimov Khazar Siyavush oglu 1974 
112. Mammadov Sheuvkat Ibad gyzy 1964 
113. Jafarov Samir Tadjir oglu 1987 
114. Bidzinov Zeynali Mammad oglu 1926 
115. Boranov Magsud Ali oglu 1928 
116. Abbasova Hamayil Janysh gyzy 1940 
117. Abbasova Sughra Alish gyzy 1917 
118. Valiyeva Nazila Kamil gyzy 1966 
119. Valiyev Aghasaf Zakir oglu 1986 
120. Valiyeva Guldana Zakir gyzy 1989 
121. Huseynov Vugar Hilal oglu 1971 
122. Ilyasov Mahammad Ilyas oglu 1940 
123. Ahmadova Sarvinaz Mukhtar gyzy 1900 
124. Ilyasov Ahmad Mammad oglu 1968 
125. Ahmadov Natig Ilyas oglu 1968 
126. Alimammadov Faig Shahmaly oglu 1969 
127. Mammadov Mammad Rahim oglu 1935 
128. Mammadov Seuhbat Mammad oglu 1976 
129. Binaliyev Alili Gulali oglu 1967 
130. Binaliyev Jabbar Gulali oglu 1969 
131. Badirov Ali Rais oglu 1968 
132. Mammdov Aydin Gurban oglu 1964 
133. Shahveranov Maharram Jodar oglu 1930 
134. Nasirova Tatyana Dmitriyevna 1952 
135. Budish Dmitri Nikolayevich 1930 
136. Humbatova Simuzar Jannat gyzy 1976 
137. Humbatov Mughan Jalil oglu 1973 
138. Huseynov Huseyn Ismayil oglu 1934 
139. Huseynov Aziz Alysh oglu 1956 
140. Huseynova Khoshbakht Huseyn gyzy 1963 
141. Huseynova Susan Huseyn gyzy 1971 
142. Huseynova Emma Huseyn gyzy 1969 
143. Huseynov Zeuhrab Huseyn oglu 1971 
144. Azizov Mehman Gudrat oglu 1959 
145. Jafarov Nusrat Fazil oglu 1975 
146. Hashimov Sheuvkat Shukur oglu 1943 
147. Aghayev Vidadi Shamsaddin oglu 1960 
148. Shahmuradov Namig Amirkhan oglu 1965 
149. Alaskarov Mazahir Maharram oglu 1969 
150. Aliyev Ayaz Elman oglu 1971 
151. Zeynalov Osman Bahadur oglu 1959 
152. Rzayev Ildyrym Barat oglu 1970 
153. Guliyev Shukur Barhudar oglu 1949 
154. Guliyeva Makhmar Khanlar gyzy 1930 
155. Huseynova Gyzbas Mardan gyzy 1934 
 
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
Alif Latif oglu Hadjiyev was born in Khodjaly town on 24th of
June 1953. In 1970 he finished the
Khodjaly Secondary School and in 1971
the Automobile School in Khodjaly. In
1971-1973 he rendered temporary mili-
tary service in Minsk.
During years of 1974-1984 he worked
on various posts in bodies of the Ministry
of Internal Affairs of Byelorussia and the
Board of Internal Affairs of UGAR of the
Azerbaijan Republic.
In 1976-1979 he got special secondary
education in the Police College named after Frunze of the Ministry of
InternalAffairs of USSR.
In 1981 he entered the Leningrad Branch of the Police Academy
and a year later because of passing to render in Azerbaijan continued
studying in the Rostov School of theAcademy.
In the years of working in the Section of the Board of Internal
Affairs of UGAR he was repeatedly exposed provocations by
nationalist Armenians. Furthermore, a criminal case was fabricat-
ed against him; however, upon commencement of the Upper
Garabagh events the slanderous accusation against Alif Hadjiyev
was discovered and he was acquitted and restored in the post.
In 1990 Alif returned to Khodjaly and worked in the newly-
established organizational committee of the UGAR. While his
working in Khankandy the Armenian nationalists tried to oust him
from there, but Azerbaijanies, in the contrary, were glad that Alif
is amongst them.
At that time Alif was entrusted with vary responsible task i.e.
provision of safety of the Khodjaly airport. A kind talk regarding
KHODJALY PEOPLE
ARE NATIONAL HEROES
108
109
his worthy service was spread through the Azerbaijan. The police
detachment led by him was controlling the air-trips from Armenia
and checking reached passengers and delivered goods prevent-
ing from illegal actions.
At that time he was toiling day and night and doing his bests
for the sake of protection of Khodjaly. In
the tragic night of the perfidious attack Alif
was doughtily fighting against the dashnak
butchers trying to defend and spare the
peaceful unarmed inhabitants and bravely
fell in unequal confrontation.
Alif's intrepidity and heroism will
remain in the memory of Khodjaly inhabi-
tants and thankful Azerbaijani people. His
grave is in the Martyrs' Avenue in Baku.
Alif's brother
Suleyman also
died in that fatal horrible night.
* * *
Tofig Mirsiyab
oglu Huseynov was
born in Khodjaly in
1954. Finishing the
secondary school he
continued studying in
the Aghdam Agricultural College. Upon gradua-
tion from the College he rendered temporary
military service in army in Ayanguz town of
Kazakhstan. Upon demobilization in 1972 he
returned to the native town. His father Mirsiyab and mother
Minash used to inculcate to the children the sense of love to the
Motherland since childhood. These moral inculcations were
expressed also in Tofig Huseynov's activity teaching military
affairs in the Khodjaly School after military service. In 1981 he
was assigned as inspector of the Regional Department of Public
Education on military affairs.
Since February 1988 when the prevocational scenery on
Upper Garabagh commenced the Khodjaly inhabitants as well as
all inhabitants of the county was exposed to period of hard cross-
es. In 1991 a Khodjaly self-defense battalion was established on
Tofig's initiation and he became its commander. He had neither
sleeping nor rests at that time. Everyday he was in encounters,
shootings and attacks to Khodjaly. The town had resisted to the
enemy for four years.
In the night from 25th to 26th of February 1992 when the bru-
tal armada of occupants the self-defense battalion led by the
commander resisted up to death and fought until the last bullet.
Tofig's courage was inspired also to his companion-in-arms. His
death shocked comrades… He lived only thirty-eight years. It was
a short but inspired life. Tofig's parents as well as his wife
Makhmar and brother Bakir also tragically died in that fatal night.
The fallen hero left three children named
Afsana, Yadigar and Murad. They get
grown under careful protection by Akif
Huseynov, Tofig's uncle.
The hero was buried in the Martyrs'
Avenue in Baku.
* * *
Ingilab Alekper oglu Ismayilov was
born in Khodjaly in 1961. Finishing the
school he was summoned to military
service. Upon demobilization he returned to Khodjaly and tried to
enter to police ranks but failed. He was assigned as worker to
dairy & vegetable sovkhoz and simultaneously gained specialty
of machine-operator.
The meetings commenced in 1988 in UGAR as well as the
110
frequent provocations and incidents compressed the intensity.
Active construction works were carried out in Khodjaly gaining the
town status in 1990. Khodjaly inhabitants were obliged to be seri-
ously engaged in organization of protection of the inhabitants. In
1990 Ingilab began to work at the regional section of police. The
time was troubled. Armenians were keeping on attack on the town
and kill of innocent people. Ingilab was coming home rarely. All
thoughts were in the military post. In the night from 25th to 26th of
February the fighter supported by 366th shooting regiment com-
manded by Armenians filled forests and fields with corpses… The
surviving inhabitants of Khodjaly including were discharging the
wounded and killed people under bullets…
Khodjaly became a martyrs' town.
Ingilab was going on bravely fight against the occupants in
the battles battered in the Aghdam zone. His last fight was in
Dashbashy altitude. In the battles for this altitude Ingilab
destroyed about twenty-five Armenian soldiers but was exposed
to enemies' bullet.
A MOTHER'S CRYING
111
1 Bayati - is a folklore sample of Azerbaijan, a poem form consisting of four
lines with seven syllables per each.
2 Bozdagh - is a mountain ridge in Azerbaijan.
112
Jeyran-ana - is the National Hero Ingilab Ismayilov's moth-
er. In the horrible February night she lost her son, grandson and
near relations. She expressed her inescapable pain and grief in
sad bayaties.1 This pain brought her to grave.
ADHERENT OF PUBLIC
MEMORY
Sheuhrat Usub oglu Hasanov
was born on 23rd of December 1944.
He lost his father early and was grown
by his widow mother. His childhood
coincided to the hard post-war period.
From little up he was varied by zeal and passion for education.
Finishing the seven-year school in Khodjaly he completed the
secondary education in Kahnkendy, and later graduated from
the Oil & Chemistry College in Baku. During his practical train-
ing in oil-field where a new borehole was being drilled a curious
episode happened. The young trainee notified the drill man that
not oil but gas will discharge from the underground bed. He was
right. Probably, such prevision assumes perfect knowledge of
113
the geological structure and character of bed attitude.
He was his mother's only child. The mother was missing for
lover son. She often dreamed that she came to Baku. Once
Sheuhrat got a troubling letter: his mother fell sick. She
expressed her grieves in bayati:
I'm full of acke, just come,
For the God's sake, just come,
I was full of strength and health,
Now you lose your dear mam.
His soul got full of bitter reproaches. Sheuhrat left the Baku
plans and permanently returned to Khodjaly.
In twenty-four years old he was the Secretary of the Urban
Council of Khodjaly town.
The roots of their family ascended to kin of the Garabagh
khan's vizier and Mirza Jamal Javanshir, a regional historian.
Probably, the unusual thirst for knowledge and passion for culture
as well as jealous attitude to the Motherland and its historical mem-
ory passed to him genetically.
He knew that his native land of Khodjaly was exposed to dev-
astation and destructions thrice in the 20th century. He knew about
the dashnak evil dinned into comprehension of the "long-suffering"
neighbors. Thus, he couldn't be free of anxious presentiment of
new infringements.
Undoubtedly, he was gifted and widely-read and passed for
"vivid encyclopedia". Compatriots respected and loved him. A
"Voice of Khodjaly" Newspaper was published in Khodjaly.
Sheuhrat had a significant role in publication of this newspaper and
its title was devised by him. He said: "The voice of Khodjaly is
insuppressible."
Armenian nationalists always searched a moment for razing
this ancient settlement to the ground and depersonalizing its histor-
ical memory.
Upon 1966 they destroyed the ancient cemeteries on the moun-
tain road leading from Shusha to the Dashalty gorge. Khodjaly village
itself also located nearby in 1905-1906. In those years the Armenians
114
fully destroyed the village.As a result, the Khodjaly established a town
two kilometers beyond the ruins of the former village, but the ceme-
tery remained. In 1966 Armenians collapsed the cemetery and estab-
lished a farm in its place. Sheuhrat couldn't be negligent to this imper-
tinent vandalism. He sent telegrams to Baku and Moscow. Baku sent
here a commissions consisting ofArmenians, and the case was crum-
pled… The Armenian village Noraguk also was established in the
place of Azerbaijani cemetery. In connection with this next despotism
Sheuhrat addressed in press with several troubled correspondences.
In 1986 Armenians decided to collapse the ancient tumuli and
cemeteries near the Khodjaly and construct a garage there.
Sheuhrat addressed via the Azerbaijani TV sounding the alarm and
requesting to send historian specialists to Khodjaly.
In 1988 the semilegal Armenian committees established in
Garabagh commenced collection of signatures among the inhabi-
tants for separation of the autonomous region and its grant to the
territory of Armenia. A large-scale meeting was held in Askaran
region on this occasion. Babayan, the head-master of the Badaran
village secondary school having the floor talked through his hat that
as though Garabagh had never been the territory of Azerbaijan.
Sheuhrat participating in the meeting rebuffed these thoughts of the
rural "enlightener" and passed a "lesson of history" to him. The
Armenian nationalists participating in the meeting began hand-to-
hand fight against this far-outer discoverer... Namely at that period
Sheuhrat Hasanov published an article titled "The petrified memory
of our history" in the "Gandjlik" Magazine where belonging of
Azerbaijan was proved via historical facts and colonization of our
native lands by Armenians was reminded.
In 1989 Armenians deceitfully collected signatures of 3751
credulous Azerbaijani people under a list they had no idea of. It was
"the petition" of joining UGAR to Armenia. Being aware of this
provocation Sheuhrat destroyed the list furtively put to his patriots.
Grigoryan, the Secretary of the Askaran Regional Committee of
Party being notified of it called Sheuhrat "nationalist" and raised a
question regarding his dismissal from the post but the Khodjaly
inhabitants demonstrating solidarity removed the "thunders" of the
115
Regional Committee. However, the Armenian nationalists had for-
gotten nothing.
Since commencement of blockade of the Regional Committee
Sheuhrat was enrolled in self-defense battalion and fought against
impudent fighters and accomplices day and night. In the night from
25th to 26th of February 1992 Khodjaly was turned into ashes within
several hours. Sheuhrat was hardly wounded. Kamal Abbasov, his
compatriot discovered him in the mess of the night and began to per-
suade him to stand up and run beyond the bullets.
But Sheuhrat couldn't move. He was bleeding and exhausted and
grasped by the brutal Armenian bandits. They cut his leg and arm and
put out his eye… Then, upon killing Sheuhrat, they found in his pock-
et only the list of the Khodjaly inhabitants… Later the perfidious ene-
mies called this paper as "list of fighters".
A lot of inhabitants including Sheuhrat's near relations were
taken prisoner.
Kamal Abbasov remembers the words said by the hero at the
last meeting: "Tell my family that I'm not afraid of being eaten by
birds or animals. But let them not to leave my corpse for trampling
by enemies…"
In that horrible night the corpses of innocently murdered old men,
women and children were left scattered about the forest and tillage.
Mehriban-khanym, Sheuhrat's wife as well as his daughters
and relatives and Eldaniz Allahverdiyev, chief physician of the
Khodjaly hospital did their best to find Sheuhrat's corpse.
Sheuhrat's daughters Ruhiyya and doctor Almaz couldn't come to
their senses for a long time upon the shocks suffered during the
researches. The corpse was found a month later. Sheuhrat was
buried in the "Uzundara" tract near Aghdam. Mehriban-khanym
couldn't agree remaining her husband's grave there. Thus
Sheuhrat's remains were discharged and reburied in the Martyrs'
Avenue in Baku.
Upon the Order of the President of the Azerbaijan Republic the
glorious son of our people was posthumously rewarded with the
Medal "For Bravery".
He was veritable intelligent patriot and a kind person with gener-
116
ous soul. In his published addresses and literary trials he used to dis-
cover the spiritual treasury of the people as well as its customs and
traditions, struggled for careful attitude to the historical memory and
joint solidarity of the unique Turkish world.
Each time visiting the Sheuhrat Hasanov' s grave in the
Martyr's Avenue I thought with heartache about the tragically cut
short life and untimely faded spring of this
talented person. May you rest in peace,
my dear brother!
A MARTYR WITHOUT
GRAVE
In 1956 the second son was born in
Mirsiyab Huseynov's family. He was
named Bakir. Since childhood Bakir was
distinguished with own judiciousness. He
finished secondary school in Khodjaly and the Agricultural School
in Aghdam. Successfully and worthily rendering military service he
returned to Khodjaly, was accepted to work and became support
to his parents. Later he was invited as director of motor vehicle
base.
While studying in Aghdam he met Nazaket, his future part-
ner in life. They married and established a family living in peace
and agreement. They gained two joys in their family i.e. daugh-
ter and son, Samira and
Samir.
Upon commencement
of the events in Upper
Garabagh nobody of
Khodjaly inhabitants left his
residence or town. The
state was getting worse day
by day. Bakir was enrolled
117
to ranks of self-defense battalion commanded by Tofig, his
brother. There was uninterrupted danger and confrontations day
and night. In the tragic February night Bakir was in the position.
When a mass barrage commenced through the town and the
ring of settling enemies began to get narrower and the unarmed
people was leaving the town Bakir run home and taking His
father Mirsiyab and mother Minash and rushed to forest. The
witnesses say that he tried his parents not lagging behind the
other compatriots; however, due to the severe forest the old
people couldn't move fast. They wore themselves out, got stuck
on roads and frozen… During skirmish with Armenians Bakir
became a martyr. His parents and sister Elza as well as his
brother Tofig, commander of the self-defense battalion and
Makhmar, the latter's wife died.
The Khodjaly tragedy made a lot of residences orphans.
Bakir as well as most of his compatriots fought to the utter-
most and died bravely.
THE FIRST REFUGIES
SETTLED IN KHODJALY
13th of February 1988. The programmed meeting campaign
in Khankendy commenced namely since that day.
It was commencement of black days of Azerbaijan and the
anti-Azerbaijani psychosis resulted in armed aggression and
massacres as well as the massed murders and "ethnic purges".
Commencement of the bloody nationalistic bacchanalia
destroyed the working rhythm of the factories and plants in the
autonomous region, and in particular, enterprises in Khankendy
partially constructed and partially reconstructed in 80-s. Majority
of Azerbaijanies worked at silk complex, shoes-making factory,
conditioner plant and other enterprises. Since commencement
118
of the meetings the Armenians working there expired the work-
ing process and crowded the streets. They commenced striking
and stick up proclamations in the town adding fuel to the fire and
addressing about "low" social and economic state in the region,
suppression of Armenians and with other provocative slogans.
All of these blatant lies had the purpose of "substantiation" of the
necessity of seizure of the autonomy from Azerbaijan and join-
ing in to Armenia. Such a peaceful discontent of Armenians and
planned "protesting" actions might express surprise only on
prima facie.
At that period I used to work as teacher at the Secondary School
No. 6 of Khankendy. Our Armenian colleagues were declaring that
they had nothing againstAzerbaijanies and noArmenianwould touch
or injure them. However, Azerbaijanies were prohibited to come to
work and they weren't paid their salaries.
The Regional Executive Committee of the UGAR took a deci-
sion regarding discharge of the autonomy FROMAzerbaijan and its
junction to Armenia. Armenia reacted with "hospitable" agreement
but the Azerbaijan Supreme Council withdrew fair protesting act.
The Presidium of the Supreme Council of USSR expressed its
opinion to the positions of the both republics in own statement spec-
ifying that it considered remake of the constitutionally established
borders of the Azerbaijan SSR and Armenia SSR as impossible.
But the separatists didn't calm down. The Gorbachov's
Kremlin was watching their "crocodile tears". There were state-
ments of the USSR Supervision regarding the measurements
on normalization of the existing situation and removal of "the
grave disadvantages" as well as development of economy and
culture and increase of welfare of the UGAR toilers (It's notice-
able that the indices of the down living standards in the autono-
my before the Garabagh events weren't lower but sometimes
higher than those on the other regions of Azerbaijan.). The cen-
ter planned establishment of available conditions for expansion
of the relations of the region with Armenia (simultaneously, the
119
separatists cut down the railway movement upon the Aghdam-
Khankendy Branch and blocked the ways to the Azerbaijani set-
tlements.)
In brief, theArmenian separatists had gained carte blanche but the
peaceful Azerbaijanies were sitting at homes as on powder keg…
In autumn of 1988 the national hysteria turned into apogee.
On 18th of September massacres and arson of residences of
Azerbaijani families commenced in Khankendy. The attacks start-
ed at street named after Sabir in direction of Karkydjahan and
Khodjaly.
Assurances of the dreams in "good-neighborliness" and
"peaceful coexistence" were myths and deceits. Azerbaijanies
couldn't imagine that their former neighbors they granted the
Garabagh lands and treated with hospitality to in its time will
become forgetful and thankless human beings and cruel enemies.
In that September night sixteen thousand Azerbaijanies were left
to the mercy of fate. Innocent and unarmed people were exposed
to massacres and murders. The punitive missions were executed
especially by the fighters from Yerevan and Sumgayit skilled at
such affairs.
RemovedAzerbaijanies hid in the surrounding forests for three
days left for Shusha, Khodjaly, Keusalar and Karkidjahan.
The black days of Khodjaly didn't begin yet at that time. All
inhabitants as well as Elman Mammadov, Chief of the Urban
Executive Committee actively participated at the fate of the
wretched refugees. On Elman Mammadov's initiative a big settle-
ment was established for the refugees and obligatory resettlers.
Besides the Khankendy people, the refugees from Armenia as well
as the Mesheti turks removed from Fergana also settled here. In
1990 Khodjaly got status of town and began expanding and large-
scale constructions commenced here. Until the tragic February of
1992 Khodjaly was a shelter for all removed Azerbaijani people of
the UGAR. It was impossible to guess that there will be a day when
the town collapses. During a night hundreds people were murdered
and thousands destinies were destroyed and results of long-year
120
works were collapsed.
The bloody bacchanalia committed by the Armenian separatists
caused massed extirpation and
removal of the Azerbaijani
inhabitants of Upper Garabagh.
The families gaining shel-
ters in Khodjaly and repeated-
ly being deprived of resi-
dences and turning into
refugees keep the sad mem-
ory of those bitter days.
AIDA RZAYEVA-I can-
not remember those days
without ache. The Garabagh
conflict remained a recalcitrant wound in my soul. That time I
worked at the shoe factory in Khankendy. Upon several years of
work I got a room in hostel. Even those years it was very difficult for
Azerbaijani people to get fixed up in a job and gain registration in
Khankendy. I succeeded to get registered very difficultly. But less
than a year later Armenians moved us out of our native lands. On
18th of September 1988 at 9.00 o'clock p.m. Armenians com-
menced massacres at the Sabir street.
At that time I settled at my uncle Eldar's residence. Several fam-
ilies had taken shelter in his residence. The misfortune was noticed
to some instances, however, nobody responded or came to help.
We couldn't crash with my uncle because there were Armenian res-
idences around. We left for forest, to Keusalar tract. It was a horri-
ble nigh full o darkness, shouts, groans and entreaties for help. Near
the morning we reached to Keusalar village.
Several days later I used the lull and returned to own resi-
dence. Nothing remained from it. Everything was robbed and
dresses and documents were burnt.
We settled in Khodjaly i.e got out of the frying pan into the fire.
Everyday Armenians were shooting in the town with cannons.
Narmina Gasymova, my daughter suffering the drudgeries of that
121
night died. Jeyhun, my six-month infant was hardly wounded…
These torments had undermined my
health. I'm a first-group invalid. We found
shelter in Baku… But I live with hope in
and look forward discharge of our lands.
* * *
In Khankendy we lived in the neighbor-
hood with Gambarovs' family, kind and
serene people. The other neighbors were
Armenians. Garsalan-kishi1 and his family
were held in respect of neighbors.
The massacres and slaughters hap-
pened on 18th of September brought all Azerbaijani people to
shock.
Late a night hearing the heart-rend-
ing shouts and excited voices I went out
to balcony.
Garsalan-kishi's residence was sur-
rounded by fire and smoke. Women were
shouting and children were crying.
All residences of Azerbaijani inhabi-
tants also got in fire. We had nothing to do
but to leave the residence because we
cannot expect mercy from the brutal band.
We rushed to the forest in direction of the
Karkydjahan settlement. Hundreds of peo-
ple deprived of residences didn't know what
to do and decide i.e. whether leave the
native places forever or wait for getting
array. At last they chose Khodjaly and set-
tled there.
Armenians were quite trouble of the
constructional works commenced in
Khodjaly since 1988. Settlement of the
refugees from Armenia as well as the
122
Mesheti turks removed from Fergana here
was contrary to the dashnaks' plans of
ethnic purge in the UGAR. So they had
become furious.
But the Khodjaly inhabitants were
taking care of the unhappy refugees.
Their settlement and solution of their
domestic matters were controlled per-
sonally by Elman Mammadov, Chief of
the Executive Power.
Nobody might guess that we would
be exposed to such misfortune and so
many innocent people including the nice Gambarovs' family, my
neighbors in Khankendy would die within several hours…
Two families from the eight destroyed ones were resettlers
from Khankendy. The Gambarovs as well as all refugees losing
residences in the regional had recently settled in Khodjaly and
constructed own residence and it seemed that the life gets better.
But the peaceful life was illusive.
The Gambarovs' family got among the people died during the
February attack of the brutal Armenian armed hordes. Garsalan, the
head of the family, Valida, his wife and the other members of the fam-
ily i.e. Safar, Matanat, Emin, Esmira and Nadir Gambarovs became
victims of the slaughter. Only Rauf and his sister had survived.
* * *
MAMMADOV IBAD
ALYSH OGLU's family lived
at 46th Martuni Street in
Khankendy. The family con-
sisted of the parents, children
and grandchildren. Neither
the head of the family nor
Soltana, his wife or Sheuvkat
and Matanat, their daughter
123
had thought or dreamt the horrible days expected in future.
Armenians they were doting upon trampled on the divided
bread.
On 18th of September during the massacres the Mammadovs'
residence also was burnt. The destitute creatures settled in
Khodjaly and constructed own new residence. They got fixed up
in a job and were engaged in housekeeping, had an orchard and
vegetable garden.
Ibad-kishi outlasting the Great Patriotic war couldn't guess
that he would be exposed to tragedy comparative with the fas-
cist brutalities in the native land. He couldn't bear the shocks
and died four months before the Khodjaly tragedies. In that fatal
night the Ibad-kishi's family together with other ones rushed to
the surrounding forest… But they failed escaping. Old Saltanat
and her son Arif, two daughters and
grandchildren Sabuhi, Salim and Samir
died. They have no grave.
* * *
MAMMADOV ARIF IBAD OGLU
was born in Khankendy. His childhood and
youth also passed here. In nature he was
reserved and sociable fellow. He had mar-
ried to daughter of Alesker-kishi highly
respected in Barda. They had two children
named Fatma and Fuad. Their father had no luck to grow them and
lead to the life.
Upon the massacres in and expatriation from Khankendy he
worked as driver in the textile complex. He had voluntarily been
enrolled to self-defense battalion. He dreamt of end of the unde-
clared war commenced by Armenia and introduction of order in
Garabagh and their return to Khankendy, the native land.
The tragedy of the Khodjaly genocide happened. Arif's corpse
was identified among those strewed in the surrounding forests and
124
fields. Being hardly wounded in fight he bravely died. His orphan
family as well as the near relations have been waiting for discharge
of the Garabagh over ten years and hope that they will bow to his
grave in the Martyrs' Avenue in Aghadm unfortunately being still
under Armenian occupation.
Malahat-khanym talks to Fuad and Fatma about their father,
his glorious life and courage participation
in protection of Khodjaly.
Arif lives in thankful memory.
* * *
GULIYEV OGTAY GULMAMMAD
OGLU was born in Khankendy in 1970.
Finishing school he rendered military serv-
ice in Saratov and returning home got fixed
up in a job and was going to continue edu-
cation without isolation from production.
But the neighbors' perfidy crossed all his plans.
They resided in the "Karpidjly" estate. The family had four brothers.
Gulmammad-kishi, his father was proud of the sons. The follows were
growing as competent, diligent and worthy people feeling the native rela-
tions with Motherland and participation in its fate. The cruel Garabagh
distemper commencing in 1988 opened their eyes to a lot of "games"
backstreet for the time being.
Upon the September massacres in Khankendy the family divid-
ed the destiny of other Azerbaijani compatriots. The residence was
burnt and property was robbed.
Gulmammad-kishi reluctantly removed to Shusha together with
his family and hoped that it would be temporarily.
Till 1992 Shusha was holding out and defended by the local
inhabitants and those settled here. Ogtay Guliyev also had bravely
fought in the ranks of defenders.
Each day the town was exposed to bombardment from reactive
installments and cannons from Khankendy.
In order to besiege the rushing enemies there was held an
125
operation in Dashalty on 25th of January
1990; it was tragic and defenders suffered
great losses.
Ogtay Guliyev died in this military raid.
* * *
GULIYEVRASULGULMAMMADOGLU
is above-mentioned Ogtay's brother. He
was in 1965 and finished school in
Khankendy. He expressed bravery and
courage in defense of Shusha. During
bombardment of the town he was mortally
wounded. His grave is in Shusha.
* * *
ALIYEVASARAASIF GYZY was born
in Khankendy in 1964. Upon finishing school
she entered the Pyatigorsk Institute of
Foreign Language and after graduation from
it she accepted an appointment to the native
town. In 1983-1984 she worked on probation
in Dresden and returning to Khankendy
taught foreign languages. She was involved
in scientific & researching works. Completing the post-graduate
course at the same high school in Pyatigorsk she continued the edu-
cational work in the regional pedagogic institute in Khankendy.
Simultaneously she was working on her dissertation. She was distin-
guished by deep erudition as well as a fit of temper and keenness.
She dreamt to devote herself to science. Upon the September events
she was obliged to remove to Shisha. In 1990 she went to Baku at
last time for having the matter of her scientific work out. She returned
by train till Aghdam but the farther road was blocked by separatists.
The only means of intercourse with Shisha was helicopter. On 28th of
January 1990 the Armenian armed forces shot down a helicopter in
the airspace over Garabagh. 47 people tragically died. Sara-khanym
126
was among the passengers. It was the end
of the talented and worthy daughter of our
Motherland. Her grave is in the Shusha
cemetery.
* * *
RASHIDOV ADIL MAMMAD OGLU
was born in Khankendy in 1941. He fin-
ished a college and worked as account-
ant reviser at the Urban Council. Upon
the September massacres in the regional center Adil moved to
Baku together with his family. Later in order to be closer to the
native lands he settled in Khodjaly and began to work there.
In the horrible February night of 1992 when the town was
exposed to fire and incursion Adil was obliged to hide in a cellar
together with his family. Jalil-kishi, an
inhabitant of Khodjaly being in captivity
says that in the morning after that night
the inhabitants got horrified by the view
of destructions and sites of fire. Adil and
his son Nazim roaming through the
streets of the destroyed town got met
with Armenian bandits. Rejecting to sur-
render unarmed Adil being constricted
of hate and rage came to grips with the
occupants. His son Nazim tried to help
to father. They were shot and fell dead.
25th of February was Nazim's birthday when he got 20 years
old.
127
LAYLA, KHODJALY, LAYLA…1
128
1 Layla - is a refrain in the Azerbaijan national lullabies
2 Novruz - is a national oriental holiday being celebrated in Azerbaijan in the
spring...
129
Zalimkhan Yagub
KHODJALY
Khuraman
130
EYE-WITNESSING
M A R T Y R S
I'M WAITING FOR MY PARENTS
Each inhabitant of Khodjaly may talk to you regarding the
horrors of the terrible February night despite of passing thirteen
years and growth of that-time children. But it's impossible to for-
get those events. It's very difficult and bit-
ter to listen to talks of the children losing
parents and becoming orphans in that
night.
One of these orphans is KHALILOVA
HAMAYIL TAHIR GYZY.
I met her a short after the Khodjaly
tragedy. She was six or seven years old
then. But the view of her thoughts and
maturity of discourses shocked to tear.
"We were three sisters. All of our family
rushed to the forest. My father was hold-
ing my hand. One of the sisters was car-
ried by mother and the other by grandmother. Passing a short
the infants began to cry. It was light like in morning due to the
shells and lighting bullets.
Shells were raining down from the
sky. We could run a far enough when
lost from view my mother and grand-
mother. I was firmly holding my father's
hand. It seemed that that night the
nature was pouring bloody tears. It was
snowing to the forest and the frost was
keen. Sometimes my father released
my hand for firing back. We ran until
the daybreak. Armenians were presid-
132
ing near a high hill. They shot and my father fell down. I sat at
his bedside and ask where was he wounded. He used to call me
"Maty". He said: "No. Maty, I've no ache". But he was lying and
didn't get up. Uncle Kamal ran to us and tried to help my father
to get up but failed. My father asked him: "Take the child away!"
Uncle Kamal held my hand and barely we got away my father
called me: "But you didn't bid farewell to me!" Then he kissed
me in cheek and whispered: "Go away, darling, I'll follow you!" It
was the last moment I spent together with my father."
I had a lump in my throat. How could I console the girl?
Whose endearment could change the father's and mother's heat?
Live and get grown, Hamayil, and bear the sparkle burnt in
your soul by your parents. You've to live instead of your unlucky
parents and near relations.
We've to live for the sake of battle for discharge of our lands.
Our day will come!
HASRAT REMEMBERS
The Khalilovs were known and respected in Khodjaly.
TheGarabagh pandemoniumand the
undeclared war commenced by Armenia
in 1988 deprived Hasrat-khala1 and
Gachay-ami2 as well as all compatriots of
rest and dream.
Gachay Khalilov as well as Tahir and
Yashar, his sons andRashid, his son-in-law
were fighting in ranks of self-defense battal-
ion.
The February night of 1992 remained
recalcitrant wounds and inescapable ache
in hearths of people. Even now, thirteen
133
years later Hasrat-khala cannot save her feeling remembering that
tragic period.
"It was about 11 o'clock p.m. Suddenly the town was
exposed to fires from each sides. We rushed to forest. It was
snowing and frosty. We were shot behind… Running separately
we lost each other. I was apart my husband, son and daughter-
in-law. I was running over thick layer of snow carrying the twen-
ty-days-old grandchild tied to my back. Lala, my four-years-old
grandchild stayed with Zarifa, my daughter-in-law. But Hamayil,
my elder grandchild ran together with Tahir, her father. Suddenly
I slipped and rolled down together with the infant and became in
the bottom of ravine. Upon falling I lost my relatives from view. I
heard shouting, groaning and crying people. It was snowing and
frosty, the forest was thick. Fighters and mercenaries together
with Soviet soldiers from the 366th regiment had laid an ambush
and were murdering unprotected people. We ran through thicket
until the morning. The Aghdam people came to help. The infant
was crying, she wanted milk. My heart felt that she wouldn't see
her parents and she had to be cared of and grown by me."
I reached Aghdam.
Those died and missed were mourned over later. Several
days later I got aware of destiny of my daughter-in-law shot by
butchers. Little Lala thinking that her mother fell asleep covered
her with blanket. Armenians watching it aside shot also in her.
Later I heard that Gachay, my husband had also been killed.
The fiends getting unsatisfied stripped his scalp off, put his eyes
out and mutilated his corpse. Thus, I lost my nears and dears.
On 9th of March I got news about Tahir, my son killed on the road
with burst of sub-machine gunfire. His six-years-old daughter
sat at his bedside as though waiting somebody for help. Then
Kamal saw them and Tahir in his last moment entrusted his
daughter to him…"
This was the tragedy the Khalilovs were exposed to.
Her husband, son, daughter-in-law, two granddaughters
134
and son-in-law were buried in the Martyrs' Avenue in Aghdam…
But at present Aghdam is also under occupation.
BLOODY RECKONING
ABBASOV SALMANMASHADYOGLU was born in 1940.
"Armenians took us prisoner in Pirdjamal village. They shot
without any reason Maryam, my sister and Gulzar, my sister-in-
law (she was in eighth month of pregnancy) as well as more
twenty-five peaceful and unprotected people. We were taken to
rural cattle-shed. They moved out seven fellows and shot them
at our sight. Four of them were Mesheti turks and the rest were
Azerbaijanies. The days of torments and humiliations prolonged.
Everyday we were beaten with sticks and butts. Two wounded
people were killed upon beating.
In the Preliminary Arresting Cell in Askaran anArmenian sol-
dier broke my four ribs with butt. Another one stroke my frozen
and blackened toes and those were broken away. I lost my con-
sciousness."
SALMANOVMAMMADADYSHIRIN OGLU was born in 1952.
"On 27th of February 1992 when I was moving to Aghdam
through the forest I was caught by Armenians. They beat me
with butts, kicks and fists until my falling down. One of them
asked: "But where is your friend?" I left Khodjaly with Tahir and
we lost each other in the forest. I answered: "You should know
it, you had caught him before me." One of the fighters showing
the corpse in bushes: "Look there, isn't that him?"
That was Tahir… They had mutilated him and cut out his
head, ears and other organs…"
HUMBATOV JALIL HUMBATALI OGLU was born in 1934.
"During the massacres in Khodjaly Armenians shot at my
sight Mughan, my son, Sudaba Rashid gyzy, my daughter-in-law
135
and Firuza, my wife."
ABBASOV GADIM MAMMADALI OGLU was born in 1943.
On 26th of February 1992 near to Dahraz village of Askaran
region Armenians took prisoner about hundred and half Khodjaly
inhabitants including Gadim Abbasov. They were moved to farm
and searched on. Golden decorations were taken from women
and money and weapons were taken from men.
On 28th of February women and children were discharged and
sent to Aghdam. Twenty people were chosen among men and
sent to the Preliminary Arresting Cell in Khankendy. Gadim was
among them. During forty-six days he and other Khodjaly people
were exposed to torments. As a result he was paralyzed. On
Gadim's words, everyday about 12 o'clock p.m. five or six
Armenian military servants entered the cell and began to cruelly
baton the prisoners till 4 o'clock a.m. with butts, pistol handles,
sticks and rubber bludgeons.
KARIMOV ABULFAT RASHID OGLU was born in 1960.
He was kept in the same cell together with Gadim. During the
torments his fingers and ribs were broken. They made ten injec-
tions to him and as its result he got nervous disorder and cordial
attacks.
NADJAFOV VUGAR ALI OGLU was born in 1960.
"The women, children and old men taken prisoner together
with us were exposed to torments. Armenians cut off at our sight
the head of Ahmad, Mesheti turk. I was brought to Khankendy and
put into chains in cattle-shed. I was often beaten with crow-bar and
several wounds were committed with knife."
MAHARRAMOV MURAD JAMIL OGLU
"…When the refugees were near to Nakhchivanik village it
was already light and Armenians saw them. They closed the
way to the village with armor machines. Most of the refugees
were women and children, however, Armenians opened a mass
136
barrage…A lot of people were died…After the tragedy when we
flied on helicopter to get the corpses we met horrible image…
Mothers with infants in arms had become victims of slaughter.
There were a lot of cut off ears, fingers and disfigurated faces.
Hands and legs of a burnt corpse were tied with wire. It was
known that he was a Khodjaly inhabitants named Tavakkul…"
SADYGOVAZULEYKHASHAHMALYGYZY was born in 1947.
"We were kept in the prison cell of the regional police section
of Askaran and exposed to torments. We were beaten, kicked,
insulted and humiliated. Prisoners were injected toxic prepara-
tions."
USUBOV RAMIZ HUSEYN OGLU was born in 1943.
"We were neither fed nor given a drink to in the prison cell in
Khankendy, and beaten everyday. They pulled out golden teeth of
Aslanov Gayum, my cellmate. The tall prisoners were obliged to
fall to knees far easily beating on face. One of the prisoners had
bullet wound which was later inflamed and due to absence of care
he died."
AGHAYAROV YUNIS BEHBUD OGLU was born in 1930
"I was kept in the regional police section of Askaran without a
dress, bread and water and in case of giving a piece of bread it was
profaned with spit… Everyday we were beaten with sticks and rub-
ber bludgeons. Prisoners were made injections as if against dis-
eases. All of them died. Me and Mirza Allahverdiyev were exposed
to pulling out our golden tooth crowns with common fork and the
entire teeth were smashed with fist.
The son and daughter of Jabbar-kishi, Khodjaly inhabitants
also were taken prisoner. When the fellow reacted to the
Armenian for humiliation of honor he was brought down and his
head was cut off."
HADJIYEV GANAAT MAMMADALI OGLU was born in 1937.
"… They chose thirteen of us and took to Khankendy. We
were kept half-clothed and half-starving at police section in
137
rooms without windows. Almost everyday I was beaten with rub-
ber bludgeons, kicked with heels on head, stroke on body and
hands with bar having prominent nails. The traces of tortures are
remained also on legs. Gadim Abbasov, Elbrus Abbasov and
Ramiz Yusifov also were exposed to such humiliations and tor-
ments. When we were kept in cellar of a five-storied building in
Khankendy at my sight Armenians on a bender chopped hand of
fifteen-years-old fellow and then cut him with knife. I had wit-
nessed when butchers disemboweled one prisoner women and
put there an alive cat…"
NAGHIYEV MAMMAD AGHALAR OGLU was born in 1953.
"Thirteen people being kept under arrest together with me
were taken out the premise and shot beyond with gunfire."
‘
PASHAYEVA KUBRA ADIL GYZY was born in 1938.
"… I was wounded in left arm and leg on the edge of the
"Katik" forest tract. Armenians got us into ring. I hid in bushes.
At my sight Armenians killed my husband Shura Tofig oglu and
my son Elshad with gunfire… Then they found me and took pris-
oner together with other brought to the police station of Askaran
and located in its cellar. Till present I see at my sight the cut off
heads of forty soldiers of our National Army being taken prison-
ers. During imprisonment in the cellar Armenians separated
young girls from near relations and brought to unconsciousness
beating their heads to wall… They starved prisoners and even
didn't give water to children groaning from thirst. Every evening
they chose the next victims for mortal reprisals…"
ABYSHOV INTIZAM NIYAZ OGLU was born in 1970.
"While being hostage in the police section of Askaran region
I was repeatedly exposed to torments. Drunk Armenians
entered the cell and commenced to beat us without any reason
with rubber bludgeons until loss of consciousness. Then they
nodulized us with cold water in the frost for returning conscious-
138
ness and continued beating. They kept us hungry and thirsty in
cold premises. Ilham and Ilgar, my brothers as well as Saadat
and Ibrahim-kishi, other Khodjaly inhabitants also were exposed
to such tortures."
ABYSHOV ILGAR NIYAZ OGLU was born in 1964.
"We were brought to the police section of Askaran region.
There we met previously caught Natig. He was beaten and mutilat-
ed. On the eighth day the Armenian guard told my brother: "I don't
like you, thrust out your head". My brother did and his head was cut
out."
HUSEYNOV ELGIZ CHINGIZ OGLU was born in 1978.
"We were stuffed into rural shop and more people were
prought. Three of them were soldiers from Baku and I remember
also Alesker-muallim1 and Hasan. The latter was wounded, howev-
er, he was cruelly beaten by an Armenian named Maxim. When we
were in building of a special building in Khankendy the military com-
missar of Askaran region in rank of captain threatened us and got
our golden things. He often beat us. Armenians took a hostage
named Vidadi to cemetery and returning declared that they had cut
his head off."
ALLAHVERDIYEV MIRZA SALEH OGLU was born in 1952.
"As soon as I was taken hostage Armenians beat me with butts
and kicks. One of them strike a stone on my hand with such strength
that I lost my consciousness. Regaining consciousness I found
myself in a water puddle in lavatory. They took me from there and
again beat with sticks and bludgeons and threw me into a cell where
were twelve Khodjaly inhabitants. I realized that I was in the police
section of Askaran region. They broke my ribs, knocked out my teeth
with fist and plucked out the golden crowns with knife. Upon sever-
al days of torments I was taken to Noraguk village and thrown to cel-
lar of a shed. Keeping me in this deep-freezer a day they threw hay
instead of mats. Everyday upon afternoon two or three Armenian
139
came and taking me up cruelly beat. Signs of these strikes remained
on my head, arms and thorax…"
MAMMADOV SUREN HEYDAR OGLU was born in 1942.
"While being in captivity I witnessed a lot of murders of
Azerbaijanies by Armenians."
AZIZOV ARIF GUDRAT OGLU was born in 1956.
"Armenians taking my father prisoner exposed him to blows
and deprived him of sight and shot him in back. As a result my
father died in 1995."
ASLANOV GAYUM BAHRAM OGLU was born in 1939.
"Being kept in the cell of the police station of Khankendy every-
day I was exposed to blows by the Armenian military servants.
They plucked out my four teeth and broke eight ribs, and strikes on
my head remained a crack on my skull. Bodies of several captives
were entirely covered by wounds. They were kept in sinister condi-
tions. Wearing military boots on hands Armenians were beating the
captives with them. The blows were so strong that we didn't believe
that we would survive. All these brutalities were committed in dark-
ness."
SALIMOVA NANASH SAMED GYZY was born in 1930.
As a result of the occupation of Khodjaly five of her children
had become victims of brutal slaughters. These were Fakhraddin,
Araz, Mikayil, Shahla and Khumar as well as Bahadur Mikayil oglu,
her husband killed by bandits in forest.
Nanash herself together with her sons and daughters (her
daughter Shahla was with her three infants) were caught by
Armenians nearby Askaran; at the sight of unhappy mother her son
Araz was chopped into pieces and she was obliged to eat her son's
flesh.
Keeping in a farm for three days she was exchanged.
AMIROVA KHAZANGUL TAVAKKUL GYZY was born in 1983.
140
During occupation of Khodjaly her family was taken prisoner.
Her mother Raya and seven-years-old sister Geuycha were shot.
At the sight of children their father Tavakkul was tied to tree and
beaten with reinforce, then was poured with petrol and burnt.
TALYBOVA AGHDJA ALKHAN GYZY was born in 1910.
During occupation of Khodjaly she witnessed that on the road
to Khankendy ten people of peaceful inhabitants were brutally
beheaded.
MUSTAFAYEVA BANEUVSHA IBRAHIM GYZY was born in
1955.
"… When the residences in Khodjaly were burnt I seized
Alima, my one-and-a-half-year-old daughter and run out.
Everything was in fire and smoke. Women were shouting and chil-
dren were crying. My husband Rza excitedly returned from post-
office and we took the children and rushed to forest. In a hurry we
failed to take overcoat and it was terrible to return for them. We
joined to crowd and passed the Gargar river, got in ploughed field
and at last, reached the edge of the "Katik" forest tract. Suddenly
I dropped the child on a spiny bush; thorns scratched her face and
she began to howl noisily. But any noisy sound might betray every-
body. Several men went out of the rank of refugees and required
those having infants in the arm to constrict them. I was in despair.
Seeing my state Rza ran up to me, seized the infant and pressed
her head to his bosom for ceasing her howl.
Men were moving ahead shooting back. Women were trying to
calm the crying children.
A half an hour later we kept on moving. In the morning we
reached a highway and got ambushed there. My son Vagif and
later Rza were shot…
I desperately embraced my infant and moved ahead trying not
to lag behind the thinning out crowd of refugees.
Passing a great interval we reached the forest when we
remained 250 or 300 people. In the forest we were taken prisoner.
141
Armenians firstly separated the soldiers of the National Army from
the crowd, took them to slope of mountain and shot them a sight
of everybody. Husbands and sons of refugees were among the
soldiers.
Suddenly a burst of sub-machine gunfire commenced behind
the trees. The bullets were flying into the butchers. The avenger
was Araz Salimov, our soldier. Araz's mother and sister also were
among the captives… then the Armenians cumulated all refugees
and threw a grenade into their heap. It was a horror seeing the fly-
ing mutilated parts of human bodies.
I lost my consciousness. Regaining comprehension I glanced
back and saw my infant ten meters beyond me. Explosion of the
grenade cut off my breast and Alima's heel.
Those survived were kicked and beaten with butts. Ears got
deaf of the harrowing shouts. Chief of this band was a person
named Samuel. He was threatening us: "I have to inflict such a
reprisal to you for your remembering all over your life".
There was an old man with infant in arms. He was taken away
and shot together with the child. One of the women seeing her
husband among the corpses tried to cover his face but Armenians
caught her on hairs and began to trail.
Then they commenced to rummage the woman and take their
decorations, watches, bracelets and necklaces. They humiliations
and torments were so hard that Khumar Salimova begged them
through the tears: "You killed my brothers, please, kill me, too!" But
Armenians answered: "No, we won't kill you but enjoy with your
groaning. My name's Samuel. You have to remember me as per-
son tormenting you such." Launching his fists and kicks Samuel
said: "Why you hadn't left Khodjaly yet? We had required you for
four years to leave while you're still in one peace."
Rummaging us they found a knife on an old person hid in his
boot. The old man was together with his little grandson. He was
shot together with the child. Then they threw a grenade on their
corpses and those were torn into peaces. Al last, leaving the
wounded and maimed people unable to move and stand they took
142
others to the captivity camp in Askaran…"
THE FATE OF AN ENTIRE KIN
Shukur Mammadov's family was in rank of the famous and
founding surnames in Khodjaly. Till the Garabagh events they
lived happy and peaceful. The elder Mammadovs had seen a lot
in their life. They heard a lot about the treachery and periodical
brutalities of the "long-suffering" neighbors from their fathers
and grandfathers.
When about 90-s of the last century the "Garabagh game"
was commenced the wise Khodjaly inhabitants realized that
Armenians are preparing a new perfidious plan. But even the
experienced old people couldn't guess that
the Armenians settled here might move
them from native lands and residences.
BAKIR MAMMADOV, a representa-
tive of intellectuals well-known not only in
Khodjaly but entire Garabagh says:
"Those tragic days I lost my brothers and
near relations. My brother Vagif's family
was entirely destroyed. In that horrible
night Vagif together with his wife Afila and
sons Jeyhun, Azer and Niyamaddin as well
as other Khodjaly inhabitants rushed to the surrounding forest.
All of them were killed in the forest.
Ogtay, my second brother defending his family with a sin-
gle-barrel gun fought until the last bullet. He destroyed several
attacking Armenians but the enemy succeeded to take him pris-
oner. The Armenian woman the sons of which were killed by
Ogtay shot in him with gun. I was informed regarding it by the
Khodjaly inhabitants being captive in Khankendy. My uncle
143
ALIYEV EYUB SARY OGLU, my father-in-law MAMMAD-
KISHI and mother-in-law BAGHDAD-KHALA were killed in that
fatal night. Their corpses haven't been buried yet. My father
SHUKUR ISMAYIL OGLU and mother ABUZANDA SARY
GYZY had sunk into the grave due to the suffered shocks and
grieves. I have a lot of relatives from Khodjaly which fate is
unknown yet.
Till present we succeeded to achieve discharge of our
Garabagh from the Armenian occupants. The soul of dead peo-
ple and memory of martyrs never leave me in peace.
In order to keep the memory of the Khodjaly tragedy and
notify its realities to the world society I have organized a
Khodjaly charitable society. In the cellar of my residence in Baku
at 22nd Nasiraddin Tusi street I have established a museum of
"The memory of Khodjaly", collected martyrs' photos as well as
documents and articles published in various times and made a
stand from them. I do my best and will go on until my last breath.
Every year I hold arrangements concerning to the Khodjaly
tragedy under the aegis of charitable society.
144
The "Memory"
Society has consti-
tuted a diploma of
Alif Hadjiyev,
National Hero of
A z e r b a i j a n .
Several activists
distinguishing in
realization of our
arrangements and
expansion of infor-
mation regarding
the Khodjaly
tragedy have been
rewarded with this
diploma.
We have com-
memorated the tragic date of 26th February for twelve years. We
don't lose our hope in the future and believe that our lands will
be discharged from occupants!"
145
SALATYN AHMADOVA'S SECOND LIFE
In January of 1991 despite of
the already commenced account
of victims and losses war and
peace were in vicinity to each
other and the troubling presenti-
ments still were unable to sup-
press the naive hope regarding
introduction of order and triumph
of justice.
Salatyn Askarova, a journalist
gaining fame with own correspon-
dences and reports from points of
fire and brave patriot came to
Khodjaly those days. Alif
Hadjiyev, the Chief of Airport
together with his employees met
her in the airport. During the negotiations Salatyn asked from
Elmar, a young policeman: "Do you have children?" Elmar
answered: "I have two daughters and the third child is expect-
ed." Salatyn laughed: "If a boy is born call him Jeyhun as my son
and if a girl is born call her as me."
Elmar's third daughter was born on 12th of July. She was
named Salatyn… But the journalist wasn't lucky to see the new-
born namesake… On 9th of January 1991 moving through a
mountain road nearby Gala-deresi village of Shusha on a car
she and the military servants in the car were ambushed by
Armenian bandits. The burst of sub-machine gunfire ceased the
life of the courageous patriot and talented journalist. She was
posthumously conferred with rank of the National Hero.
Little Salatyn was growing aware of nothing and surrounded
146
by parental caress and endearment.
Dark clouds were gathering over Khodjaly. The inhabitants
were repulsing the attack of the impudent enemy and vainly
requiring support from the Republican Supervision.
February was very cold and rich of snow. Power supply was
uninterruptedly ceased. Incursions and shootings got often. The
misfortune was reaching…
MUSHGUNAZ AHMADOVA remembers: We, women
took children and hid in cellars. Seeing that the state is getting
more dangerous we got out and rushed to the flood-lands of the
Gargar river. On the way we could turn to the post-office and call
to Aghdam and Baku. Nobody responded to our requirements of
help. The only rescue was in forest. We moved there. We were
more than two hundred people. We couldn't let out a squeak for
fear. But how to calm the infants in arms? Hearing the children's
crying Armenians were shooting that side. People were
remained bleeding on snow. Old men, children and fighters of
the self-defense battalion were among us. We didn't know
where we were moving in the darkness and thickness of forest.
Hearing the voices of howling hungry children Armenians were
shooting from sniper guns and riffles. My infant was howling and
I couldn't calm her. This howling meant death of many people
and new victims. I got crazy from despair and constricted my
own child I born with my own frozen fingers… Firstly I decided
to leave the swaddled breathless body under a bush but didn't
dare and tying her to back I moved again. We moved for two
days eating snow and lost the way in the thicket. The third day
Armenians found us and took prisoners. We were moved to
Dahraz village. The self-defending fighters and old men were
kept but a part of the people was discharged upon negotiations
with our side. Mahira-khala being in front of me suddenly said
that day: "Your baby is moving". I didn't believe but opening the
swaddle with great difficulty I saw my little blackened Salatyn
moving… It was a miracle. I quickly gave her my breath but
147
there wasn't milk because I had been hungry for three days.
Realizing that my infant is alive my heart softened but fear and
trouble were keeping me hesitating because I didn't know what
will happen further. But in my soul I decided not to abandon the
child even in case of death.
My husband Elmar died that night. The third day of captivity
most of us were discharged. Others were taken somewhere by
Armenians separating mother from child and brother from sister.
The forth day we reached Gulably village. We were taken to
the Aghdam hospital. Armenians exposed this hospital to shoot-
ings from "Alazan" Reactive Devices and in the night we were
located in residences. My legs were frozen. Physician said that
unless taking such patients to Baku opportunely it would be nec-
essary to amputate the legs. My constricted infant starving for
four days was in a sorry plight.
Me and Salatyn were sent to Baku and had been treated
and cared for three months. The emergency physicians treated
my leg and returned life to my Salatyn."
Years passed from that period. Salatyn living her second life
are grown and studies in fifth level. She already knows regard-
ing the horrible events happened that night. Tofig Mutallibov and
Pasha Galbinur had devoted a poem to her. The girl perfectly
declaims and likes music and poetry. She studies also at musi-
cal school.
We wish health and clear sky and happy future to young
Salatyn. Let she be worthy to the glorious name of journalist
Salatyn Askarova and grow as brave patriot for her mother's joy
and devote herself to serving the people.
148
RETROSPECTION: YEAR OF 1967
ALLAHVERDIYEV MUBARIZ
GASYM OGLU was born in Khodjaly in
1942. Graduating from the Medical
Institute in Baku in 1966 he was appoint-
ed to the UGAR as a young specialist.
"Taking the appointment document
I came to the Health Department of the
UGAR but couldn't get a job. I was
obliged to wait for two months. I
appealed to the Ministry of Health of
Azerbaijan regarding my appointment
and got an answer that they couldn't interfere the affairs of the
UGAR. I had to wait more. Upon several time I appealed to the
Regional Health Department again and upon the long inquiries I
was appointed to far Nakhchivanik village. I had worked there
for a year. Then I was recalled and sent to business-trip and
upon returning I was notified that my post was reduced. I
became unemployed again.
In 1967 the situation in Garabagh glowed. Azerbaijanies
were afraid of getting out or go to town. Armenians commenced
very perilous provocation accusing quite innocent Azerbaijani
teacher in death of an Armenian child. The excitements
strengthening by deceitful accusations brought to that three
Azerbaijani people called to the case but guilt of which wasn't
proved were burnt by furious crowd in a "black funnel". This
cruel lynch law left a hard impression on the Azerbaijani people
residing in the UGAR. Information from Khankendy became
very difficult and risky. I suffered a lot of crosses at that period.
I appealed to the Regional Health Department again and was
pinged-pong to work at the farm. Perhaps, it was hardest and
149
most horrible in my life demanding courage. Everyday I was
obliged to ride to farms in Kosalar, Ballydja, Khazanak, Jamilly
and other villages. Upon two-month work I was sent to business-
trip again and returning became reduced on my post."
Remark: It was the fate of all Azerbaijani young specialists
sent to the UGAR on official appointment. The circumlocution
with employment and scare away of Azerbaijani staffs realizing
by the local powers and Armenian functionaries in the
autonomous region had a certain purpose blending with the
plans of "Armenization" of the ethnic staff of the inhabitants. The
covert or evident discrimination caused outflow of Azerbaijanies
from the Upper Garabagh, their native land.
MUBARIZ ALLAHVERDIYEV: "Then I on a traveling
ambulance car. The car was a fleapit. I held this post for four
months. No patient was found for me. I came again to Baku,
appealed to the Ministry of Health and heard the same answer:
"But we told you that we're not entitled to give instructions to them."
At last I got ensured that Armenians wouldn't allow me work
here as a physician. In 1968 I left the UGAR forever and went to
Turkmenistan. I was met there honorably and less than a week
later I was assigned as head physician of the "Leningrad"
kolkhoz."
The young physician becoming unsuitable in native
Garabagh got fixed up in a job abroad. But he couldn't forget
native Khodjaly and dreamt to return. He began to search ways
and, at last, in 1969 he got an invitation telegram to post of
teacher of the chair of anatomy of the Medical Institute in Baku.
At that period the Republic was led by Heydar Aliyev. Since
that time creative works commenced in the Republic: young
specialists were held in special care and attention.
Working at the chair Mubariz Allahverdiyev wrote a thesis
and defended it. At present he continues his pedagogical and
scientific activity as a docent of the chair.
150
ALLAHVERDIYEV ELDANIZ GASYM oglu was born in
Khodjaly in 1953. Upon finishing the secondary school here he
gained higher education in the Azerbaijan State Medical Institute
in 70-s. Successfully graduating from the Treating & Prophylactic
Faculty of the Institute he was appointed
to work in the Upper Garabagh. It was a
problematic and rather an impossible
matter for Azerbaijani staffs to get fixed
up in a job in the UGAR. Armenians had
all efforts for preventing from flow of our
compatriots to the autonomous region.
The physician Eldaniz Allahverdi-
yev says:
I had seen at first hand my brother
Mubariz long-suffered while working in
Upper Garabagh. This problem was
troubling me since the studentship years. In 1977 I got appoint-
ment to Garabagh…My parents' fond dream was my assign-
ment as physician in native Khodjaly. When I submitted the
appointment document to the Health Department of the UGAR
they told me: "We haven't any vacant post for you yet". Several
months later I was accepted to work on ambulance. Further I
was passed to Askaran region as the head physician to the
medical point. Armenians expressed rapt interest to my works
and patents, progress of treatment and written prescriptions. I
realized that they watch my each step. I treated to my medical
obligations with great responsibility. I was gaining experience as
a young specialist and learning Armenian language.
When they were spoken to not in Armenian language they
expressed obvious negligence. Half a year later I already could
consort with patients in Armenian language.
In 1982-1983 the state in the Upper Garabagh commenced
to glow. Upon Heydar Aliyev's promotion to the higher post in
Moscow Armenians committed petty cares. They restored own
151
former plans and intensions they cherished a long ago.
At that time a new polyclinic was being constructed inAskaran and
I hoped to get a post of head physician there. But Armenians including
theAdministration ofAskaran region set up a clamor that exclusively an
Armenian person should by the head physician of theAskaran polyclin-
ic and "turk" cannot gain such a post… Because head physician is a
noticeable figure to be remained in medical annals but "turk" is entitled
to remain in history. In brief, my envisaged appointment was changed
to the regional polyclinic. But before I had a time to work there for a few
period the head physician called and hurl a shocking accusation onme:
"You have gathered Azerbaijanies around yourself and established an
organization…" He transferred me to the reception department of the
regional hospital. I had to work here "fighting" from 1985 to 1988...At last,
in 1988 the provoked Garabagh events commenced. These were the
most strained and repressive days for Azerbaijanies residing in the
U p p e r
G a r a b a g h .
Everyday I was
maltreated and
asked at work:
"Why don't you
get away?" I
was obliged to
go to the
regional center and return to Khodjaly; our car was thrown
stones. In 1990 I passed to work in Shusha. A short later the
Ministry of health transferred me to Khodjaly region. I worked
there till the last fatal day… I personally witnessed the torments
of the peaceful Khodjaly inhabitants and the tragic fate of victims of
the genocide…"
152
YAGUT ALLAHVERDIYEVA,
Mubariz's sister graduating from the
Azerbaijan State Medical Institute as
well as her brother, Eldaniz
Allahverdiyev has own history:
"In 1983 I came to the UGAR on
appointment. My specialization is eye-
surgeon. I had to wait a long until assign-
ment as oculist to the maternity house. I
witnessed violent attitude of Armenians to
my brother Mubariz and Eldaniz as well
as numerous other Azerbaijani people.
That's why since the commencement of work I had sense of con-
trol and jaundice. Although patients weren't much by most of them
were examined by Armenian patients. The prescriptions written by
me were exposed to repeated control.
The Azerbaijani physicians were very few in the maternity
house. Despite of our zeal and responsible attitude to obligations
the kind words were always addressed exclusively to theArmenian
personnel.
In the fifth year of this troubling controlled work the provoked
Upper Garabagh campaign commenced. The attitude to us was
evidently fastidious and hateful. I was exposed to repeated
attacks but was bearing and working. I bore till 1989. The state
glowed utterly. Azerbaijani people were murdered, moved off the
work and their residences were burnt. The central power of the
Republic had left us to the mercy of fate.
In 1989 I left for native Khodjaly. At that time the town was blocked
and exposed to shootings and attacks. People got wounded everyday
protecting the town. I already acted as military physician. Khodjaly
inhabitants were fighting. Everybody able to catch weapon was defend-
ing the town. We had resisted to armed aggressions for four years. At
last, the horrible massacres committed by the Armenian butchers on
26th of February 1992 made me refugee as well as my thousands com-
patriots. Till present we live as refugees in own Motherland."
153
T R U T H I S
I MMORTAL
ELMAN MAMMADOV is a
Parliament Deputy. He was born in
Khodjaly in 1950 and his specialty is
mathematician pedagogue. We was
teacher and head-master of secondary
school and used to have other leading
posts. He led the Executive Power in
Khodjaly at the difficult period when the
town was exposed to misfortune.
The Khodjaly inhabitants consid-
ered Elman-muallim as a wise person,
protector and intercessor regardless of his posts. He always
lived with thoughts and aspirations of compatriots and cares of
the native people.
From 1988 to 1992 he fought against the Armenian nation-
alists together with his compatriots and had battle against the
armed bands occupying our lands.
Upon occupation of Khodjaly had efforts each day and night
and searched ways and opportunities for providing shelters and
refuges for the wretched compatriots. The tragedy spread the
refugees through forty-eight regions of the Republic. Those hard
days it was impossible to contact to Khodjaly inhabitants and
render an aid to them in settlement of social and domestic prob-
lems and morally support them. It demanded not only intension
of force and energy but also having a great heart of real patriot.
Elman-muallim is one of such patriotic sons of the
Motherland.
The Chief of the Executive Power had often been to busi-
ness trips. He met compatriots in each region and had long-time
negations getting acquainted with their need and demands pay-
ing attention even to miserable requirements. He did his bests
for settlement of problems and went to another region. He had
155
kind words and consolation for each person; he inspired hope
and belief in return to the native lands and residences. Hope in
tomorrow is a great power.
In 2000 the people expressed a great trust in Elman
Mammadov and he was elected as Deputy of Milli Madjlis,
National Meeting of the Azerbaijan Republic. As a Deputy he
expanded the scopes of own social and politic activity.
At present he issues the truth of the tragic events to the pub-
lic of far countries i.e. Europe, America and Asia. The voice of
the son of Khodjaly land sounds from tribunes of foreign parlia-
ments. The truth of Khodjaly as well as the aggressive policy of
Armenia as an occupant state gets discovered for thousands
people owing to efforts of the Deputy for the sake of own com-
patriots and entire Azerbaijan. Besides the large-scale activity
Elman-muallim finds a time for meeting compatriots and getting
interests in their needs for rendering moral and other supports.
FATMA AKTASH is the President
of the Fund of Eurasian, Turkish,
Azerbaijanian and Caucasian Women.
She lives in Holland since two years old.
The roots of her kin are connected to
Garabagh. At the beginning of the last
century her parents were obliged to
leave Garabagh. A long ago she had
heard from her grandmother a talks
about massacres and butcheries com-
mitted by Armenians resettled in
Garabagh against the native inhabitants.
FATMA-KHANYM says: "Aslihan-khanym, my grand-
mother had lived in Shusha for half a century. She had told me
that Shusha is one of the most beautiful and miraculous points
of Azerbaijan owing to its natural conditions, climate and geo-
graphical location. She remembered through heartache regard-
156
ing the butcheries committed in Garabagh at the beginning of
the 20th century as well as the torments suffered by our people.
I have never seen Shusha but upon mentioning about Garabagh
and Shusha everybody in our family gains sorrow for the
Motherland of our ancestors. We living abroad is troubled by
pains of native Garabagh and expatriation of the Azerbaijani
inhabitants by Armenians.
It's February now. Each year we meet this month with
heartache. A day before the Khodjaly tragedy I dreamt of
Aslihan-khanym, my dead granny. She was telling me: "Get up,
join your hands and don't let the enemy to pass!"
The next day we heard about the Khodjaly genocide. This
tragedy shocked us, Azerbaijanies living in Holland. We held a
demonstration in the morning and explained the people we saw
and met that Armenia had committed an aggression against
Azerbaijan and massed massacre of people in Khodjaly…
Nowadays we continue our activity in this direction. I had
submitted numerous documents concerning the Khodjaly
tragedy to several commissions of the Holland Parliament. We
try to achievement the real assessment of the Khodjaly geno-
cide. For this purpose it's necessary to make respective legal
documents and send it to all Parliaments all over the world. If all
of us i.e. compatriots living abroad join our efforts we would
make a step ahead in direction of settlement of the Garabagh
problem. We have to do a lot for introduction of the world socie-
ty with the Khodjaly genocide.
May the Khodjaly martyrs rest in peace! I bow again to their
memory."
157
MALAHAT HASANOVA, Deputy
of Parliament, physician and political
scientist.
"Khodjaly isn't only our national ache
but in my opinion, it's also a tragedy of a
general human significance. My profes-
sion is a pediatrist physician. Considering
the certifications of the horrible murder-
ous deeds and corpses of innocently and
brutally killed children I pour tears even remembering this event…
I have to often be abroad due to my occupation. Regardless
the places of my business-trips I put to attention of foreign citi-
zens and auditory a truth of vandalism committed by the
Armenian occupants against the peaceful Azerbaijani inhabi-
tants in Khodjaly in February of 1992. The world must know the
trust of the Armenian aggression and have effort for curbing
aggressors.
The world must admit the Khodjaly tragedy. This tragic date
has to be commemorated in the international scope and monu-
ments have to be erected to the victims of the Khodjaly tragedy.
Let the future generation know the crimes committed by the
Armenian dashnaks at the end of the 20th century.
It's bleeding wound of our historical meaning for us,
Azerbaijani people.
People of all countries and continents have to join in fight
against bloodshed and expansionism. The Armenian occupants
committing the Khodjaly massacres and their protectors have to
reciprocate to the International Court. I do and will declare this
tragedy everywhere as a woman and mother…
Furthermore, the Khodjaly tragedy had made orphans a lot
of children. The fate of the orphans being deprived of maternal
care as well as residences must trouble not only Azerbaijan but
158
also all countries and all people of the world. Everywhere, in all
my meetings, negotiations and addresses I appeal to my col-
leagues as well as public figures, parliamentarians and leaders
of states to protect the peace all over the world.
The Khodjaly tragedy hasn't to be repeated!"
ATAKISHI ATAKISHIYEV, the
ex-prosecutor of Khodjaly town.
"At the last century the Azerbaijan
people were exposed to great misfor-
tunes. Our perfidious neighbors always
were waiting for an opportunity for appro-
priation of Garabagh, a miraculous land
of Azerbaijan. Armenian had occupied
our lands several times. At last our
blessed land was entirely occupied and
the peaceful people became martyrs or
refugees."
Each time remembering the Khodjaly massacre I feel as one
of the martyrs… How couldn't we protect Khodjaly from those
people? But the misfortune had been expected for four years.
The Khodjaly people had known no rest day and night. Is it pos-
sible to forget the bitter trials of the history and the tragedies
happening before? How couldn't we guess that the Armenian
butcher armed to the teeth and those paid abroad as well as the
366th shooting regiment supporting the dashnak host and having
Armenian officers as commanding personnel will make the ring
of blockade around the town narrower and expose it to fires?
Till present we failed to achieve admission of Armenia as an
aggressor state committing ethnic purge at the occupied land in
the expense of murdering women, children and old people. The
Armenian butchers murdering the unprotected refugees and
crushing those wounded and dying as well as committing mas-
sacres and depriving the local people of the right of life, the most
159
saint human right have to stand in front of the International
Justice!
The time will commit own justice!
The memory of the innocent Khodjaly martyrs will remain
forever. These tragedies must become the use for future.
Despite of the passing twelve years there is still a lot of matters
needing to be clarified as well as spoken and written about.
I bow to the memory of Khodjaly martyrs and wish the
remaining people to stand firm, hope and believe."
HAGIYA NAKHCHYVANLY,
Doctor of Political Sciences.
"On 26th of February 1992 it was out-
wardly and comparatively quietly in Baku.
The Azerbaijani TV declaring about death
of only three people in Khodjaly premedi-
tatedly led astray the society. However,
several days later we heard the horrible
news regarding the events. Khodjaly was
razed to the ground and a great majority of
people was murdered. Remembering
those events I feel as if they had happened recently. Everyday the
hospitals were receiving wounded and maimed people. We visited
the wretched people and tried to calm and console them. I was
shocked by the facts heard from the Khodjaly inhabitants I consort-
ed in hospital. The Armenian bandits were fighting against children,
women and old people brutally destroying them. The butchers of
the "Golden Empire" committed a massacre in Baku on 20th of
January 1990, but, they failed to subdue the will of our people to
fight. The Khodjaly tragedy was continuation of the slaughters hap-
pened in Baku in January having the same soviet militarist compo-
nent. During the bloody action committed in Khodjaly the Armenian
armed bands acting together with the forces of the 366th shooting
regiment turned the town into ashes and slaughtered the inhabi-
tants. Khodjaly used to suffer a lot of misfortunes before, however,
160
it had possibly never been exposed to such a cruel brutality. The
Armenian fascism isn't inferior to the "black death".
The wretched Khodjaly inhabitants suffers hard days of wan-
dering but our fight goes and must go on. We have to declare the
truth of the Khodjaly genocide all over the world. The world must
see the real face of the Armenian nationalists.
Our people will never forget this tragedy."
MUSA GULUZADE, historian scientist, literati
"Down the centuries wars had
caused disasters and tragedies to peo-
ple. Probably, the term "war" is the most
horrible one. A war promises bloodshed,
destructions, death of human beings
and cease of lives. The mankind had
always stood against war.
The Azerbaijan people are pacific on
nature and had never attacked to anoth-
er people or hankered after alien lands.
However, unfortunately, Armenians
we located in the territories of our
Motherland in olden times had traitorously assailed against us.
The Armenian troops supported by foreign protectors invaded to
Azerbaijan and turned a lot of our towns and villages into ruins.
Thousands sons and daughters of our Motherland got murdered
or remained invalids forever during the Garabagh war. On 26th of
February 1992 the Armenian occupants committed the Khodjaly
massacre, razed the town to the ground as well as sometime
happened to Khatyn, Lidyce, Hiroshima, etc. the historians fair-
ly align the dashnaks' brutalities with fascists' villainies.
The Khodjaly tragedy is the most horrible one our people
was exposed to and a recalcitrant and eternally unforgettable
wound. The world has to know the instigators and the truth of this
tragedy. Despite of the said or written facts about the Khodjaly
161
genocide it's impossible to put a dot in this page of history.
The term "Khodjaly" must sound as disquieting tocsin for the
entire mankind. The memory of this disaster has to be personi-
fied in grief monuments.
The world must achieve stability and make the weapon
silent everywhere. Peace of a necessary condition of life.
Instigators of wars and bloodshed have to meet all possible
repulses and accusations.
As representatives of the Azerbaijani intelligence we sum-
mon the people of the planet to join in fight for peace and raise
the voice of protest against war.
Only upon solidary efforts and vigilance of peoples as well
as protection of general human values it would be possible to
prevent from repeat of tragedies like the Khodjaly one. We try
and fight namely for this purpose."
162
E C H O
OF TRAGEDY
Alamdar Gulu-zadeh
KHODJALY,
YOU'RE MY GRIEF
164
1 Gyrkhgyz - is a village in Garabagh
2Gargar - is a river in Garabagh
3 Gopuz - is an ancient oriental stringed musical instrument
165
4 Khurdjun - is a knitted sack for carrying on shoulder
Ali Vekil
THE
DIED TOWN
( e x c e r p t f r om poem )
166
167
COMMENT OF THE
"SECRET INFORMATION"
BY COLONEL V. SAVELYEV
Colonel Armaik Mamukyan, the head of the press-service of
the Ministry of National Safety of Armenia asserts that there's a
Azerabijani captive neither in Khankendy nor in the entire territo-
ry of the Upper Garabagh as well as Yerevan. But the letter
addressed to UNO by Vladimir Romanovich Sevelyev, Colonel of
the Main Reconnaissance Board of the Russian Federation on
16th of December 2000 specifies the number of the captives and
camp zones in the territory of Armenia.
The "Jianak" Newspaper, a body of the Armenian Diaspora in
Turkey commenting the February events i.e. the bloody mas-
sacres committed in 1992 writes: "…We got inspired. Armenians
gained power and force for fighting for our native lands.
Simultaneously we saw God's benediction. We were fighting. The
Azerbaijani people couldn't love Motherland like us. We won
owing to our love to the Motherland… We're aware also of Baku.
They spend more force not to fight for Motherland but for dynas-
ties and posts as well as power and glory. Because those in Baku
also know that these lands belong to us and our fathers and
grandfathers. Vladimir Savelyev, a Russian Officer asked us
about it in front of the cannons shooting in the field of battle. He
required our correspondent to leave these places…" (24th of
February 1992).
Vladimir Savelyev has been the chief of the Security Service
Department of the Military Unit No. 02270 (in the Upper
Garabagh). The colonel collecting the first data regarding the
Khodjaly tragedy as a witness of the events submitted the "secret
information" to UNO and Council of Europe (on 26th of November
1992, 19th of March 1998, in July and December of 2000) and the
168
Main Reconnaissance Board. The last references were sent by
him under the signature of "Officer Pugachov".
However that may be we succeeded to get acquainted with
the text of this dispatch.
The colonel observing the military actions performed in the
Upper Garabagh by the military units of Russia together with the
Armenian Terrorist Organizations comments all events in the
facts and documents: "…I'm not entitled to dissemble these facts.
All events had happened before my eyes. I cannot forget the shot
corpses of people, children, old men and pregnant women. Let
the Azerbaijani people forgive my incapability to prevent these
bloody events. I had sent the secret information consisting of
twelve pages to the Kremlin, the Ministry of Defense and the Main
Reconnaissance Board and written to them: "Just read and see
how the honor of Russian officers was sullied."
V.R.Savelyev writes: "…I was interested in and was watching
the events happening in Baku. It was felt that Ayaz Niyezovich
was defrauded. He was lost in the mishmash and everything was
out of his control. He was in the center of confrontation and was
non-authoritative commander-in-chief…"
"…But what about the Military Security Service of Azerbaijan
is that this organization is paralyzed. According to the data we've
gained, the employees of this organization were interested only
in theft of meat as well as potatoes and onion sacks unable to get
engaged in own direct obligations. The events happened in
Khodjaly were hidden from the President. Everybody in the
General Headquarter of the Azerbaijan Army behaved as direct
chiefs. Meanwhile, the state of the forth troop union was glowing.
Everything was against to Azerbaijan in this union. The conditions
were getting out of all frames. Officers were lost in conjectures.
We were informed that there are contradictions in the
President's Machinery and the Force Ministries. The aims and
ideas weren't supplementing each other. Everybody was support-
ing the idea of war due to own political ambitions. A part of politi-
cians was supporting the Supreme Commander-in-Chief of
169
Azerbaijan but the other part was bearing the opposition and the
unable Generals…"
Berkin Siradjyan, an Armenian journalist publishing an article
titled "Before the offensive" in the local "Frans katolik-ekklezia"
Magazine (France) writes: "…I saw Khodjaly with my own eyes. I
was delighted with bravery of Artsakh people fighting for each
inch of land. But I wouldn't adhere to such battles for the land. I
was afraid of the neglected corpses piled on snow and ice… I
was afraid realizing that the Azerbaijani side as well as the future
generation wouldn't dissemble over this blood… The Russians
support us today, but tomorrow we may remain all alone… From
other side, I'm sure that the flame in eyes of my Armenian broth-
ers fighting in Khodjaly would never go out. This flame means a
fire burnt for the sake of the Motherland. Such flames never go
out…" (12th of March 1992).
In January of 1992 a Membership Group of the "Asala"
Armenian Terrorist Organization (establishing an illegal educa-
tional camp nearby Paris) consisting of 26 people led by major
Ashyn Simonyan came to Khankendy. They easily succeeded
providing support for themselves in the person of the 366th regi-
ment remaining self-willed. He presented USD 36 000 to Colonel
Yevgeny Zarvigarov "for the first acquaintance". According to the
data, Major-General Boris Budeykin, Commander of the 23rd
division accused the mammonish colonel raising a matter to the
Commandment of the 4th Army regarding his dismissal "over
betrayal to the officer's honor".
However, these accusations and requirements had no impact
because the laws weren't already acting.
In the "Secret Information" Colonel V.Savelyev writes:
"…These problems get more evident in sample of the 366th reg-
iment involved to the international conflict. Transfer of the regi-
ment to the Armenian side and destruction of Azerbaijani people
during the military actions as well as grant of the military machin-
ery and weapons to Armenians had a political essence."
In his letter addressed to the Ministry of Defense dated on
170
12th of April 1992 the Colonel also specifies that he had sent to
the Ministry of Defense of Azerbaijan and the President's
Machinery 46 documents numbered by him among those identi-
fying the personalities of a part of the died or slain people. "They
answered me that they were investigating the documents. Then I
was in was in Tbilisi and sent the letter from there, but I couldn't
understand what the Military Intelligence of Azerbaijan was con-
sidering…"
On 19th of February 1992 in the Theater Square in Yerevan
Firdos Arabyan, an Armenian Emissary from Lebanon declared a
letter of thirteen solvent Armenian from the "Garegin" Center act-
ing as sponsor of the Diaspora: "… Long live the aroused people!
Greeting the Armenian heroes realizing own wisdom, mind and
intellect and burning our ancestors' flame again I give them the
best regards of Armenians of the world. The Armenians rising in
Paris, Cologne, Rome, Washington, Kuwait, London, Moscow,
Ankara, Tehran and Latin America are together with you! And
we're ready to render any support…"
These "Heroes of Nation" causing a clash among two peo-
ples don't consider the reality that no innocent blood would
remain unrequited. The responsibilities for the committed crimes
are born neither by Washington nor London but all of these bar-
barities lie on conscience of Yerevan. It should be realized like did
by the scout V.Savelyev seeing and realizing everything.
It's specified in his "Secret Dispatch" to the Main
Reconnaissance Board of the Ministry of Defense of the Russian
Federation that upon the official permission of the Military and
Regional Commandment regarding liquidation of the weapon
emplacements bombarding the regiments Colonel Zarvigarov
and other officers participating at the actions committed in direc-
tion of Khodjaly joined to Armenians. As a result forty-nine
Azerbaijanies were moved to square and shot within a day...
Upon the order of Lieutenant Colonel Sergey Kraule, Chief of
Headquarter, major I.V.Moiseyev, commander of the first shooting
battalion, major S.I.Ohanyan, commander of the second battal-
171
172
ion, major Y.A.Nabokikh, commander of the third battalion, cap-
tain Isaac Lykhodey and others took care rather of Armenians
while moving the peaceful inhabitants. According to V.Savelyev's
testimony 58 Azerbaijanies were murdered during the evacua-
tion.
The murdered Azerbaijanies were buried contrary to the cus-
tom. The corpses were thrown to pits and busied. The Colonel
notes that in twilights it was terrible to hear the voices of dogs and
jackals howling and gnawing over these pits. There was a smell
of stinking corpses everywhere.
Meanwhile, Rafael Messeyan (Grigoryan), one of the leaders
of the "Ramkavar" Party acting in Lebanon and distinguishing
with radical position writes in the correspondence titled "the
Armenian Support" published in the "Zartunk" ("Awakening")
Newspaper: "The oblivion of those fighting in Khodjaly doesn't
suit to us, Armenians… These heroes are being supported. We're
aware that in twenty-four countries of the world the solvent and
rich Armenian entrepreneurs have established "The Fund of
Support to Artsakh"… An Armenian entrepreneur in London allot-
ted the earnings got from his sold villa, and an Armenian busi-
nessman paid the annual income of his trade center. The
Members of the "Armenian Native Speech" Society in Paris had
collected compassionate benefit for the Khodjaly heroes" (24th of
March 1992).
On 4th of February 1992 the Garabagh Self-Defense
Divisions (!) and the Commandment of the Russian Troops Union
received confidential message of the Pontiff Johann-Pavel II. The
Pontiff passed "the power sent down to him by the God" (?) to the
Armenian self-defense divisions and reminded to the Orthodox
Russians in uniform that the committed battle is nothing but a
"religious battle" and promised to pray for them… Considering the
1 Probably, the Pontiff was deluded by the Armenian propaganda; partially, in
West till present some social circles misinformed by Armenians hold the
opinion that not the peaceful Azerbaijani inhabitants but Armenians were
exposed to massacres and destructions in Khodjaly.
international conflict as "a battle for belief" His Grace had written:
"… Having an opportunity I'll come to Khodjaly and bow to the
battlefields where my Armenian brethrens had died."1
Let's return to the Colonel V.R.Savelyev's certifications:
"…There was a case when I was unable to render an aid to
eight or nine years girl wounded by bullet not far from me. I'm
afraid of the day the God will chastise me…"
The damned days changed each other. Those days the
Armenian employees of the "Operator-II" Private Studio coming
from France (Jull Barelyan, Sherin Sitaryan) made record of
burning corpses in surroundings of Khodjaly. Upon the data
issued by Ivan Korabelnikov serving in the 2nd battalion of the
366th regiment it happened in hilly area at north-east of Khodjaly.
In order to "elucidate" the Khodjaly tragedy forty-seven
Armenian journalists came to Khankendy from thirty-two coun-
tries of the world. Part of them was watching the events via the
observation slot of armored troop-carriers provided by Colonel
Y.Zarvigarov and making notices, and others were making oper-
ative shootings. They demonstrated the destroyed settlements
turned into ruins to the world and commented in feigned grief:
"…The Azerbaijani people are annihilating innocent
Armenians…"
The strategic aspects of the plan of occupation of Khodjaly
were "thoroughly developed" by Armenians together with Russian
military servants. V.I.Chitchiyan, Chief of Headquarter of the 1st
battalion, major Y.A.Nabokikh and captain I.Lykhodey directly
participated at the operations. On officer I.Korabelnikov's data,
V.I.Chitchiyan killed the Babayevs' family consisting of thirteen
members… In 1993 the Armenian Diaspora in France conferred
him with premium in sum of USD 150 000 and "Grand Prix of
Church". On 12th of September 1994 Chitchiyan immigrated to
France and presently resides there.
Afik Isabaliyev, a private signaler of the 366th regiment had
admitted that on 24th of February 1992 he fought in battalion
under the command of captain I. Lykhodey and participated in
173
occupation of Khodjaly.
Answering to the question "How did you fight?" he said:
- We also were afraid of death. We were destroying every-
body met. Sometimes even trees shaking in wind and the rustle
of leafs inspired fear in us… I don't know whether the
Azerbaijani people would forgive me. My mother has repudiated
me because my fighting conjointly with Armenians… I already
cannot go home, everybody turns back on me. But I was
obliged… It was an order… We had to obey to orders… Nobody
is going to forgive me! ("An Armenian Grave" by Abdul Fateh.
"Beirut" Publication House. 1994.)
According to A.Isabaliyev, Armenians had bought weapons
and equipment from Russians. The cost of the Kalashnikov's
submachine gun was USD 1500.
In the night from 25th to 26th of February Khodjaly was
exposed to fire and occupied. But the troops weren't satisfied.
V.R.Savelyev notes in the "Secret Dispatch" that a day before
occupation of Khodjaly the third battalion was discharged from
the zone of the actions but not entirely. And the 366th regiments
remained there in full staff… The officers were engaged in
betrayals…What about the weapons the Armenians were grant-
ed absolutely new weapons. It was decided to take from
Armenians money and values instead of the weapons…"
On 19th of March 1992 (on our traditional calendar this date
coincides with the Novruz holiday) a small cemetery was estab-
lished in Khodjaly for burying the dead Azerbaijanies. 54 inno-
cently killed people were buried there. In evening of the same
day Surik Shaginyan, host of the TV-channel of the Armenian
Diaspora in France put this sad image to TV-screens in Iran,
Turkey, Moscow, Yerevan, Washington, London, Paris and Bonn
and profusely talked about respect of Armenians to the memo-
ries of the corpses of squandered Azerbaijanies (!) and the bury-
ing ceremony. But in Baku still nobody could realize the reasons
of the tragedy happened in Khodjaly. Everybody from the estab-
174
lished Deputy Commission till the opposition parties was para-
lyzed and the power was cracking into scars. The Safety bodies
were deprived of the informational sources… A membership
group of the safety system entered to collaboration with the
opposition. A.Mutallibov's power had already lost the political
force in the state and society. V.Savelyev wrote: "…Upon occu-
pation of Khodjaly A.Mutallibov's power lost own viability, and
ministers had established a state in state around the Prime
Ministers."
Further the Colonel V.Savelyev goes on: "The following peo-
ple had directly participated in discharge of the regiment and
grant of weapons to Armenians:
- Colonel-General Gromov;
- Lieutenant-General Grekov;
- Lieutenant-General Ohanyan;
- Deputy I.Andronov;
- Colonel Y. Zarvigarov (further he became General);
- Colonel S.Kraule…
The forth army had provided conditions for participation of
the fighters of the 23rd shooting division in the Khodjaly opera-
tion. But K.Yermolayev and A.Babukov, Deputy Commander of
the 23rd division required get back the weapons and equipment
granted to Armenians but nobody was going to obey to them."
V.Savelyev notes: "Upon bombardment of the cantonment
from "Grad" installments on 23rd of February 1992 the Colonel
Y.Zarvigarov ordered to move the regiment from the permanent
dislocation to the alternate point. The order was fulfilled without
any resistance of the Armenian fighters… But not all equipment
was removed. The General I.Ohanyan (other than the Major
Ohanyan) coming those days to Khankendy insisted to remain
the equipment…" As a result Armenians owned thirty-three
PDM, three ZSU-23/4, eight D-30 and other weapons and
equipment.
The same day Illarion Hagverdiyan, head of the cell of the
175
terrorist organization in Khankendy acting under the mask of the
Armenian self-defense detachment declared gratuities to twen-
ty-four people among the Russian officers and soldiers. For
instance, in front of the detachment the Russian Officer Yevgeny
Golubev was solemnly conferred with an order with engraving
"Asala" made of gold and weighing twenty-five grams and USD
5000. Furthermore, a private soldier Anastas Ivanov was
rewarded with USD 10000 and documents of "Hyundai" car
waiting for its recipient in Yerevan…
As a result, the Armenian armed detachments concluded
personal bargains and "military contracts" with Russian Officers.
Let's remind that a part of these military agreements
between Armenians and the Soviet odd jobbers was carried out
via oral orders. Hereby each order or General's word had own
cost. For instance, the cost of the order on the military actions in
side of Armenians committed by the 463rd special chemical pro-
tection battalion and the 909th special reconnaissance battalion
in Khankendy was USD 18000.
The Colonel V.Savelyev writes: "When the first battalion was
dislocated in the alternative zone the Colonel Ivan Moiseyev
was taking wait-and-see attitude in the "Chapar" gorge. Then his
battalion entered the Chikhany settlement and "was surround-
ed" by Armenians. As a result the battalion left own weapons
and equipments for Armenians… Offering money to Ivan
Moiseyev and the personnel they were offered to fight togeth-
er…
It's noticeable that namely the Ivan Moiseyev's battalion had
destroyed and turned into ruins the settlements around
Khodjaly. This battalion was called among Armenians as "Ivan's
wild battalion".
By our estimate eighty-five per cent of the weapons and
equipment of the 366th regiment passed to Armenians.
Furthermore, they were disposing of 142 submachine guns,
7600 bullets, 460 flak jackets, 11 ton of potted goods, 1200 pairs
176
177
of shoes in six sizes and 146 pistols delivered from France…
Armenians were provided also with 146 portable radio transmit-
ters made in USA.
The French Senate was lamenting for absence of any infor-
mation regarding Khodjaly and blaming the dipcorps of
Azerbaijan in this country. On 14th of February 2001 it got also
known that the Khodjaly tragedy was introduced in France as
"Armenian tragedy". But what about our Embassy of that time it
was found nothing but to summon its employees for "develop-
mental works". On the other hand, O.Ter-Grigoryan, an
Armenian diplomat addressing in April 1992 in the Yerevan
Theatre Square said: "…The Armenian propaganda has already
taken desirable stands for itself in the diplomatic centers of
Baku…" (?). It was worthy to think about.
In the mentioned address the diplomat dropped a loyal sub-
ject curtsy in direction of the northern protectors: "… 300 hun-
dred years ago Armenians asked Peter I to use also them in
fights against alien invaders…1 If in 1959 the number of
Armenians in Moscow (namely in the city itself) was 18400 peo-
ple nowadays they aggregate 47000 ones. 142 people work in
the foreign diplomatic corps of the Russian Federation. 59 ones
of them act as journalists…"
According to a private soldier Grigory Vorontsov a part of
the documents concerning to cooperation of Armenian people
with Russian ones in the Khodjaly events happening on 1st of
March 1992 was burnt upon order of the Major-General
S.Lukashov, Commander of Aviation of the Transcaucasian
Command. The Colonel V.Savelyev touching these circum-
stances in the "Secret Information" specifies: "…Collecting the
corpses of the killed Azerbaijani people to "KAMAZ" No. 02-19
MM Armenians made a nig fire… There wasn't limit in human
hates. The list below specifies some officers joining to
1 It would be possible to believe in sincerity of these "noble impulses" unless
a sober and selfish intensions were hidden behind such declarations.
Armenians and killing the captive Azerbaijanies with enjoy one
at a time:
Colonel B.Baymukov - Rear Deputy Commander of
Regiment
Colonel I.V.Moiseyev - Commander of the 1st Battalion
Major S.I.Ohanyan - Commander of the 2nd Battalion
Major Y.A.Nabokich - Commander of the 3rd Battalion
Major V.I.Chitchiyan - Chief of Headquarter of the 1st
Battalion
Major V.G.Ayriyan - Chief of Regiment Reconnaissance
Senior Lieutenant O.V.Mirzakhalzarov - Company
Commander
Senior Lieutenant S.V.Khrinkhua - Reconnaissance
Platoon Commander
Senior Lieutenant V.N.Garmash - Tank Company
Commander
Senior Lieutenant V.I.Valilovsky - Company Commander
Senior Lieutenant A.B.Lysenko - Platoon Commander
Senior Lieutenant B.A.Azarov - Battery Commander
Senior Lieutenant I.S.Abramov - Antitank Battery
Commander
Lieutenant O.V.Bolezny - Second Tank Company
Commander
Lieutenant A.V.Smakyn - Tank Platoon Commander
Lieutenant S.I.Rachkovsky - Field-Engineer Company
Commander
Lieutenant V.I.Bondarev - Deputy Chief of
Reconnaissance
Lieutenant A.I.Kulov - Chief of Radiochemical Platoon
(And 41 junior-rank military Armenians)".
Becoming General Y.Zarvigarov addressing in front of offi-
cers on 24th of February 1992 at 9.45 p.m. said that the battle in
the region isn't a war for lands but campaign of Islam against
Christianity. General said: "…The representatives of the Islamic
178
countries of the world and military advisors had gathered in
Baku (?) in order to discuss the ways of destruction and smash-
ing of our cross… It's a campaign against Christianity in which
we must either to vindicate our honor and dignity or to humble
disgrace and obey."
At the same time Ayaz Mutallibov, the "Supreme
Commander-in-Chief" was engaged in Baku in division of posts
and ordering to incompetent staff. The "Secret Information" by
Colonel V.Savelyev, honorable Russian scout is very important
admission of this experienced officer rejecting to put up with
injustice. We've to succeed that this admission as unexampled
historical and documentary certification would become property
of publicity in UNO and Council of Europe. It goes on remaining
as a necessary task.
Reuvshan NOVRUZOGLU
179
VACANCY IN FATEOF
THEMOTHERLAND IS CRIME!
Thirteen years passed since the Khodjaly genocide. During
these thirteen years we commemorate with bitter grief and sor-
row the one of the most horrible actions of massed terror in the
history of our people and entire mankind. It's thirteenth year hat
we bow to the memory of the victims of the Khodjaly tragedy. It's
thirteenth year that glancing back to the recent history we try to
understand and investigate all circumstances and reasons
causing the tragedy and put into attention of the international
society the truth about it and its real instigators and executors as
well as secret and evident "producers"…
We repeatedly ask ourselves: How could we tolerate this
butchery distinguishing with awful and sadist cruelty? What was
the guilt of the peaceful Khodjaly inhabitants exposing to Hannibal
rage? Why the Republican Administration neglected the repeated
troubling summons and remained vacant in the next danger?
Whose is the guilt that our wise and brave people was caught
napping by perfidious invasion of the "long-suffering" neighbors
destroying unarmed people and committing blooding genocide in
Khodjaly? Who had given free rain and supported the Armenian
formations and the 366th shooting regiment of the former Soviet
army participating conjointly with the dashnak butcher in the mas-
sacres against the civil inhabitants, old people, women and chil-
dren?
The 19th and 20th centuries had remained a lot of tragic signs
and wounds in our national history. The Gulustan and
Turkmanchay Treaties concluded consequently in 1813 and
1828 legislating partition of Azerbaijan and dissociation of the
180
nation and accompanied by purposeful colonization of our lands
by resettled Armenians had factually created a base for further
pushing the Azerbaijan inhabitants aside.
The Armenians settled in the territories of the Erivan,
Nakhchivan and Garabagh khanates remaining unsatisfied with
establishment of the "Armenian region" and using the aids of
own protectors commenced realization of the insidious and
jesuitical plans aiming to establishment of the mythic "Great
Armenia". The milestones of this "activity" were large-scale
bloody actions against Azerbaijanians in 1905-1907 and 1917-
1920 accompanied by barbarian humiliations and torments as
well as burning innocent people alive.
All of these events continued during a century and reached
its zenith in commencement of the Upper Garabagh "problem".
On 12th of February 1984 in Khankendy Armenians held an
open demonstration under the slogan of "miatsum" ("reunifica-
tion").
At that period neither the USSR Administration nor the
Republican powers had taken any trenchant measurement;
quite the reverse, the progress of the events showed that the
separatist bacchanalia was connived at by the Gorbachov's pol-
icy under screen of "democratization" of society.
Since the first days of commencement of the dangerous
scenery there was a demand in a prescient, resolute and wise
patriotic leader. The events happened in Khankendy,
Gushchular, Malybeyli, Jamilly, Meshaly rendered lessons nei-
ther to us nor the republican administration.
Khodjaly is of important military and strategic significance
locating in front of the Aghdam-Shusha and Askaran-Khankendy
route; capture of this point meant a "clear passage" between the
regional center and Askaran and seizure of only airport in the
UGAR. In this case it was necessary to turn the key town into
stronghold firming it fundamentally. Alas, the amorphous and
unexampled policy of the republican administration of that time
181
failed to provide it. Khodjaly and its inhabitants got left to the
mercy of fate. However, there were flagrant signs of the expect-
ed disasters and unequivocal signals about the prepared mas-
sacres and slaughters the governors of the power had paid no
heed to; otherwise, the summons of the Khodjaly inhabitants
wouldn't remain unreciprocated.
Namely as a result of bungling of the republican administra-
tion the blockade ring was implacably getting narrower since
October 1991; the vehicle routes were closed and the only
means of communication were helicopters. But when the last hel-
icopter of the civil aviation was shot over Shusha (as a result 40
people died) this hope in the connection with the outer world also
collapsed. Power supplement of the town ceased. The town was
surviving only owing to bravery of the inhabitants and heroism of
defenders bearing innumerable attacks of Armenians. Defense of
the town was provided by the fighters of the self-protection
detachment as well as policemen and military servants of the
national army. But hunting rifles are incommensurable with up-to-
date weapons and equipment. Since the second half of February
Khodjaly became a target for methodical bombardment and
heavy weapons.
The horrible tragedy sanctified in details in this book hap-
pened in the night from 25th to 26th of February.
The catastrophe happened during the visit ofAliAkpar Vilayati, the
Minister of Foreign Affairs of Iran to the region with a mediatorial mis-
sion.
On 25th of February we met in Baku with the Azerbaijan gov-
ernment; on 27th of February the Minister was going to leave for
the Upper Garabagh and further for Armenia. In connection with
the mission upon the arrangement between the parties cease of
fire was declared from 27th of February to 1st of March; howev-
er, the Armenians traitorously violated the agreement. The same
event happened on 12th of February when the OSCE
Representatives came to the Upper Garabagh for getting intro-
182
duced with the situation and search of the ways for regulation of
the conflict (their further supposed route was to Baku and
Yerevan). The same day the Armenian extremists ignoring this
circumstance captured Malybeyli and Gushchular villages of the
Shusha region killing, wounding and taking prisoners about half
a thousand people and robbing these villages burnt them.
Bombardment and shootings from heavy weapons and
equipment caused fires in Khodjaly; on 26th February about at.
5.00 a.m. the town was covered by fire and entirely destroyed,
robbed and, almost razed to the ground. The reader is already
aware of the tragic episodes of that night. Let's remind those
died and victims: 613 people died and 487 ones were maimed;
1275 peaceful inhabitants becoming hostages were exposed to
humiliations and torments. 150 people disappeared without a
trace…
There were women, old men and children among those
died.
56 victimswere destroyedwith brutal cruelty: theywere burnt alive
andbeheaded; several onesarewithout scalp; childrenwithput off eye-
balls; pregnant women with unstitched abdomens; desecrated
corpses…
I hereby keep silence regarding the material damages cal-
culated in astronomic figures.
The matter firstly is about the destroyed human lives each
of which is irreplaceable and priceless…
When I express these figures with the pen I cannot com-
pose the feelings of rage and sorrow or think about these fates
without heartache because these figures express human fates
expired or mutilated by armed and conscious brutality.
These are parents dreaming to see the children's weddings
but surviving them, brothers and sisters deprived of shelter and
heat, infants failing to rejoice over the life…
The Republican Administration had enough information
regarding the expected events. The governmental bodies liable
183
to provide safety of citizens expressed full negligence and
vacancy and hadn't taken any measurement for rescuing the
inhabitants of the town constricted in blockade and irresponsibly
treated to fulfillment of own official liabilities.
The Khodjaly genocide is a result of the discords among those
at the helm of state and desiring to come to force, the anarchy
spread through the republic, crisis and paralysis of state manage-
ment, the political games happening in and around the Upper
Garabagh as well as indifference of each of us and the history will
never forget it.
The Armenians separatists weren't definitely repulsed and
no strict measurement was taken concerning to their protectors.
The news about the bloody crime not immediately but grad-
ually spread through the world and the scope of the genocide
didn't allow hide its essences.
Owing to courage and intrepidity of our journalists and hon-
orable employees of the mass-medias of Russia, France and
other countries the result of the tragedy were taken to reel of film
and demonstrated on the most of the TV-channels of the world.
Chindyz Mustafayev, our famous journalist, correspondent
of the Azerbaijan Television died in front while fulfilling the pro-
fessional liability had written: "At first we came escorted by two
military helicopters to the place of the events on 28th of February.
We saw from the sky that a large field is full of human corpses.
The pilots didn't dare to land the helicopter because this territo-
ry was controlled by Armenians. However, upon landing we left
the helicopter and wee exposed to strong bombardment. The
policemen coming with us should take the corpses aboard for
delivering them to the relatives. We could take only four corpses
at it got impossible to take all of them. We were shocked by the
seen horror. Two of us lost his consciousness.
The same situation happened also on 2nd of March.
… We came to the place of events with foreign journalists.
The corpses had got worse state till that time. During several
184
days they were exposed to humiliated actions".
JAN-IV UNIT (journalist, France) wrote: "We witnessed
the Khodjaly tragedy. We saw corpses of hundreds dead people.
They were women, old men, children and those defending
Khodjaly. We were disposing a helicopter. Flying up we took
everything to camera from altitude and fixed Khodjaly and sur-
roundings on the film. Suddenly the Armenian formations shot in
our helicopter and we were obliged to return ceasing the shoot-
ings. I had heard a lot about wars and read about cruelty of the
German fascists but Armenians had surpassed them in brutali-
ties and destruction of peaceful inhabitants and murder of little
children. We saw a lot of wounded people in hospital, carriages
and even in premises of kindergartens and schools".
V. BELYKH (correspondent of the "Izvestiya" Newspaper,
Russia):
"Corpses were keeping to be brought to Aghdam. It has no
analogue in the history. The eyeballs of the corpses were put off
and their ears and heads were cut off. Some corpses were
trailed over the ground and tied to armored vehicles.
Humiliations had no ends."
LEONYD KRAVETS (Major) testifies: "During the next
flight on 26th of February I saw reddened purple stains on the
ground. I slowed the speed and the flight engineer cried that
"women and children" are on the ground. I myself had counted
200 corpses. Armed people were roaming among them.
Then we returned there on helicopters for taking the
corpses. A police captain from Khodjaly also flied with us.
Seeing his four-years-old son with crushed head he went out of
his mind. Another child was beheaded. Corpses of women, old
people and children were lying everywhere."
185
The "FINANCIAL TIMES" Newspaper, 14th of May 1992
"According to the General Pyankov's information, 103 mili-
tary servants of the 366th regiment remained in the Upper
Garabagh for fighting conjointly with Armenians".
"KRASNAYA ZVEZDA" in correspondence titled
"Garabagh: a war until victory" (11th of March 1992) obviously
admits that the military servants of the 366th regiment acted
conjointly with Armenians in capture of Khodjaly upon monetary
and currency recompense and the weapons and equipment of
the regiment were granted by Armenians to separatists.
VALER ACTUEL, 14th of May 1992
"In the Upper Garabagh the Armenians used up-to-date
weapons and helicopters supplied by the "Asala" Organization."
Sariya Talybova, a Khodjaly inhabitant being exposed to
capture torments further remembered: "We were brought to an
Armenian cemetery. It's very difficult for me to describe the
events happening here… Armenians cut off the heads of four
young Mehsety turks and three Azerbaijanians over the graves.
Then they mortified children with torments at the sight of their
parents and shoveled the corpses into a pit with bulldozer.
These anthropomorphous savages unsatisfied by blood put off
the eyes of two Azerbaijani fellows in army dress…"
The list of these written and oral testimonies might be con-
tinued. The most deplorable matter is that instead of declaring
the Khodjaly genocide all over the world the republican admin-
istration fearing of loss of power and being exposed to rage of
people hid the real and horrible truth from inhabitants. The oppo-
sition also was busy in fights for power instead of changing the
populist rhetoric to discovery of the brutalities of the Armenian
occupants and terrorists committing the bloody massacres. As
186
though everything was in the order of things…The both parties
were interested rather in the leading seats and the power-seek-
ing ambitions. The tragic fate of the victims of the Khodjaly
genocide faded into the background of the criminal politic sort-
ing outs and prolongations… After Khodjaly the deplorable
results of these squabble was increase of the catastrophe caus-
ing collapse of Shusha, Lachyn, Kalbadjar and occupation of
other settlements. Thus, the Khodjaly massacre is a result of the
purposeful genocide policy of the Armenian nationalists against
the Azerbaijanian people. The Armenian nationalists conducting
the policy of ethnic purge realizing repeated massed destruc-
tions upon obligatory removal of all Azerbaijanians fromArmenia
commenced capture of the territory of the Azerbaijan Republic.
Passiveness of the civil world having no efforts for prevention of
this aggressive policy and failing to render political and legal
assessment of vandalism and bloody invasions of the Armenian
expansionists allowed the occupants realize own intensions on
establishment of the monoethnic "Great Armenia" in the
expense of annexation of our lands more zealously and cynical-
ly. As a result twenty per cent of the territory of the Azerbaijan
Republic became occupied and over million refugees were
deprived of native residences.
This crime is directed not only against our people but also
the mankind and humanity.
The actions of Armenians and their accomplices participat-
ed at the Khodjaly massacre are severe violation of the most
elementary human rights and impertinent trample of the interna-
tional legal norms of the Geneva Convention, Common
Declaration on Human Rights, the international pacts on the
civil, politic, economic, social and cultural rights, the Declaration
on Children's Rights, the Declaration on Defense of Women and
Children at the State of Emergency and Military Conflicts as well
as other international legal acts.
Unfortunately, the countries of the world hadn't expressed
187
objective and adequate attitude to this tragedy yet and failed to
admit it as a genocide act expressing a strange indifference and
negligence. Furthermore, failure of admission of the genocide
as an evident and prudent massed slaughter of people (speci-
fied in a numerous promulgated testimonies of witnesses as well
as photo-documents and movies) does no credit to any demo-
cratic state. The history also wouldn't forgive it. On the contrary,
several states believing in the prudent insinuations deprived of
any ground and the "crocodile tears" of the Armenian propagan-
da had accepted verdicts regarding destruction of this "long-suf-
fering" and "civil" people by turks. Shan't the actions committed
by this "long-suffering" and "civil" people in Khodjaly, the Upper
Garabagh and contiguous regions be considered as genocide?
Isn't it genocide that an entire town was razed to the ground
within several hours, inhabitants were destroyed with brutal cru-
elty, burnt alive and beheaded, oh you, Mr. democrats?
One of our first national tasks is achievement of admission
of the Khodjaly tragedy by the world states as genocide actions.
It's not occasional that during the official visit to the
Azerbaijan Republic Omar Izgi, the Chairmen of the National
Meeting of the Turkish Republic noted that in recent future the
Turkish Parliament intends to discuss the matter of the Khodjaly
genocide and accept a respective resolution accusing this bru-
tal action. The step to be taken by our Turkish confreres would
be exemplification also for other countries.
It's partially noticeable that the brave defenders of Khodjaly
town weren't afraid of the enemy armed to the teeth and
expressed real courage and heroism during the unequal resist-
ance. Most of them were conferred to honorary title and reward-
ed with orders and medals upon the President Heydar Aliyev's
decree. Each year the 26th day of February is commemorated on
the governmental level as a day of memory of the victims of the
Khodjaly tragedy.
Despite of the suffered discords and grieves the Khodjaly
188
people trust and hope in future. They're sure that they'll return to
the native land and resuscitate the collapsed town. But present-
ly the kind and polite Khodjaly people suffer difficulties; the
inhabitants of this town are dispersed through forty-eight regions
of the Republic.
The President Heydar Aliyev had repeatedly expressed the
will of our state to settle the Upper Garabagh matter amicably
and had all efforts for it. But unless such a way succeeds we'll
gain restoration of justice and entirely discharge the occupied
lands in military way. The Azerbaijani lands cannot remain under
the thumb of occupants! Their discharge is our saint liability for
the memory of our martyrs and the future generation and the
history.
The President Ilham Aliyev worthily
continues the line fixed by our general
leader and his position concerning to the
conflict with Armenia logically arises from
this politic line.
We need in a powerful state, strong
army and indissoluble civil unity.
Each of us has to realize that we're
not entitled to forget the former lessons.
Vacancy in fate of the Motherland is
crime!
AHMAD HASANOV,
Prosecutor of Khodjaly region,
Junior Justice Advisor
189
ALLEGED"ARMENIANGENOCIDE"AND
THEKHODJALYTRAGEDYOFTHE20THCENTURY
As it's known, the Armenian historians began to bear territo-
rial pretensions against the contiguous states (firstly to
Azerbaijan and further to the Ottoman state) since the 5th centu-
ry and put forward an idea of establishment of "Great Armenia"
"from sea to sea". The Armenian nationalists had efforts to real-
ization of own aims using various historical and political factors
expecting available flow of circumstances and resorting to vari-
ous tricks.
Colonization of the Azerbaijani lands at the beginning of
19th century and liquidation of the Azerbaijani khanates turning
into ancestral lands of the tsar's Russia, partially, establishment
of the Erivan province in the territory of the historical Western
Azerbaijan and later of the Armenian Republic upon coming of
Bolsheviks to the power becoming the Soviet Republic and
incrementing new territories (Zangazur and other Azerbaijani
regions) upon verdicts of the Communist leaders are milestones
of this "creeping" and regular expansion.
The "Armenian matter" was firstly raised in the international
scope at the Congress of European Countries held in Berlin in
1878. As this matter had previously got special painful keenness
it stores a potential explosive charge for the countries conta-
gious to Armenia.
V.F.Mayevsky acting as vice-council of the tsar's Russia in
the eastern regions of Turkey at the end of 19th and start of 20th
century had noted in own memories that the concrete essence
of the "Armenian matter" is connected to the Armenian riot in
Turkey and, from other hand, the confrontations against
190
Armenia and Azerbaijan in Transcaucasia. It's a matters of "life
and death" for Armenians.
But how do Armenians themselves see the essence of this
matter? In Armenian ideologists' opinion, the native lands of the
"Great Armenia" were captured by "nomad barbarians" (hereby
they mean turks) and it's necessary to restore the "historical jus-
tice" i.e. mobilize the efforts of the world community, punish the
"aliens" and discharge the native Armenian lands. The outlines
of this fantastic space cover the Western Armenia (present
Turkey entirely and Syria), Southern Armenia (present
Azerbaijan, the Armenian Republic, parts of Georgia and Iran)
and at last, "Northern Armenia" (Stavropol, Krasnodar, Rostov
and Voronej…)
The historical sources specify that upon allotment of
Armenia in 387 between Rome and Sasanies and loss of the
State system during the next centuries Armenians tried to
restore own state and achieve independence; at the end of 19th
century these efforts gained ideological and organizational
expression in establishment of the "Dashnaksutyun" and
"Gnchak" Parties; Armenians try to gain autonomy in Turkey
through the mediation of Russia, England and France. This
effort is expressed and personified in absolutely uncivil forms.
Provocations, terror, kindling of xenophobia and turkophobia
were the accustomed arsenal of the "long-suffering national
patriots". Infusion of anti-Turkish psychosis caused bloody mas-
sacres of the peaceful Turkish inhabitants in 1874-1876, 1894-
1896 and 1917.
In 1905-1906 and 1918-1920 the nationalistic passion being
managed by Dashnak producers causes massed destruction of
Azerbaijanies in Baku, Upper Garabagh, Guba and
Shamakhy…
It's about ninety years that the world hears about the
"Armenian genocide" in Turkey in 1915. But what happened in
Turkey? During the World War I the Osmanly Turkey conjointly
191
with Germany and Austro-Hungary was fighting with the
Entente. The countries of the latter used the Armenians from
Turkey as "the fifth column" for the purpose suppressing own
military rival; according to the terms of the undercover collusion
Armenians should promote an armed riot in Turkey and due to
this "merits" would get a warranted opportunity to establish an
autonomous enclave (including Van, Diyarbekir, Bitlis,
Trapezund, Sivas, Arzurum and Khaput).
As a result, in 1919 Andronic, a former General of the
Turkish army turning weapon against the country trusting him
this supreme rank declared in presence of R.Puankare, the
President of France that during the World War I the Armenian
people fought nip and tuck to the Entente against Turkey and
Germany… 180 000 Armenian volunteers fought in ranks of the
Russian Army and 15000 ones in the ranks of the European
Coalition.
Using the opportunity that Turkey was engaged in heavy
military campaign Armenians raised a riot in rear and committed
a bloody genocide against the peaceful Turkish inhabitants and
entirely the Moslem inhabitants. In this critical situation the
Osmanly state, in accordance with the orders of the military peri-
od, was obliged to take measures against debauch of the
Armenian terrorist bands. This operation commenced on 24th of
April 1915 and continued till August.
Armenians insist that turks had destroyed a million and half
Armenians. This figure is an outrageous lie. Thus, at that period
totally 870 000 Armenians lived in seven counties of Turkey and
this figure amounted the fifth part of the inhabitants of the coun-
try. The Moslem inhabitants were majority in several regions of
these counties.
We don't vindicate murder of innocent and peaceful people
regardless of their nationality or confession. Settlement of polit-
ical and vital matters by means of weapons and destruction of
people of alien religion is always considered as tragedy. But
192
talking about the tragic pages of the history it would be dishon-
orable to conceal the reasons causing them or confuse results
with reasons.
Efforts of Armenians to establish a state within the state in
the territory of Asia Minor got futile. The October revolution hap-
pened in Russia caused a new wave of encroachments upon
the territories of Azerbaijan accompanied by massed ethnic
purge under the mask of "battle against counter-revolution".
Ousting of Azerbaijani people in the 20th century commenced in
1905-1906 (and what is more on the background of revolution-
ary distempers). In years of 1918-1920 the bloody riots and
destruction of the Azerbaijani inhabitants commenced with a
new force. The initiators of establishment of the Armenian state
in Caucasus were basing upon the Armenian inhabitants of the
former Erivan province aggregating a small part of the inhabi-
tants of this region. In the essence the matter was in a monoeth-
nic state. Hundreds thousands Azerbaijani families had been
moved off own native lands since the start of century. Upon
establishment of the Armenian Republic and further the Soviet
Armenia this policy went on; 150 000 Azerbaijani people were
deported from Armenia in 1948-1953; there were efforts of
"Armenization" of the Azerbaijani lands within the years of 1950-
1960; incidents on ethnic background had been provoked; how-
ever, the Communist leaders among which there were also
"compassionate" protectors of Armenians issuing from the inter-
est of the Red Empire realized also the destructive danger of the
international conflicts for integrity and stability in the Soviet state
and were crossed the centrifugal separatist pretensions.
The Armenian nationalists had in their way a stern and
authoritative opponent as Heydar Aliyev withdrawn to ranks of
the key figures of the supreme supervision of the Soviet Union.
Unfortunately, upon proarmenially oriented Gorbachov's "reor-
ganization" and Heydar Aliyev's dismissal from the posts in the
Political Bureau and the government the anti-Azerbaijani cam-
193
paign of the Armenian separatists began to be untwined headi-
ly. In 1988-1989 the Armenian nationalists succeeded move off
all Azerbaijani inhabitants from Armenia with indulgence o the
Gorbachov's administration and support of certain military cir-
cles and subsequently, 230 000 people we deprived of the
native residences. Simultaneously, the meeting hysteria held in
the Upper Garabagh under the slogan of "miatsum" passed to
an evident armed encroachment upon the lives and rights of the
Azerbaijani inhabitants; there commenced a direct aggression
of the armed forces of Armenia with participation of fighters and
foreign mercenaries as well as certain forces of the Soviet Army.
Owing to the former protectors Armenians had occupied the
UGAR and seven contagious regions o Azerbaijan. As a result
of the ethnic purge committed by the armed forces of Armenia
20 000 Azerbaijani people were killed, 50 000 ones got wound-
ed and maimed, 4 000 ones were taken prisoners and over one
million our compatriots became refugees in the territory of the
own country.
The Khodjaly genocide happened at the end of the 20th cen-
tury, in the progress of the obtruded war. The reader is already
aware of the cruel role of the 366th shooting regiment including
to the staff of the 23rd division of the forth army of the Soviet
Armed Forces and the details of the massed destructions of the
peaceful inhabitants of this town accompanied by brutal tor-
ments and humiliations even upon the died people.
Jan-Iv Unit, a French journalist witnessing the results of the
bloody massacres committed in Khodjaly and nearby
Nakhchyvanik village writes: "We are witnesses of the Khodjaly
genocide. We had personally seen the mutilated corpses of the
Khodjaly defenders and hundreds peaceful inhabitants including
women, children and old people. We were supplied with helicop-
ter in Baku for flying to surroundings of Khodjaly. Flying over the
place of butcheries we took the images to films. But we couldn't
complete the shootings because of being bombardment by
194
Armenians. But even those seen from the altitude were enough
for imaging the committed brutalities. It was a harrowing image.
I as well as everybody had heard and read a lot and seen
movies regarding the wars happened in the world an dcruelties
of the German fascists. But Armenians brutally murdering little
children and infants as well as pregnant women cannot be com-
pared with anybody in brutality…"
That's too pity that on the background of the universal prop-
agandizing ballyhoo regarding the "Armenian genocide" the
world community hadn't rendered legal, political and moral esti-
mation to the Khodjaly genocide and the civil world hadn't held
up this barbarian crime to shame yet. Furthermore, the
Parliaments of France, Italy and Germany had taken decision
regarding admission of the "Armenian genocide". We'd like to
ask the compassionate European parliamentarians why do they
remembering the events happened almost ninety years ago
connive at the genocide committed by the Armenian nationalists
against the Azerbaijani people in Khodjaly at the end of the 20th
century? Why do the parliaments of the above-mentioned coun-
tries keep silence regarding this flagrant total evil deed hap-
pened in the world history? Really the notorious principle of the
double standards snaps into action also here?.. But what about
the admitted international law and the humanism principles,
dear sirs?
Havva Mammadova
195
THE ART WITNESSES
The mankind achieving
unprecedented scientific and
technical progress in 20th centu-
ry, commencing the era of open-
ing up cosmos, survived two
world ears was exposed to the
Khodjaly tragedy at the end of
the century. The Name of
Khodjaly was enrolled into the
sad list together with Khatyn,
Lydice, Hiroshima, Songmy,
etc… The Khodjaly butchery
became one more bloody page of the purposeful genocide policy
against the Azerbaijani people.
This page of the history specifies our occupied lands,
destroyed residences, towns and villages turned into ruins,
humiliated monuments of art… groans of grey-haired mothers,
tears of orphans, blood of the brave defenders and martyrs…
Ash, tears and blood…
This page specifies Garabagh, our recalcitrant wound.
The tragic events caused by the aggression of Armenia,
occupation of our lands, human sacrifices, distorted fates,
refugees… All of these problems trouble each of our compatri-
ots including a politician, a fighter, a young and old person.
These problems disturb out literal and artificial figures.
Vagif Udjatay (Huseynov) is one of the painters firstly
196
197
expressing the Khodjaly tragedy. His poster accuses the occu-
pants and their protectors. Cross-shape handle of saber pierc-
ing a child's bosom expresses an association with outlines of the
Kremlin Tower.1 The poster is pronouncedly lapidary with a wide
background of the heathen space without any aggravating
detail; all attention gets concentrated on the subject; hereby the
painter achieves a significant emotional force of influence.
Vagif Udjatay's work titled "Hauling Dashnaks" is bitterly
satirical and original in composition remembering with own
structure the famous Repin's masterpiece titled "Haulers on
Volga". Certainly, Udjatay's work has an absolutely other mean-
ing. In the view of hauler he expressed the known concrete peo-
ple i.e. Armenian dashnaks immoderately hauling a "barge" i.e.
Garabagh full of blood and separated from Azerbaijan. This
political cartoon describes the ideologists and inspirers of the
bloody vandalism in Garabagh. Amir Talybov's "Double-faced
Catholicos", Amirbek Narimanbekov's "Aggression", Elmas
Huseynov's "Khodjaly tragedy" discovers the real face of the ini-
tiators of the genocide policy and butchers' cruelty.
Teymur Aghayev's "Memory", Shahlar Abdullayev's
"Blockade", Beyukagha Mirzazade's "Triumph of Evil", Faig
Ahmadov's "Shout of my soul" are the works full of philosophi-
cally meanings of the Khodjaly tragedy and spirit of protest
against destructions, bloodshed and a war causing lot of disas-
ters.
The horrors of the fatal February night, the rage and
despairs, pain and heroism, torments and courage of the inhab-
itants of the town are expressed in Nazim Mamedov's series of
works. Their titles express everything: "Khodjaly in fire", "Last
day of Khodjaly", "Death of heroic woman", "Captive family", etc.
The work titled "Retribution" is distinguished with special emo-
1 The metaphor means the leaders of the Kremlin at the period of the tragic
international conflict.
tional and impressive force. The author had collected detailed
materials regarding the circumstances of the happened events
before taking up the brush; human grief, pain of losses, love in
native land, sorrow and compassion, the painter's protest
against the vandalism and accusation of the evil instigators are
expressed by influential tongue of the vivid paints. The painter
has presented a significant part of these works i.e. 31 pictures
to museum.
A cycle of works has been devoted to this theme by Kamil
Ramazanov. These are "The tragedies happened during 1905-
1908" and "Pages of history" retrospectively submitting the
episodes of cruelties of the Armenian nationalists and fascists;
"What's the devil" philosophically thinking about the destructive
elements of shabby instincts promoted by falsified ideas; "Civil
Armenian man and commoner Turkish woman", "Proud Girl",
"Officer of our Army", "Azerbaijani Soldier", "Courageous Girls"
expressing the belief in the spiritual force and insuperability of
nation; "Little Captives", "Salatyn's Tragedy", "Captive's
Martyrdom", "Mother's Howl" full of rage and hate to the brutal
enemy… The burden of this cycle is bravery and courage of the
Khodjaly inhabitants defending own town and own lands at the
unequal battle to the uttermost.
Karim Jalal's work titled "Trace of Time" personifies the trag-
ic memory having ascetically strict composition and discreet
tones. This is a symbolic silhouette of lonely Mother on a road
moving beyond, to uncertainty and to nowhere and stopping for
a moment for glancing back with grieve sights at native resi-
dence, native land: there's no way back, there's an impassable
border between her and Motherland. She's leaving the land
where she was born and learned to walk, married and became
a mother; she's leaving own residence full of her joys, cares and
memories… She carries a child, an only phenomenon remained
with her, her future and only hope…
Two big hands over her head are binding threads as if a spi-
198
der is spinning a web; there's a bleeding watch on the symboli-
cal wrist meaning the time when Khodjaly was sunk in blood and
razed to the ground; it is a "Trace of Time", sign of history
drought by burst of sub-machine gunfire, perfidy, cruelty and
vandalism...
Hafiz Mammadov's, Yagub Mehdiyev's, Khanlar and Zakir
Ahmadovs' works express unforgettable and brave TV-journalist
Chingyz Mustafayev taking through the tears the innocent vic-
tims of the Khodjaly massacre; a mother embracing her infant
runs beyond the brutal enemy; a brave fighter is fighting for the
native land…
The works created by our paints via the heartache and suf-
fer of soul are the artificial personification of the tragic page of
our history full of tears and blood and tears and summon to fight
for admission of justice as well as fir the sake of honor and dig-
nity of the Motherland.
Elmira Gasymova,
Deputy Director of the
Azerbaijan Art Museum
named after R.Mustafayev.
199
Khanlar Ahmadov - "Wounded Fighter"
200
Karim Jalal - "Unprotected Compatriots"
Karim
Jalal - "Trace
of Time"
201
202
Yagub Metiyev -
"Howling Voice"
Vagif Udjatay -
"Hauling Dashnaks"
Faig Ahmadov -
"Shout of Soul"
Vagif Udjatay - "Khodjaly
Tragedy"
203
Nazim Mammadov -
"A Child's Death"
EXECUTED MONUMENTS
Several years ago there were known also another fact of
vandalism committed by the Armenian occupants during capture
of Shusha in May 1992: coming to brutal boldness the "con-
querors" shot in Uzeyir Hadjybeyov's Bulbul's and Natavan's
busts put in the town. The great composer, great singer and
great poetess perpetuated in bronze by the thankful Azerbaijani
people became targets of barbarians. The damaged works of art
were found occasionally and brought to Baku (the "civil" pillager
were going to seal them as scrap metal in the neighboring
republic). Now these busts are located for common viewing near
the building of the Art Museum named after R.Mustafayev.
If an enemy is shooting in the monuments
Of famous figures, then he gets afraid
He sees in them a bastion of independence
And a memory unable to detroy.
Huseynbala Miralamov
"Executed Monuments"
(The "Penitence" Book. "Gandjlik", 2002)
204
THE MINISTRY OF CULTURE:
CARE OF PEOPLE WRETCHED BY WAR
Rescue of the Uzeyir Hadjybeyov's Bulbul's and Natavan's
busts and their delivery to Baku were very difficult and got pos-
sible firstly owing to the significant patriotic service of the
Ministry of Culture of the Azerbaijan Republic.
The life and cares of the refugees and immigrants including
those from Khodjaly is a subject of special and permanent atten-
tion of the Ministry of Culture. Our compatriots suffering from
war, losing own near relations and depriving of native resi-
dences need in kind attitude and spiritual heat as well as regu-
lated and normal way of life. The masters of art, singers, musi-
cians, poets and writers often visit the tent camps i.e. temporary
shelters of the immigrants. The Ministry of Culture regularly
organizes concerts and meeting in these regions and hold
demonstration of the works of painters and sculptors devoted to
the Garabagh events and memories of the war victims. The
Ministry of Culture realizes a great work for introduction of the
truth regarding the Khodjaly tragedy to the world community.
205
POLICY
AND
T E R R O R
ARMENIA: TERRORISM AS AN INTEGRAL
PART OF THE STATE POLICY
(facts and figures)
Besides realization of the ethnic purge and genocide policy
in the occupied territories the Armenia Republic and its special
services are directly involved in terrorist and diversionary
actions committed hundreds kilometers beyond the conflict zone
and caused death of hundreds people.
The taken investigations and the court examinations had
proved that these actions are initiated and realized by the spe-
cial services of Armenia as well as Armenian terrorist and sepa-
ratist organizations.
The existing materials specify that terrorism is supported in
the Armenian Republic on the state level; they use for this pur-
pose the military captives and hostages, citizens of third coun-
tries, representatives of national minorities.
On 16 th of September 1989 a "Tbilisi-Baku" Passenger Bus
was exploded, five people died, twenty-five people got wound-
ed.
On 10 th of August 1990 a "Tbilisi-Aghdam" Passenger Bus
was exploded, twenty people died, thirty people got wounded.
Reference: A.Avanesyan and M.Tatevosyan, the executors
of the crime were arrested. It was clarified that this terrorist
group had planned to arrange explosion of the "Aghdam-Tbilisi"
Bus on 17th of July 1991, but the arrest of these people prevent-
ed commitment of this crime.
207
On 30 th of May 1991 a "Moscow-Baku" Passenger Train was
exploded near the Khasavyurd station of the Russian Federation,
eleven people died, twenty-two people got wounded.
On 31th of July 1991 a "Moscow-Baku" Passenger Train
was exploded near the Temirtau station in Dagestan, sixteen
people died, twenty people got wounded.
On 8th of January 1992 as a result of the terrorist action
committed in sea passenger ferry going on the route
Krasnovodsk (presently Turkmanbashy) - Baku twenty-five peo-
ple died and eighty- eight people got wounded.
On 28th of February 1992 a "Kislovodsk-Baku" Passenger
Train was exploded near the Gudermes station in the Northern
Caucasus, eleven people died, eighteen people got wounded.
On 2nd of June 1993 a carriage was exploded at the Railway
Station in Baku causing a great material damage to the state.
Reference: Igor Khatkovski, a citizen of Russia executing
the terrorist act arrested in Baku admitted that he was recruited
by the Colonel Jan Ovanesyan, the Chief of the
Reconnaissance Department of the Ministry of National Safety
of the Armenia Republic, and sent to Azerbaijan in order to com-
mit undercover work and terrorist action being ordered to realize
terrorist actions with a lot of human sacrifices. As a result of the
joint operative actions realized by the Ministry of National Safety
of the Azerbaijan Republic and the Russian Federal Safety
Service on Jan Ovanesyan and his Deputy, Major Ashot
Galoyan as well as Major Boris Simonyan, an employee of the
Russian Federal Security Service were detained in Moscow on
13th of May 1994. The investigation discovered that in 1991-
1994 the above-mentioned group had organized explosions in
the passenger trains going to Baku from the Russian Territory
where 47 people died and 83 people got wounded.
On 1th of February 1994 a "Kislovodsk-Baku" Passenger
Train was exploded at the Railway Station in Baku, three people
died, twenty people got wounded.
208
On 9th of February 1994 a goods carriage staying on the
alternate way at the Railway Station in Khudat (Azerbaijan)
causing a great material damage to the state.
On 19th of March 1994 as a result of the explosion at the
"20th of January" Underground Station in Baku fourteen people
died and forty-nine people got wounded.
Reference: It was discovered that the terrorist action was
prepared by the Reconnaissance Service of Armenia and real-
ized by the members of the "Sadval" Lezgin Separatist
Organization. The investigation and judicial actions proved that
at the beginning of 1992 the Special Services of the Armenian
Republic had a secret communication with the "Sadval"
Organization and financing it oriented its activity against
Azerbaijan. In 1992 massed weapons, ammunition and explo-
sives were delivered on helicopters from Armenia to Dagestan
for the "Sadval" fighters and supplied to activists of the organi-
zation in the northern regions of Azerbaijan. In 1992-1993 the
Armenian Reconnaissance established military training bases in
Nairy and Arzny regions of the Armenian Republic and about
hundred members of "Sadval" passed special diversionary and
terrorist training under supervision of Armenian instructors.
Thirty people of these terrorists were called to criminal account
for explosions happened at the "20th of January" Underground
Station in Baku.
On 13th of April 1994 a "Moscow-Baku" Passenger Train
was exploded near the "Dagestan Lights" station in Dagestan,
six people died, three people got wounded.
On 3rd of July 1994 as a result of explosion of the power
train between the "28th of May" and "Gandjlik" Underground
Stations in Baku fourteen people died and fifty-four people were
maimed in various degrees.
Reference: This terrorist action was committed by Aslanov
Azer Salman oglu, a citizen of the Azerbaijan Republic of Lezgi
nationality. A.Aslanov was taken prisoner during the fights for
209
Garabagh and recruited by the Armenian Special Service bod-
ies. The investigation and court process had determined that in
the "ideological provision" of A.Aslanov's training as terrorist
participated a publicist Zori Balayan, one of the ideologists of the
Armenian separatist and nationalist extremism and Robert
Kocharyan, the present President of the Azerbaijan Republic
and the leader of the Upper Garabagh separatists.
The Fire-cease Agreement coming to force in May of 1994
as well as the initiations undertaken by the Azerbaijani party cre-
ated conditions for cease of the military actions in the conflict
zone and factually, the anti-Azerbaijani terrorist activity of
Armenia in the regions beyond the from line simultaneously
completed. I proves again that besides the direct military expan-
sion, the terrorism directed against the wide layers of inhabitants
and civil objects is an integral part of the unit state policy of
Armenia concerning to the Azerbaijan Republic. Artificial prolon-
gation of amicable regulation of the conflict by Armenia keeps
tension in the region and, consequently, has a potential danger
of disasters in the world. In this case we cannot be ensured in
absence of the terrorist "component" of the Armenian militarism.
210
THE CHRONOLOGY OF OCCUPATION
OF THE AZERBAIJAN REGIONS BY ARMENIA
18th of September 1988 Khankendy
17th of February 1992 Khodjavend
26th of February 1992 Khodjaly
8th of May 1992 Shusha
18th of May 1992 Lachyn
2nd of April 1993 Kalbadjar
7th of June 1993 Aghdara
23rd of June 1993 Aghdam
23rd of August 1993 Fizuli
24th of August 1993 Jabrayil
31st of August 1993 Gubadly
29th of October 1993 Zangilan
THE CHRONOLOGY OF CAPTURE
OF THE AZERBAIJAN VILLAGES
ON THE EVE OF OCCUPATION OF KHODJALY
30th of October 1991 Tug, Salaketin
12th of November 1991 Akhullu
19th of November 1991 Khodjavend
15th of December 1991 Jamilli
21st of December 1991 Nabilar
23rd of December 1991 Meshaly
25th of December 1991 Hasanabad
211
212
28th of December 1991 Karkidjahan
21st of February 1992 Geybaly, Malybeyli, Lower
and Upper Gushchular
15th of December 1992 Garadaghly
THE KHODJALY TRAGEDY IS AN
INTERNATIONAL CRIME
AND INTEGRAL PART OF THE PUR
POSEFUL GENOCIDE POLICY
COMMITTED BY ARMENIA AGAINST
THE AZERBAIJANI PEOPLE
One of the heinous crimes committed at the period of the
Armenian-Azerbaijani and Upper Garabagh conflict is the
bloody massacre unprecedented in the history committed in
Khodjaly town in the Upper Garabagh region of Azerbaijan.
Massed innocent people were destroyed with a sophisticated
cruelty… A lot of children, women and old people were shot1…
TheArmed Forces of Armenia and mercenaries destroyed entire
families and people were killed with special cruelty: they were
peeled off and cut off their ears and scalps.
1.THE CHARACTER
OF THE KHODJALY GENOCIDE
AS AN INTERNATIONAL CRIME
1 The concrete data regarding the number of the killed, wounded, maimed,
taken prisoner and disappeared people are specified in the previous chapters
of the book.
The legal subject of genocide is determined with the
Convention of protection and punishment of genocide crime
accepted upon the Resolution No. 260 (3) of the UN General
Assembly on 9th December 1948 and consists of the following
actions committed for the purpose of full or partial destruction of
any national, ethnic, racial or religious group:
- destruction of members of such groups;
- infliction of heavy bodily injury or mental disorder of
members of such groups;
- creation of vital conditions purposefully directed to full or
partial physical destruction of any group;
- acceptation of measurements directed to suppression of
fertility in such groups;
- obligatorily separation of children from any human group
and passage to another.
Determination of the g e n o c i d e crime is a necessary
element. It distinguishes the genocide crime on its objective fea-
tures from other similar international crimes. Each action com-
mitting the g e n o c i d e crime on its character may be com-
mitted as a result of intention, premeditation and imprudence.
Simultaneously, intention of committing such actions and gener-
al realization of its possible results isn't enough for classification
of the action as genocide. It's required hereby to express spe-
cial direction of intention of criminal people or a concrete pre-
meditation connected to negative results of the action.
Murder of the Azerbaijani civil inhabitants trying to be res-
cued by running shooting from machine and submachine guns
from the previously established ambushes proves namely the
intention of genocide.
The fact of direction of this crime against the Azerbaijani
national group is also incontestable.
The analysis of the genocide crime determines existence of
its three main elements:
213
- existence of cognate national, ethnic or religious group;
- existence of intention of full or partial destruction of such
group (mens rea);
- commitment of any action of genocide in connection with
cognate group (actus reus).
Consequently, the genocide act must be directed against
national, ethnic, racial and or religious group. Such actions
directed to other groups, for instance, political or social one can-
not be assessed as genocide.
The term "genocide" means existence of concrete intension
regarding the general results of criminal action.
AS a determining sign of genocide crime intention includes
several aspects:
- Intention consists of destruction not of one or several
persons belonging to any concrete group but of a group. Not the
individual's personality but namely his belonging to concrete
group is a determinative factor for determination of the genocide
victims;
- Intention must consist of destruction differing from oth-
ers. Genocide is a rejection from admission of existence right of
entire human group. But manslaughter (homocid) is character-
ized by non-admission of existence right of separate people.
Therefore, a criminal action (actus reus) may be limited in one
person by a criminal intension (mens rea) must be directed to
existence of group;
- Intention must have a purpose of full or partial destruc-
tion of group;
- Intention must have a purpose of destruction namely of
national, ethnic, racial or religious group.
The final result of a criminal action expressed in full or par-
tial destruction of a certain group isn't put as a necessary condi-
tion for calling to criminal account for commitment of genocide.
For this purpose it's enough to commit any action expressing the
objective essence of this crime for the purpose of full or partial
214
destruction of certain group.
The term "destruction" belonging to the objective corpus
delicti of genocide means physical destruction of a group by dif-
ferent means.
The UN International Court in the Resolution on "Barcelona
teraktion" Case renamed the obligation of genocide acts mora-
torium as "ergo omnes" obligation. The International Court had
admitted the principles basing the Convention regarding preven-
tion and accusation of genocide crime, integral part of interna-
tional law and order as well as the norms having obligatory char-
acter for all states.
2. THE LEGAL DOCUMENTS BASING
ADMISSION OF THE KHODJALY GENO-
CIDE AS INTERNATIONAL CRIME
The Convention of protection and punishment of genocide
crime accepted upon the Resolution No. 260 (3) of the UN
General Assembly on 9th December 1948.
The Regulations of the Nuremberg military tribunal
(although the Regulations don't specify directly the genocide
crime, the actions aggregating this crime are considered as
crime against humanity and the military crimes).
The Regulations of the Yugoslavian International Criminal
Tribunal (Article 4).
The Regulations of the Rwanda International Criminal
Tribunal (Article 1).
The Status of the International Criminal Court (Article 6).
The Criminal Code of the Azerbaijan Republic (Article 103)
The Decree of the President of the Azerbaijan Republic
"Regarding the genocide of the Azerbaijani people" dated on 26th
of March 1988.
215
3. KHODJALY GENOCIDE
IN THE LIGHT OF
INTERNATIONAL LAW
International law determines the following concerning geno-
cide:
- Criminal judgment and punishment of persons responsi-
ble for genocide is inevitable.
- Not only executors of genocide are criminally liable;
attempts of commitment of genocide as well as instigation of
genocide policy and participation in genocide also causes crim-
inal liability.
- Principle of universal jurisdiction is used towards the
executors of genocide.
- Reference to fulfillment of an order does not reprieve.
- The official person is liable for taking measures to pre-
vent genocide.
- The terms of usual criminal liabilities are not applied to
the genocide crimes.
- Retroactive application of law is possible to genocide
crimes.
- Persons who participated in genocide should be extradit-
ed to the country which government required them.
Therefore, all actions committed by the Armenian occupants
216
against Azerbaijani people in Khodjaly are determined as geno-
cide and considered to be a crime against humanity in accor-
dance with international legal norms.
4. FACT FOR THE WORLD
COMMUNITY: KHODJALY TRAGEDY
IS A PHASE OF GENOCIDE POLICY
INPLEMENTED BY ARMENIA AGAINST
AZERBAIJAN
Present document called "KHODJALY tragedy is a phase of
genocide implemented by Armenia against Azerbaijan" adopted
at the conference of advisory council of Human Rights Institute
of National Academy of sciences of Azerbaijan in 19.02.2002
was sent to Milli Medjlis of Azerbaijan Republic, parliaments of
Turkey, Georgia, Russia and other countries as well as PACE,
European Council General Management for Human Rights and
OSCE Bureau for democratic institutions and human rights. The
document was also directed to international remedial NGOs,
centers and unions represented by Azerbaijani Diaspora.
Analytic and Informational Center
of Human Rights Institute of
National Academy of Sciences of Azerbaijan
217
GIBBETS IN LACHYN
On 18 May 1992 Armenian separatists occupied another
Azerbaijani town of Lachyn. In accordance with inhuman policy
of ethnic purge of civilian population, the occupants had
"excelled" once again. Representatives of foreign mass media
witnessed the brutalities Armenians committed in their zoologi-
cal hatred to Azerbaijanis.
In connection with this subject Azerbaijani political scientist
Reuvshan Novruzoglu brings an example the information given
by Reuters correspondent Vaniry Bennet: "The signs of recent
fights for Lachyn were intolerable to see. According to official
Yerevan, the Kurds who also lived there let the Armenians use
this road as a humanitarian corridor to bring medicaments and
provision… But when we passed through Lachyn two days later
I could see dead bodies all over the canyon. Local journalist
Mechi told us not to look there. 'There are many things you
should not see' he said, 'and many questions you should not
ask'." ("Moskovskaya Gazeta", 19.05.92, pp.2).
The road of Lachyn was sown with dead bodies riddled with
bullets. V.Bennet said she was not allowed to look at people tor-
tured to death. Marking that 'some of the bodies were behead-
ed' the journalist renounced to go to that place full of traces of
abominable cruelty.
There is another sample of cruelty. On 18.05.92 eight girls
aged 9-11 were shot in Lachyn village Garagyshlag (western
218
side of the district) at 13.50. Four of them were from Gajili vil-
lage. According to R.Novruzoglu, V.Bennet managed to film the
carnage. However, the tape was seized from her my special
services (MI-6). R.Novruzoglu says, 3 days before the occupa-
tion of Lachyn, on May 15 1992, a terrorist group of mercenar-
ies headed by major Abraham Arshakyan attacked Sadynlar vil-
lage. 13 inhabitants were captured. It is supposed that these
hostages are still kept in the prison of Armenian security service.
On May 19 the survived civilians were brought to concentra-
tion camp in Sonasar. Everything was for sale there.
Azerbaijanis in critical condition were stuffed with medicaments.
The role of executor in doctor's smock was acted by a "terrorist-
physician" (impossible to call her otherwise) Aida Nersesovna
Saakyan, who held weird "experiments" over Azerbaijani kids.
There is a separate cemetery for children who became victims
of this insane woman. Some day even 36 children were buried
there. The first man to inform Children's Fund of the UN about
this cemetery was diplomat Francesco Vandrell (27.05.1992)
[see UNO": "The Reports and News of the Children's Fund",
1992, X-9].
Another witness of Armenian vandalism was an Iranian jour-
nalist Sayar Hussein. He wrote about gibbets Armenians set in
Lachyn: "The view of the gibbets horrified me. Two women were
hanged in Alkhasly village. I don't know, may be they were moth-
er and daughter.
This panorama can make think anyone who has a heart…
we can't extend a helping hand… we are just praying God.
Nobody publicized these photos in Iran" ("The Lachyn Diary",
Murtuz Brothers publishing, 1995, pp. 52).
We should notice that the women Mr. Hussein was writing
about were Amirova Hadjar Ajdar gyzy (born 1942, passport ¹
XI-VQ ¹469214) and Abdullayeva Rabiya Aslan gyzy (born 1950,
passport ¹ XI-VQ ¹ 312612). After publication of the photos in
such publishing houses as "Zartunk" (Lebanon), Ararat
219
(Armenia), "Araz" (Iran), "Variety" (USA) the Armenian terrorist
showed their face again. They claimed these women were
Armenians and hanged by Azerbaijanis in Khankendy.
Moreover, the video cells that recorded this enabled the
Armenian falsifiers to win such prizes as "Amateur
Cinematography" in California (silver medal) and the same fes-
tival in Paris (golden medal).
According to R.Novruzoglu, these investigations put an idea
that all proofs seized from the authors are kept in state archives
of such countries as Great Britain, USA, Iran, Germany, Russia,
and France. "It's necessary to address these countries. I think,
it will not be connected with any breach of law if Azerbaijan can
apportion a certain sum to obtain these files. But I do not see
any action. For example, we could watch a video file which
showsArmenians' brutality in Upper Garabagh. But we could not
find money to obtain the tape. Our officials and ministries
refused to apportion money to buy that tape. But I'm sure this
17-minutes long record will be enough to unmask Armenian ter-
rorism and make all civil world recognize Armenia as a terrorist
state", concluded Reuvshan Novruzoglu.
("Garabagh" newspaper, 4-24th June 2002,
in Azerbaijani language).
220
POLICY OF ETHNIC PURGE AND TAC-
TICS OF SCORCHED EARTH
IN THE TERRITORIES OCCPIED
BYARMENIA
Economy
- 20% of Azerbaijan's territory is occupied by Armenian
armed forces;
- As a result of aggression over 900 inhabited localities
were destroyed and burnt;
- 6000 industrial, agricultural enterprises and other objects
were destroyed;
- 150000 residential constructions with total square over
9000.000 square meters were destroyed;
- 4366 cultural and public-service institutions were
destroyed including
§ 695 medical stations
§ 927 libraries
§ 464 historic monuments and museums6 state theaters
- Agricultural holdings, water industry, hydraulic structure,
all communications are out of order.
- As a result, Azerbaijan's economy suffered extensive
221
damage in the sum of over 6 billion USD.
Population
As a result of Armenia's military aggression against
Azerbaijan over 20.000 our compatriots were killed.
- Over 50.000 people were wounded and crippled.
- Azerbaijanis became refugees and displaced persons.
- Over 4965 people including 69 children, 320 women,
358 old men are captives at the moment.
222
BRUTAL TREATMENT OF TO AZER-
BAIJANI HOSTAGES
KEPT IN ARMENIA AND UPPER
GARABAGH
(Facts concerning Armenia's violation of the
Geneva Convention dd. 12.08.49)
At the communique of Armenian Foreign Affairs Ministry dd.
16.02.1994 8 Azerbaijani war prisoners were reported shot
allegedly "for attempt to escape". Upon demand of Azerbaijani
side, bodies of 10 Azerbaijani war prisoners were brought to
Baku from Yerevan with assistance of International Red Cross
Committee. On March 24-25 1994 the bodies were subjected to
chemical, histological and biological forensic medical examina-
tion and the fact of 8 war prisoners' being shot from very close
distance was determined. Components of soot found in the shot
wounds in three bodies showed that the shot was done with the
gun in contact with head.
Other war prisoners were shot from very close distance
223
which showed premeditation of the murder. Autopsies showed
that one of the bodies missed liver, spleen, heart and right ear.
Another body missed both ears, one more body missed right ear
and had perforating gunshot wound in the chest. One of the bod-
ies had deep incised wound in neck, another had numerous rid
fractions in the chest. The last body showed signs of cachexia.
On April 7-8 1994 the bodies were subjected to another
autopsy by Professor Derrick Pounder, forensic pathologist with
international status, the member of the International Academy of
Law and British organization "Doctors for Human Rights". He
said the war prisoners were shot with the same weapon (gun)
from very close distance and rejected the version of these men's
being shot when "trying to escape".
- Amiraliyeva Arzu Binnet gyzy, former hostage, witnessed
mass execution of 19 Azeri men from 30 hostages including her
husband, mother, sister, brother-in-law and aunt on April 18
1993.
- Huseynov Hasan Medjid oglu, aged 57, former hostage,
told that Armenian occupants executed most of the 40 civilians
on Goradiz-Fizuli road.
- During the occupation of Kalbadjar district of Azerbaijan
Armenians coordinated the occupation by radio on 6721 kHz
frequency. The Security Service of the Ministry of National
Security of Azerbaijan had monitored the Armenians' talks and
intercepted the orders by radio on 07.04.1993. The orders were
transmitted from the radio station in Vardenis region of Armenia
to execute all captured Azerbaijanis and burry them all in order
to hide the evidence from representatives of the international
organizations who were to monitor that war region.
- Alishanov Budag Ali oglu, former hostage, aged 61, wit-
nessed 5 Azerbaijani hostages used as slaves in the village of
Drambon (Upper Garabagh) by Arkady, an Armenian who tor-
mented them to death.
224
- According to Nuhiyeva Raisa Shirin gyzy (former
hostage), Karimova Samaya could not bear the tortures she and
her 2-year daughter were exposed by Armenians and committed
suicide. Her daughter Nurlana was lost her eyesight from trau-
mas.
- Before eyes of 15 years old Nazaket Mammadova
Armenians tortured her father and cut his ears off. Her mother
became mad from the shock. The girl was returned after her rel-
atives had paid 4000 Russian rubles.
- In village Kurdmahmudlu of Fizuli district Armenian mili-
tary men severely beat him, cut off one ear, bound his hands
behind and set fire under his feet. He could hardly survive. And
be released from Armenian captivity on 14.08.1994.
- According to of the Ahmadovs family freed in 1994,
Armenians executed 25 civilians in village Gadjar of Fizuli dis-
trict.
- Imaret Mammadova, aged 30, was captured with her
children during Armenians' occupation of Kalbadjar. Armenian
occupants executed civilians including her 8-month son Taleh.
The bodies were burnt. After the carnage of her 10-year son
Yadigar she was taken other with women and old men to
Khankendy ("Stepanakert") and exposed to tortures and humili-
ation.
- Khudiyeva Gulsum told that her mother Afat Mirzayeva
and Grandfather Aslan Mirzayev were killed when they were try-
ing to escape from Armenian firing. Her 7-month grandson
Ilyasov Babek had got a shell splinter in his right eye. They
spent 4 four month in Armenian captivity and the kid had mo
medical service. As a result he lost his eye.
- Shevelev Vladimir Ivanovich, born 1926, captured in
Aghdam 03.07.1993. He told he stayed in the occupied town
hoping Armenians would nit harm him as he was Russian, not
Azerbaijani. However, Armenians executed his old mother, sis-
ter and brother who was laid up by an illness.
225
He saw an exploded Azerbaijani tank with disfigured bodies
of crew, women and children around it. Vladimir Shevelev was
released from Armenian captivity 28.04.1994.
- The autopsy of Atakishiyev Farhad Rahman oglu
showed he died as a result of constant beating and tortures.
- In many cases Armenians captured whole families. So,
on 26.02.1992 during Khodjaly assault six the Mammadovs fam-
ily (6 persons including 3 women) were captured. 15 inhabitants
of Kalbadjar district captured on 06.03.1993 were members of
the Guliyevs family. 19 persons from village Gorazilli of Fizuli
district belonged to the Nuriyevs family; the oldest of them was
aged 80, the youngest - 4 years.
226
MEASURES TAKEN BY
THE AZERBAIJAN REPUBLIC
TO SECURE THE RIGHTS OF WAR PRIS-
ONERS AND HOSTAGES
In February 1993 leader of the Caucasus Moslems
Allahshukur Pasha-zadeh met the Catholicos of all Armenians
Vazgen II in Swiss town of Montre. By the initiative of
Allahshukur Pasha-zadeh the signed communique included the
matter of immediate release of all war prisoners and hostages.
09.03.1993 in the Moscow International Red Cross repre-
sentational office the meeting between Namik Abbasov, the
Chairman of the Committee for Hostages and Missing People
and Andranik Arshakian, the head of administration of Defense
Ministry of Armenia was held. The parties agreed to prepare the
drafts of four documents to be signed in Geneva in March of the
same year. Within ten days Azerbaijan prepared the drafts as
follows:
- Exchange of hostages on "all by all" principle and refusal
of taking hostages.
- Exchange of injured and hard diseased hostages.
- Exchange of the bodies of those died in captivity within 48
hours.
227
- Observation of the Geneva Conventions on maintenance
of war prisoners.
The documents were sent to Armenia and Geneva through
representational office of the Red Cross in Baku. Later the
Armenian side set up political claims and refused to send a del-
egation to Geneva to sign these documents.
There are no captives of Armenian origin in Azerbaijan after
one-sided release of 27 Armenian war prisoners by Azerbaijani
side with assistance of the Red Cross in August 1994. Despite
statements of Armenian side during the negotiations (held since
1993 and concerning missing persons and hostages) about only
50 war prisoners, 1327 people have been released from
Armenian captivity. There are facts showing capture of 783
Azerbaijani citizen (including 18 children, 43 women and 56 old
men) from 4965 of those considered missing. According to tes-
timony of the released persons names of other hostages were
gathered in a list. Nevertheless, these facts are objected by
Armenian side and they are not officially registered by the
International Red Cross.
However, the International Search Group represented by
Bernhard Klaze (Germany), Svetlana Gannushkina (Russia)
and Paata Zakareishili (Georgia) who has numerously visited
Baku, Yerevan and Khankendy got an information concerning 6
Azerbaijanis mentioned in those lists. These war prisoners were
found in Armenian captivity although Armenians obstinately
objected this fact 6 years before.
Azerbaijan provides conditions for monitoring on its territory
at any time. So, on September 25-29 1999 remedial group with
a representative from OSCE and Armenia visited Baku in order
to discover facts of Armenians being kept in Azerbaijan prisons.
In order to prove illegitimacy of Armenian allegations this group
was let to monitor all prisons.
In December 1999 Azerbaijani side stated in PACE that all
matters connected with war prisoners, hostages and missing
228
persons should be settled in accordance with Geneva
Convention provisions and following principles:
- Consideration of the matters of war prisoners, hostages
and missing persons as especial humanitarian problem and
non-usage of them to in political purposes;
- Opportune release of all war prisoners registered by the
Red Cross;
- Organization of common search for missing persons and
urgent notification if found any;
- Provision of all necessary conditions for monitoring of
the supposed places of captivity by humanitarian organizations
and representatives of both sides;
- Expansion and development of relations with
International Red Cross and other remedial and humanitarian
organizations in order to settle the matters concerning war pris-
oners, hostages and missing persons;
- Address to EC member states to assist in rehabilitation
and treatment of the released people;
These principles were approved by the PACE Political
Matters Comity and were reflected in the address of Milli Medjlis
of Azerbaijan Republic on 30.12.1999.
229
APPEAL OF KHODJALY
REFUGEES TO
THE UN AND OSCE
In our appeal to such authoritative world organiza-
tions as the UN and OSCE we intend to inform about
Khodjaly genocide committed by Armenians in Upper
Garabagh region of Azerbaijan and give the socio-polit-
ical evaluation of this bloody crime.
Anyone who knows Azerbaijan history is aware that
Khodjaly town located in the Upper part of Garabagh
and existing since III millennium BC is one of the
ancient inhabited localities of Azerbaijan. This is proven
by the exhibits and unique historical monuments found
during archaeological digs on the territory of this town.
Secured by great powers, Armenians who in 1978
erected a monument on the occasion 150th anniversary
of their resettlement from Persia to Azerbaijan, accom-
plished policy of expansionism against Azerbaijan dur-
ing last two centuries in order to realize their insubstan-
tial idea of "great Armenia". To achieve these aims they
never stopped before such crimes as ethnic purges, ter-
230
rorism, deportation and genocide.
Numerous historical documents show prove that mil-
lions of Azerbaijanis were exposed to ethnic purges and
deportation from their homelands in Caucasus in 1905-
1907, 1918-1920, 1948-1953.
Finally, beginning from 1988, groundless territorial
claims to Azerbaijan were sounded by Armenian sepa-
ratists again; the machine of provocative Upper
Garabagh campaign was launched. This had neither
historical nor ethnic or politic ground. Over 230.000
Azerbaijanis were exposed to genocide and deportation
from their homelands in modern Armenia. As a result,
Armenia became monoethnic and Armenian chauvin-
ists' wishes came true.
What was mostly regretful, the Upper Garabagh
conflict, Armenians' chauvinistic tricks on the territory of
Azerbaijan and sufferings of Azerbaijani civilians who
became victim of this obscurantism met with silence of
the USSR and civil world. Fervent Armenian chauvinists
were inspired to make use of this situation and commit
genocide of Azerbaijani people of Upper Garabagh and
other unexampled crimes. Armenian armed forces occu-
pied 20% of Azerbaijan's territory including 7 regions
which do not belong to Upper Garabagh. Over
1.000.000 Azerbaijanis were driven out from their
homes, dozens of thousands people were murdered,
crippled, became hostages. Hundreds of inhabited
localities were wiped off the earth, thousands of cultur-
al and public-service institutions, schools, hospitals,
historical monuments, mosques and cemeteries under-
went Armenian vandalism.
231
Tragedies, terrorism and mass killings committed by
Armenian gangs in the first years of the conflict in such
Garabagh villages as Karkidjahan, Meshali,
Gushchular, Garadaghly, Agdaban and others and
Khodjaly genocide is a historical crime by "longsuffer-
ing" Armenians. On 26.02.1992 another tragedy had
gone down to history along with Hatin, Songmi,
Nagasaki and Hiroshima - the Khodjaly genocide. That
night Armenian armed forces with the assistance of
Russian 366th motorized infantry regiment (was dislocat-
ed in Khankendy ("Stepanakert") attacked Khodjaly
town from 5 directions. The population of the town was
7000; at the moment of attack 3000 inhabitants were
staying there. 4 years before, Khodjaly was blocked by
Armenian armed forces so people suffered from lack of
medicine and provision. There were many old men,
injured, women and children in the town.
Backed up by their foreign accomplices insolent
Armenian terrorists wiped the town off the earth that
night. The town was burnt down and destroyed with
heavy artillery. Weaponless population - old men,
women and children were executed with specific brutal-
ity. This crime disgraces the mankind. Only due to good
fortune some people could survive and become the live
witnesses of this massacre.
Officially 613 people were killed. 1275 civilians were
captured. The lot of 150 men is still unknown. Over
1000 people became crippled being shot. 106 of those
killed were women, 83 children, and 70 old men. 76 of
the crippled are teenagers.
Several families were murdered completely, 25 kids
232
lost both parents, 130 kids lost one parent, dozens were
executed with special brutality - burnt alive, scalped,
beheaded, pregnant women's stomachs were bayonet-
ed. Many of the victims missed their eyes. It's hard to
believe that such brutality could have taken place at the
end of 20th century, before the eyes of civil world. World
should know that this is crime against humanity, not
only Azerbaijanis which was committed by the Armenian
"long-sufferers".
It is ten years that Khodjaly inhabitants who drag out
existence of refugees hopefully address to all peaceful
nations of the world and international organizations. We
appeal to you not to connive the tragedy we were
exposed as a result of Armenian aggression. We do not
believe that such authoritative organizations as UN and
OSCE can not make the guilty side who challenged to
humanity admit its responsibility. We are confident that
the world community will condemn military aggression
of Armenia against Azerbaijan and will guarantee
Azerbaijan's territorial integrity, return of million
refugees to their residences and settlement of the
Armenian-Azerbaijan conflict in the context of historical
and political justice.
With sense of sorrow we learnt the tragic news of
September 11 2002 in USA, the tragedy that caused
mass death of many people. This human tragedy
returned us 10 years back when we and dozens of thou-
sands of Azerbaijani refugees faced similar event.
As the witnesses of Khodjaly genocide we condemn
September 11 2002 terrorist action and addressing to
the UN, EU and OSCE we inform the civilized world
233
about necessity of legal and political evaluation of the
Khodjaly genocide. As people who faced one of the
most terrible tragedies of the 20th century we call all
other nations to struggle for peace and security.
We appeal to all international organizations and
authoritative states to mobilize common efforts in order
to liquidate war in all regions of the world and struggle
for prosperity, free and happy human society living in
peace and safety.
(The appeal was made at
the meeting of Khodjaly refugees
on 20.02.2002 in Baku).
234
STATEMENT OF MILLI MEDJLIS
(AZERBAIJAN PARLIAMENT)
ON OCCASION OF 10TH ANNIVERSARY
OF KHODJALY GENOCIDE
Before the plenary session on 26.02.2002 dedicated to the
10th anniversary of Khodjaly genocide, the deputies together
with invited ambassadors looked through the photo slides and
literature dedicated to this tragedy. Then the session started.
Adoption of the statement of Milli Medjlis concerning the
anniversary was put on agenda. Milli Medjlis speaker Murtuz
Alaskarov who started the session dwelled on policy of policy of
ethnic purges and genocide committed by the Armenian chau-
vinists against Azerbaijani two centuries long. The speaker
pointed out that deep analysis of historical processes was given
in the address of the Azerbaijan President Heydar Aliyev.
President also charged the government with bringing the truth
about Khodjaly genocide and Armenians' other crimes to the
notice of other parliaments, states and whole world community
as well as attaining recognition of these acts of vandalism as
policy of genocide.
Murtuz Alaskarov also noticed that making arrangements in
the USA Congress and spreading of the documents concerning
Khodjaly genocide in the PACE are of great significance from
the viewpoint of notification of the world community about one of
the most terrible tragedies of Azerbaijan.
235
After Murtuz Alaskarov's speech video records of the shock-
ing crime in Khodjaly made by martyr correspondent Chingiz
Mustafayev were demonstrated. Deputies Anar Rzayev, Samad
Seyidov amd others who spoke at the session stressed the
necessity of political evaluation of this crime by the world com-
munity and punishment of its organizers and executors.
At the end Milli Medjlis unanimously adopted Statement on
occasion of 10th anniversary of Khodjaly genocide and decided
to address with it to the parliaments of other countries.
236
THE MONUMENTS
DEVOTED TO
THE KHODJALY
GENOCIDE
238
Khatai district, Baku city
Gandja city
239
240
Naftalan town
Barda town
241
Lankaran city
242
EPILOGUE
Dear reader!
The Garabagh conflict commenced in 1988 i.e. the territori-
al pretension of Armenia to Azerbaijan and the war waged by the
former is continuing.
The Azerbaijan land still remains under occupation.
The Armenian nationalist ideology keeps laying claim to
Georgia and Turkey and the Armenian historians are glazing at
the southern part of Russia. The nationalists with dashnak stuff-
ing and terrorist equipment feel in freedom in Armenia. Terror
has become the secret element of its state policy. The dashnak
doctrine has been officially legalized and is supported in this
country. Terror is included to the arsenal of the practical activi-
ty of the "Dashnaksutyun" Party. Terrorist Varujan Karapetyan
exploding a plane of the Turkish Air Company in the Orly Airport
of Paris in 1983 and being discharged from prison in 2001 upon
the order of the Court of France and deported from the country
was met in Yerevan as hero. Terrorist Khachik Aslanyan operat-
ing in Philippines and being imprisoned in Canada "successful-
ly landed" in Yerevan in 2002.
All of these events happened in the background of the sum-
mons of the world community to fight against the international
terrorism. The "wolves in ship's clothing" move without restraint.
The Armenian terrorism keeps "sharpening canines" in
training camps. The civil West avoid to hear the rattle of the rap-
243
torial teeth.
It's time to regain consciousness and sight, sirs!
Let's stop to remain in a complacent ignorance and sympa-
thetically sigh seeing the "crocodile tears" of the Armenian prop-
aganda and to believe in sincerity and righteousness of those
annually upon ritual ring of bells in the Cycernacapert is trying to
suppress the noise of shooting submachine-guns as well as the
voice of crying orphans and groaning mothers in Khodjaly!
The Khodjaly genocide is one of the most horrible tragedies
of the 20th century. The world has to know a truth about it! It
must know and remember for preventing its repetition anytime
and anywhere!
A Japanese groaning for those destroyed in Hiroshima and
Nagasaki, the Jews surviving Holocost, a Lithuanian remember-
ing a tragedy of Pirchulis, a Czech and Slovak keeping sad
memory of Lydice, a French bowing to the victims of Oradur, a
Vietnamese crying on ashes of Songmi are sons and daughters
of various people exposing to bloody nightmare of the total mil-
itarist brutality and bacchanalia of blind hate and xenophobia!
The spirits of those innocently killed and destroyed in
Azerbaijani Khodjaly town are invisibly wandering nearby the
spirits of your compatriots exposing to massed destructions.
But it's impossible to force people to knees by any cruel
action or subdue the obstinacy of people to battle for independ-
ence, honor and dignity.
Regardless of the image terrorism is a global evil and dan-
ger for mankind ant the basic moral principles of the human
society.
It's over centuries that the Armenian nationalism and terror-
ism darken in the long-suffering Caucasus, envenom the com-
prehension of new generation with blind hate, plant death and
destructions, murder the spiritual space as a mortal radiation
and make obstacle in the way of worthy, peaceful and reliable
future…
244
Thus, the fight against the Armenian nationalism and its ter-
rorist tentacles is keenly necessary both in regional and global
measurement.
This task meets the general imperative of time i.e. battle
against the international terrorism becoming especially actual
upon the terrorist actions committed in the USA on 11th of
September 2001 and inspiring the world community to conjoin
own efforts in order to provide the main human rights of life and
safe existence.
It's required by the memories of the victims of the terror and
massed destruction.
It's required by the spirits of hundred killed peaceful inhabi-
tants of Khodjaly and the ancient Khodjaly land turned into ruins.
Twelve years have passed since the Khodjaly tragedy, but
the ache of Khodjaly as well as tears and blood of the Khodjaly
inhabitants would never be forgotten.
This memory will remain in the hearts of the present and
future generations.
We believe in triumph of justice. Our destroyed towns
and villages will arise from ruins and the territorial integrity
of the independent Azerbaijan will be restored!
245
THE USED LITERATURE
1. Keucharly T.K. Garabagh. Lie and Truth. Baku.
1958.
2. Nasibzadeh N.L. Foreign policy of Azerbaijan
(1918-1920). Baku. 1996.
3. Geuyushov R. Trip to former of Garabagh. Baku.
1993.
4. Tashgyran Ch. The Garabagh matter since past to
present. Ankara, 1995.
5. Aliyev I.H. Upper Garabagh. History. Facts.
Events. Baku, 1989.
6. McCartney J., McCartney K. Turks and
Armenians (Manual on the Armenian matter). Baku, 1996.
7. Shavrov N.N. A new danger for the Russian affair
in Transcaucasia; Impending sale of Mughan to foreign-
ers. Baku, 1990.
8. Saleh Bey. Armenianship. Baku, 1994
9. Liddel S. Armenian-Tatar Agreement on establish-
ment of peace in Garabagh
10. Mirza Jamal Garabaghy. History of Garabagh.
Baku, 1959.
11. Mammadova F.S. The Political History and
246
Historical Geography of Azerbaijan. Baku, 1993.
12. Description of the Garabagh province made in
1823. Tiflis, 1866.
13. The Caucasian Calendar for 1917. Tiflis, 1916.
14. Political History. Part 1. Baku, 1991.
15. The Historical Geography of the Azerbaijanies of
Armenia. Baku, 1995
16. Navvab M.M. The Armenian-Moslem War in 1905-
1906. Baku, 1995.
17. Abdullayev A. The aggressive policy of Armenia
against Azerbaijan. Baku, 1995.
18. The Azerbaijan Republic (1918-1920). Parliament
1. Baku, 1998.
19. The Azerbaijan Republic. Documents and
Materials (1918-1920). Baku, 1998.
20. Mammadova H.I. Pages from history of battle of
the Garabagh General Governorship against the
Armenian aggression. Baku, 1999.
21. "Respublika" Newspaper. Baku, 2001
22. "Azerbaijan" Newspaper. Baku, 2002
23. "Deyirman" Magazine. Holland, 2002
24. "Garabagh" Newspaper. Baku, 2002
247
TABLE OF CONTENTS
By the author ………………………………………………...3
What the history talks about …………………………....….7
The Khodjaly Genocide……………………………….......32
Politice stimation of the Khodjaly Genocid….................44
Martyrs of Khodjaly……………………………………......62
Eye-witnessing martyrs…………………………………..131
Truth is immortal…………………………………………..154
Echo of tragedy…………………………………………...163
Policy and Terror………………………………................206
The monuments devoted to the Khodjaly Genocide….237
Epilogue……………………………………………………243
The used literature………………………………………..246
Чапа имзаланмышдыр: 10.02.2006
Каьыз форматы: 60х84 1/16. Офсет.
15,5 Офсет чап цсулу.
Тиражы 1000. Сифариш № 18.
Китаб “Гярянфил” мятбяясиндя чап олунмушдур.
Цнван: Бакы шящяри, 28 Май 78/5
Тел: 498 56 38
249
