 
 
 
Sariyya Muslum 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
KHOJALY  IS  NOT  DEAD 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2007
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Redactor: Adila Aghabeyli   Scientific Worker in National Scientific Academy 
 
Translator: Narmin Abbasova “Shams-N” languages and translation center 
 
Painter:  Vagif Ucatay  
Published: Cashoglu Publishing house  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
KHOJALY IS NOT DEAD 
 
IN LIEU OF PREFACE OF AUTHOR 
 
…Once upon a time…..No this story is a different one.  It would be better to begin this story 
with: There were many big cities in the world, and a village named Khojaly.  
 It is pity that now I am obliged to write about my native land, about my motherland in the past tense, 
and in narrative form. But at the end of my story Evil wins over the Good rather than Good over the 
Evil.  
… Within fourteen years I try to be optimistic but I can’t. Greatness, even, the smell of grief 
named Khojaly has become familiar to me. Every year we commemorate black anniversary, tell our 
memories about that grief. By commemorating, by recalling it we reconcile with it. And now we 
gradually begin to forget about it. Though we haven’t right to this.  
…Again I dreamt about my mother. She was in a long, white dress. She was smiling. But 
whiteness of her dress pushed my shoulders in spite of dazzling my eyes; it didn’t let me to move.  
  …Oh my God, how could the grief become familiar? My Khojaly grief …. That left my dreams 
and became a story. I know that while I wrote this book I absorbed into feelings, lost in emotions. But 
the readers can be sure that, the every fate, every story he will meet is real. I know it is hard for you to 
read these reality as it was difficult for me while writing this. Though it is hard, it is difficult, we must 
write about this. There are things that are difficult not to write than to write.   
 
CHRONICLES OF EVENTS 
 
This book is about one of the tragedies of XX century. I don’t want this book to be listed with 
million simple books. Because this book is the cry of Khojaly victims.  
… This book states that executors of this tragedy still go unpunished though 15 years passed since 
then.  
… This book is the equity and justice challenge of millions of Azerbaijanis who demand this tragedy 
to be recognized as genocide.  
… Don’t look for scenes showing images of that tragedy. Accept this book as collection of memories 
of our nation. Grief, sorrow, sadness of this tragedy was written in our memory with blood.  
… This book presents part of our history written in blood.  
We have never resounded to the world about our grief.  As we are the nation who can bear its grief. 
Even this book is not the chronicle of all our tragedy. We wrote this book in order to declare world 
tragedy of all nations who witnessed horrors of the genocide in his our country.  
We are obliged to repeat the reality once more: to kill man, to be his enemy is to be against the God. 
On 26 February 1992, Armenians not only became the enemy of humanity but he became the enemy of 
human value and God as well. This numbers are written in the pages of Azerbaijan history with blood: 
Armenians attacked Khojaly town in the Daghlig-Garabagh region of Azerbaijan and killed 613 
people. 63 of them were children, 106 of them were women and 70 were old people. 8 families were 
completely destroyed, 25 children lost both of their parents, 130 children lost only one of their parents, 
657 men were disabled, and 1275 were captivated. Live of 150 captivated men is still unknown.  
History has witnessed many bloody events. But to live horror of Khojaly tragedy where women, olds 
and children were savagely killed and to bear this is out of the human will.  
Only we, Azerbaijanis could live that tragedy.  
Because we are the nation who witnessed many tragedies and bore this.  
… This book is the chronicle of horror lived in the one night.  
… This book is for delivering tragedies of the yesterday tomorrow.  
I want you to inform about the terrible scene.  There are facts about the participation of Zari Balayan, 
one of the main ideologists of the “Great Armenia” idea, in the Khojaly genocide. Zari Balayan whom 
the Interpol is looking for, justified the Khojaly genocide in his work “Reviving of our Soul” published 
in 1996 and confessing his pride in this genocide against Azerbaijanis he wrote:  
“When I together with Khachatur entered the house we saw 13 years old child hammered in the 
window by our soldiers. In order to make this Turkish child to be silent, Khachatur poked bossom of 
that child’s mother into his mouth. Then I did the same what their fathers did with our children. I 
striped off the shin of his head, breast, and stomach. I looked at my watch; Turkish child died seven 
minutes later by losing much blood. As I was doctor by profession, I wasn’t happy with what I did 
with this Turkish   child. I was very pride that I could revenge for my nation. Then Khachatur cut the 
corpse of this Turkish child into pieces and threw these pieces to dogs. We did same thing late in the 
evening with other 3 Turkish children. I carried out my duty as Armenian patriot. Khachatur sweated 
very much, but I saw revenge and strong humanism in his eyes as well as in the eyes of other soldiers. 
Next morning we came to church and prayed for those who died in 1915 and for deed we done 
yesterday. But we could clean 30 thousand men from Khojaly who occupied one part of our nation”.  
  Zori Balayan who proudly had written facts of the genocide they committed against the Azerbaijanis, 
thinks that every Armenian must be proud for their act. These men are alive and the facts proving that 
Armenians committed genocide in Khojaly is presented in the book of Zori Balayan at the pages 260-
262 of “Reviving of our Soul” published in the 1996.  
I think there is no need for comment. But I must note that after reading confession of this Armenian 
ideologist, every nation, every country must share sorrow, tragedy of Azerbaijanis.  
Thus, I evaluate the book “Khojaly is not dead” as historical document reflecting the destiny, moral 
shaking of every Azerbaijani.  
This book must be send to every country of the world, people all around the world must be unaware of 
the genocide committed against the Azerbaijanis, and must notify their attitude. “Azerbaijan Way” 
Political Movement will use their opportunities in this direction; will use all their potential for 
delivering all book abouts Khojaly genocide to world.  
 
Ilgar Gasimov 
Head of the “Azerbaijan Way” Political Movement 
 
 
 
 
HOMELESSNESS IS A BAD GRIEF 
(Illustrated page) 
 
My first teacher 
 
“Life will teach what teacher can not teach”  
Gatran Tabrizi 
 
When I took pen, her smiling face stood in front of my eyes. Again I returned to those days. A 
swarthy teacher of medium height pressing the book “Alphabet” into her breast entered into the 
classroom. This was my first teacher Fizza khanim.  
Walking between the desks Fizza khanim either corrected the band slipping from the heads of the 
girls, or tidied ones whose clothes were dirty with chalk. Very often, especially before spring she took 
us to the trip to the raged Khojaly and Ilisu River. We used to make colorful garland from field flowers 
and wear them. Our nature was so mysterious that we couldn’t stand to its beauty. At that time bright 
tears used to come down from the eyes of teacher Fizza. Her heart touched, she deeply moved, she felt 
pride of this. Our teacher was very humorous. She used to speak us interesting stories. She impressed 
us so much that we never bored of her pleasant talks. She spoke us about the courage of Allahverdi and 
Gahraman who were among the Khojaly beys, how our lands were given to Armenians due to support 
of the Soviet. Fizza was teacher of my untimely deceased father and mother who witnessed many 
troubles in Khojaly tragedy and died as well. Many children of Khojaly passed her education. Now 
news of her pupils whom she taught Alphabet and lead to the knowledge is heard from higher ranks. 
When I grew up, I learned that two brothers of Fizza, sister of three brothers, died in the Great Patriotic 
War and the other badly wounded hardly in the war and though he was sent to the rare he was a victim 
of other tragedy. Being only child of the family, teacher Fizza recalling those years said:  
- Three women teacher – Shukufa, Ganira and I taught all the lessons at school in Khojaly 
village. Because young director who was appointed to the school and other men teachers were 
send to the front. When their relatives received black letter we were crying as well. Those days 
were very hard. Pupils were coming to school hungrily.  There wasn’t even a wood to burn. 
Gathering children we used to go to the Katik Forest to pick up wood. Fastening the bundle of 
woods to our back and taking off our shoes we used to cross the river. Sometimes children 
slipped and fell to the river. In spite of starvation, poverty, bad news that was coming from the 
front shocked us, it couldn’t break our will to live. We could stand such difficulties.  
Those days we endured the hardness of the war together.  
If we compare teacher Fizza with gardener we won’t be mistaken. She was the teacher of Ramil 
Usubov, Minister of Interior Affairs, late Alfi Sukurov, known from the film “Haray” (Cry), Alif 
Hajiyev, National Hero of Azerbaijan, Tofig Huseinov and other hero sons and scholars.  
As teacher Fizza finished school with excellent marks and there weren’t enough teachers at school 
she began to work. She was awarded with medal for “Distinction in Labor in the Great Patriotic War”, 
medal “Devoted to the 100 Anniversary of V. I. Lenin”, “Medal for good work” and twice with 
“Veteran of Labor” for her activity during the war. After moving to Baku city she wasn’t fed up of 
work. She taught at secondary school of Hokumali village until 1995. Now she is a pensioner. She has 
three children, eight grandchildren, and a great-grandchild. Teacher Fizza, born in 1925 in Khojaly, 
who carried the heaviness of the war on her soft shoulders, and who lost her three brothers, now lives 
the 80s of her life.  
Nobody has moral right to forget teacher Fizza who melted her life for us as a candle. It would be 
better if there to be a lot such people who don’t desire world goods. To follow good example of such 
people is the holy duty of today’s generation. 
 
MY SWEET DREAM GARABAGH 
 
I began to write first page of this book when first breath of the spring was felt, when I wished 
about Garabagh rather than flower on the women day.  
To see spring in our beautiful Garabagh would be my greatest joy. But still my desire hasn’t 
been realized. I dream about Garabagh as sweet dream.  I longed for the days I walked on the dusty 
roads of Khojaly, for the red violets growing in the bushes. I was deeply moved as child.  
This village where I had grown up is the most beautiful place of the world for me.  
Its gardens, flowers, aromatic fruits that became beautiful after rain were the most beautiful gift of the 
world. Its muddy roads are still locked to us. Still I couldn’t rub my face to the stony and clody roads 
of Khojaly. My heart trembles as mint leaves for my village where the blood of my villagers, relatives, 
my holy being my Mother was shed.  After the untimely death of my father we lived together with my 
uncles in this house where my mother came as bride. My grandmother Tamasha, on father side, used to 
speak about the savageries of Armenian done in 1905-1918 and very often used to cite a sayings “They 
are wolf in sheep clothing”.  
Khojaly people were nomads. They used to move to lowland in winter and to mountain in 
summer. They used to climb to Girkhgiz Mountain, to the “Yellow posture” of Kalbacar.  
Nomads are simple, hard-working, hard-earned people who are wide of the trick, cunning.  
  I am proud that my ancestors were nomads as well. There used to be many guests in our home. 
My uncle was a driver. We were members of a large family. We had grown up together with our uncle 
Movsum’s children. Work-mates of my uncle who were Armenians, used to come to our place as well. 
I remember perfectly one day a man named Seror came to our place together with his wife. They drank 
and ate. I hated this woman with short hairs and dark red lipsticks at that very instant. She was 
drinking together with men. When she was completely drunk she began to speak. She said that Turkish 
people cut the stomachs of pregnant women, beheaded their children, and bayoneted them. When she 
told how Turks fastened hot samovar to the back of the men she sent foam out from her mouth. Unlike 
her wife Seror cunningly said: “Although Turks killed our people we had forgotten about this. Besides 
you are not Turks but Azerbaijanis.” But as this Armenian said we were Azerbaijanis for them at that 
moment… 
  And my grandmother Tamasha rebuked my uncle.When my grandmother left the home with 
anger, I went together with her to women who sat over the stone in our block and who could inform 
about all information in the village.  
Our neighbors aunt Maruza (who was martyr) mother of Elman Mammadov, former chief executive, 
aunt Dilbar, deceased aunt Maya (died during the Khojaly bloodshed), aunt Tamasha who buried her 
son’s corpse with branches were their. Aunt Maruza used to say: “Hey cousin! Did that Armenian 
come again? How impudent are they? My grandmother Tamam used to tell that they burnt our stock in 
the Gishlag village at the bottom of the Dash bulag. We could save our life. Those who couldn’t, they 
died.” My grandmother affirmed her cousin’s words. Her mother-in-law told how her aunt left her 
child in the cradle and run away. That infant was her sister-in law Manzar. Though grandmother 
Manzar could stay alive, her white hairs covered with blood in her own house in her elderly years.  
I returned home. Still Seror together with his wife Sveta were eating tasteful dishes, and drank our 
drinks. My uncle was also very angry; it was obvious that he hated these guests.  
But they had stuck like glue and didn’t want to go. Sveta’s rouged and powered face was shining, 
and her eyes were sparkling as greedy wolf. While looking to them my body was trembling. I wanted 
to go outside and play on the swing that was hanging on the big mulberry tree. Maybe my anger would 
calm down. Suddenly I saw her shining shoes as white as her face. I took he shoes and threw it to the 
gray dog in our yard. The dog immediately grabbed the shoes and run away. When it got dark they 
prepared to go. But they couldn’t find their shoes as the dog had interred the shoes in our garden…  
Getting more nervous, this Armenian began to look for her shoes in everywhere, in stall, in 
hen-house, under the stairs. Hopelessly, she wore the galoshes of my granny and went together with 
her husband. Leaning against the wall, I was smiling cunningly. But that moment I couldn’t imagine 
that these malevolent Armenians who sat at our table and ate our foods, would create savageries, and 
that my village’s name will be mentioned together with Khatin tragedy.  
During that tragedy, shivering from cold, little Aynura would look for her shoe in the Katik 
forest. That she would never forget that pain even if she got married…  
In the morning, our gate were knocked were hard. I heard an imperious voice of my granny: 
“Go and open the gates.” – My mother immediately went to the yard. I went running after her as well. 
Our gates had been opened widely. Those who came were men with box-calf boots and women with 
black velvety jacket and shawl in their head and they all were sitting on the horse. They were mother, 
sister and close relatives of my untimely deceased father Muslim’s friend. My mother was delighted. 
Holding the saddle of old grandmother (Let her rest in peace) Firat’s horse, my mother helped her to 
come down from the horse. I was looking to the girl wearing amber and beads. Firstly grandmother 
Firat, then her daughter and daughter-in-law embraced and kissed my grandmother. My grandmother 
was very happy. She was very angry since yesterday and said: “How nice of you Firat, how nice that 
you came! Yesterday that Armenian came together with his wife. I have never seen such impudent 
people as they. How I wanted to take a stick and whip them. I could hardly hold my patience. Respect 
to guest is respect to Allah”. My mother stoked up the fire and cooked plov.  
I was amazingly listening to the talk of these nomad women. That night these women rolling 
up their sleeves helped to my mother. We slept together in the bedding laid side by side. They woke up 
in the dawn and prepared to go. Saddling the horses they mounted the horses. Holding the saddle of the 
horse I begged grandmother Firat to take me with them. She bent and embraced me softly. She rode 
me on the croup of the horse. Then saying: “This time stay here, your granny will miss you. Next time 
I will take you with me,” – she put me down. Years passed. Once I heard that grandmother Firat had 
died, but I couldn’t forget her. She remained in my memories as sweet reminiscence.  
I grew up and went to the first class of the secondary school in Khojaly village. My first 
teacher was Fizza. I would have to grow up. My little village would have to develop as well. It would 
have great sorrow.   Khojaly grief, Khojaly wound of Azerbaijan… Khojaly genocide of Turks… 
Armenians would eat our bread and would hate us. That my mother, our neighbors aunt Maruza, three 
son of my uncle Movsum – Etibar, Habil, Mobil, aunt Tamasha’s son  - Vasif, Rasif, her grandson 
Zahir, her brother-in-law Salim (husband of her elder daughter Fitat) would become victims of 
Armenian fascism. They would look into the eyes of death. Lets again have a look at those years:  
…There had been many respectable landowners such as Allahverdi bey, Abdullah bey, Muhammad 
aga, Gahraman bey, Shukur bey, Jafar bey and others in Khojaly until the soviet period.   24 bey and 
22 women bey - that is 22 beyims.  
When I entered to the university, we went to the sanctuary of seyid “grandmother Jahan’s” holy 
place.  At that time my mother said: “Khojaly is entirely a history”. Look these mulberry tree of 
Allahverdi bey, lands of Gahraman bey were dispossessed and turned to the dwelling house of 
Armenian that was named as “Noraguh” that is “New village”, they destroyed the graves of our 
ancestors and turned it to the pig farm. These places are the land of our ancestors. By decisions of 
Armenian some of them were sent to exile, and others heart were broken. Some were exposed to 
humiliation after their properties were dispossessed. Khojaly is land with much unfairness. And the 
reason is Armenians. Khojaly’s Armenian trouble… There were 46 beys in Khojaly. They weren’t 
named bey without reason. During the khanate period, majority of the families that had dwelled in the 
Khojaly were wealthy beys. This is proved by the book named “Svod statistic dannıx o nasilenii 
Zakafkazskovo kraya izvleçennıx poselennıx spiskov” which was published in Tiflis in 1893.  
 In above mentioned source it is shown that, in the census of that period (of course after Armenian 
had changed it) 46 men out of the 192 living in the 34 house in Khojaly were beys in its real sense.  
In the 1905-1907, Khojaly was completely set on fire; properties of beys were destroyed by 
Armenian who ate the bread of these beys. At that time Safiyar bey demanded to settle in the south of 
the mulberry garden of Allahvedi bey near the ruins of destroyed Khojaly. Many years passed since 
then. Son of Safiyar bey Museib Safiyar oglu Jafarov became the victim of Khojaly genocide. His 
grandson Nusrat Jafarov was captivated. He was 17 years old, and he was unaware of his destiny. His 
mother Tahira Jafarova was working as brigade-leader in sovkhoz (state farm). When she heard that 
her son Nusrat was captivated she was shaken but she could stand to this and had married off her two 
daughters Jamila and Susan, and was obliged to live with them. There are many mothers as Tahira who 
has son or daughter sorrow in Khojaly. The river at the foot of Garabagh range is the branch of the 
Badara River. As it runs near Khojaly town it has been named as the Khojaly River (in old days it was 
named as Khaja Alili). We used to play in the bank of that river. One day we were building house from 
mud. We were decorating inside of it with many-colored glasses. But we didn’t know that Armenian 
would destroy our beautiful houses. And we would live with desire to build a house. That I would only 
see in my dreams pebble hill, Jafar hill where I used to walk …  
When Council Government came it would bring misfortune, disaster to Khojaly habitants. That 
Armenian would build new houses in the plots of land of beys and would completely change the 
names of places. That they would ransack their properties…   
Armenian had changed names in the Daghlig-Garabagh as they did in the Armenian territories. As it 
is known, 90% of geographical names in Daghlig-Garabagh Autonomous Region are in Azerbaijan 
language. Thus they were named by Azerbaijanis, real inhabitants of this land, but not by Armenians 
who were moved here. Up to the end of XIX century, Azerbaijanis and partly Albans who became 
Gregorian in Garabagh lived there.  In 1978 Garabagh Armenians celebrated 150th anniversary of 
Armenian families who first moved and settled here. In 1988 Armenian nationalists destroyed this 
monument and rubbed out number 150 from the wall in order to lose these historical facts.  
Wasn’t it respectfulness to the spirit of the real owners of this land to erect monument of old 
Armenian man and woman in the entrance of the city after Daghlig-Garabagh Autonomous Region 
was formed and name of Khankandi had been changed to Stepanakert? In 1905-1918 after Khojaly 
was set on fire and after the death of Armenian Brave Gazar in Askharan, although relations was quite 
settled, old generation of Khojaly (our ancestors) hadn’t believed to the friendship of Armenian.  
I remember very well. On hot august days in 1967, when Armenians burnt Arshad, Alamshah, 
Zohrab in the center of the Khankendi (Stepanakert) Azerbaijanis who lived in Khankendi was 
frightened to death. Deceased Rafil, Rasul (they are the victims of Khojaly bloodshed) and Rza, sons 
of uncle Bashir living in the Khankendi, came to village and with heartache told that terrible event to 
the villagers.  That day Khojaly people were in anxiety as well. I remembered the moan of that people 
once and forever. At night when I was sleeping with my granny Tamasha I asked her: “Granny, will 
Armenian burn us as well?” she answered positively: “No, we would pull out their eyes. Now sleep”. I 
turned in my place till the morning. But Azerbaijan government of that time properly punished 
Armenians, organizers of this event. Armenians got afraid. But these cunning people didn’t give up 
their bad intentions. They secretly continued their works. Leaders in the executive posts in Daghlig-
Garabagh Autonomous Region  were gregorian, geverkovs, arturyans. But Azerbaijanis were in low 
positions. They were either coward or helpless. Those who were strong and courage leaders, they were 
liquidated by terror acts. After the savage burnt of  those three Turkish men villagers assembled and 
came to decision. “Lets appeal to the government with letter and application.” After this they again 
was kind with Armenian families living in the “Gala Darasi (Castle Valley)” in the right bank of the 
Khojaly River which is in the south of Khojaly village. Armenian graves hadn’t been destroyed. But 
with the help of 366th Russian regiment, Armenians occupied Khojaly and destroyed our holy place 
cemetery with excavator and  threw them into the Khojaly River. At present this place was turned to 
fictitious  Armenian cemetery  which is built as crest in the south, north, east, west part of Khojaly.   
I remember perfectly when this began, cemetery of those Armenians who moved by their own 
decision was safe and sound. Women of our block sitting on the stone near the gate of aunt Maruza 
were against “the destruction of Armenian graves”. “What is the fault of the graves? We can not touch 
them”. Deceased aunt Maya who used to speak less said: “How could we destroy the graves?” But 
how could she know that her own grave will be among the graves destroyed by Armenians. How could 
she know that my mother who died in Khojaly bloodshed, Rafiga’s grave in “Uzundara” would be 
destroyed by Armenian hyenas after the occupation of Aghdam? But her spirit as well as spirit of all 
mothers who died in the Khojaly tragedy will be over us.  
 The spirit of our proud, innocent, fighting Mothers! Then when Armenians secretly and 
publicly propagandized about the cruelty of Turks, that they were enemies, late aunt Maruza’s 
daughter Tamella khanim who was teacher in the kindergarten told children about the friendship of 
nations.  This Azerbaijani woman, woman from Khojaly who knowing that Armenians burnt her land 
twice, had never forced her children to hostility.   
After 23 days when we saw her mother Maruza’s and my mother’s corpses, our hatred to this 
creatures increased thousand times over. I put flowers over the grave of Maruza who was resting in the 
“Martyr’s Avenue” in Baku, and who didn’t run away from enemies. I put the flower which I  can’t 
put flowers over my mother’s grave.  But I couldn’t  kiss the lands of Khojaly where old  mothers’, 
brides’,  innocent children’s, our grandfathers’, young boys’ blood was shed.   I couldn’t climb the 
Aghajan summer pasture near the Khojaly cemetery. I couldn’t drink the limpid cold water of Ahmad 
spring, Atash spring, Museib bulag, Nariman bulag, Rahim bulag. I couldn’t put out the fire of my 
heart, fire of my lips which got cracked because of thirst of motherland. 
 
KHOJALY-GADABEY CULTURE 
 
Archeological culture belonged to the Last Bronze Age and Early Iron Age (XIII-VII BC), 
situated between Kur-Araz Rivers, on mountainous and foothill regions of Minor Caucasus. Khojaly-
Gadabey culture was named after monuments explored for the first time near Khojaly town 
(settlement) and Gadabey region. Khojaly-Gadabey culture monuments consist of dwellings, graves, 
workshops, temples. Copper melt forges, rest of workshops preparing things from copper and bronze, 
industrial waste of tools and weapons of flint were found in the areas the culture was spread. There 
were also found labor tools belonged to people living in Neolithic Age. Acquired material cultural 
examples belong to the Neolithic-Bronze Age.  
Corpses were buried in the ground, in stone graves and curgans (type of grave) in reclining, 
sitting, bent positions. Ceramics of the graves were identical. Bronze sword, mace, arrow, bow, 
dagger, spear-head, jug, pot, curb, ring, bracelet, jewelry, trinkets made of bone, different materials of 
clay and stone were found.  
Together with stone tools, knives, daggers and weapons dwellings were appeared on the last 
age of Khojaly-Gadabey culture.  
People were engaged in farming, cattle-breeding, gardening, hunting, vine-growing, handicraft. 
The fine arts materials reflect religion and aesthetics view of people. Local people made contacts with 
neighbor kins. Khojaly-Gadabey culture proves assumption about local people to be ancestor of 
contemporary nation of Transcaucasus.   
Great deal of Khojaly – Gadabey cultural monuments were taken to Saint-Petersburg 
Anthropology and Ethnography Museum, Moscow History Museum…    
 
KHOJALY REGION 
 
An administrative region in Autonomy of Daghlig-Garabagh in Azerbaijan. It was founded in 
1930. Territory was 926 km2, population 21000. Previous name of the region was Khankandi 
(Stepanakert), from 1978 till 1991 its name was Askharan. There were 53 villages, 2 settlements in the 
region. Region Center was Khojaly.  Medium density of population was 21 people for 1 km2. 
Approximately 86 % of people lived in the village. Big settlements of the region were Khojaly town, 
Askharan settlement, Noraguh, Ballija, Xramurt, Dashbulag, Chanagchi, Khanabad villages. Cattle-
breading, vine-growing and grain-growing were main sides of economy. There were vine and beer 
plants, personal service shop, 5 hospitals, 28 medical attendant center, sanitary- epidemiology   
centers, music school, 38 libraries, 15 culture center, 33 clubs, 38 cinema settings and etc.   
Rivers belong to Kur and partial to Araz basins. Main river is Gargar. About 40 % of the 
territory is forest. In the forest oak, beech, mulberry trees can be outnumbered. One could see bear, 
lynx, forest cat, fox, wolf, hedgehog, field-mouse and etc, birds such as partridge, pheasant, turaj (a 
kind of bird) and pigeons.  
Khojaly is one of the ancient human settlements of Azerbaijan. It is mountainous place. Along 
the west border of the region lays Garabagh chain. Deposits of Jurassic, Chalk, and Anthropological 
Ages are found in the territory of the region. Climate in winter is dry, mild hot. Minerals are clay, lime, 
sand, marble and etc.  
Ancient curgans, tombs, sepulchers, monuments discovered as the result of excavation    prove 
these regions to be old human settlements. Territories from Agdam to Girkhgiz, from Katik to Meydan 
are homeland of great-grandfathers of Khojalys.  
Khojaly town, Bashkand, Garagav, Dashbulaq, Yaloba, Karkijahan, Kossalar, Meshali, 
Piramaki, Hassanabad, Javadlar, Janhassan and Jamilli settlements are included to Khojaly region.  
Name of Khojaly is connected with the name of families belonged to Khojaly family. It was 
named Khojaly because people belonged to Khojaly family found Khojaly settlement.  
Khojaly town (settlement) in Khojaly region, Khojaly village in Salyan, Khojaly River in 
Khojaly region, Khojaly Mountain in Fuzuli are named after Khojaly family. There is also Khojaly 
village in Syria. Khuchala oronym was met in Salyan.  
 
 
KHOJALY RIVER 
 
Khojaly River is branch of Badara River situated at the foot of Garabagh mountain chain, in the 
territory of Khojaly region. This lake is called as follows because it flows near Khojaly town. In some 
sources this river is named as Haja Alili. Some people connects present name of the river with this 
sayings.  
 
KHOJALY TOWN 
 
A city situated in Khojaly region, on the foot of Garabagh mountain chain, on the junction of 
Gargar, Ilis (Hilis), Khojaly Rivers, in the surrounding of villages Agbulag, Noraguh, Badara, 
Dashbulag, Ballija, Mehdikand (Mehdibayli), Nakhchivanli (Nakhchivanik), 11 km to the north-east 
from the center of Dagligh-Garabagh Autonomous Region Khankandi city. It was a village first in 
Stepanakert, then in Askharan. Khojaly town is the center of Khojaly administrative region.  
In 1905-07 Khojaly was buried by Armenians. Then with advice and offer of one of the 
influent beys of Khojaly Safiyar bey and others new Khojaly settlement was found on the place of 
frustrated Khojaly – on the south part of mulberry garden of Allahverdi bey. Khojaly turned to a city 
that surrounded 3 settlements: – Khojaly, Daralayaz and Galadarasi. 
Khojaly is divided into 3 parts: 
- Old Khojaly situated on the left bank of Khojaly River, on the triangle emerged from the 
junction of Ilis river with Khojaly river (then this territory enlarged to as far as Gargar river 
turned to Khojaly town) 
- Khojaly of “Galadarasi” settled by people banished from different places early in XX 
century on the right bank of Khojaly, on the south of old Khojaly 
- Khojaly of “Refugees” settled by Azebaijanis banished from Armenia during 1918-20 in 
the area of old post-communication station between the rivers Khojaly and Gargar. 
In 1991 population of Khojaly was about 7000. They were engaged mainly in cattle-breeding, 
vintage, art and trade. There were 2 schools; house of culture, 2 libraries, medical center, post-
communication department, welfare-service enterprise, hospital, different institutions and 
organizations, tombs belonged to XIV century. Nekropol, curgan field belonged to the Last Bronze 
and Early Iron Ages were found around the city. The first monuments of Khojaly-Gadabey culture 
belonged to XIII-VII BC are also near Khojaly town. The Armenians burnt the city. Because Khojaly 
town was found by people belonged to Khojaly family, it was named as follows. Some researchers try 
to connect toponymy with word Khoja: in the medieval people engaged in trade and famous religious 
people were called Khoja. 
 There can be met Khojaly toponymy in Salyan and Fizuli.  
 
ASKHARAN CASTLE 
 
A castle situated in Khojaly, near Askharan settlement, on the right and left bank of the Gargar 
River belonged to VIII century. It was built by Panahali Khan, khan of Garabagh (as to other sources 
by Mehrali Khan). The castle consists of two fortifications and was constructed from river stone. The 
tower on the right bank consists of double stone wall; the tower on the left bank is square. Thickness of 
the walls is 2-3 m. This castle was a camp of Russian forces during Russia-Iran war (1804-1813). In 
1810 peace talks between Russia and Iran were conducted in Askharan castle. Castle is named after the 
place Askharan. This geographical name consists of words “Aski” and “Aran”.  
Aski means “ancient, old”. In the work of M. Kalankatli “History of Albania” this geographical 
name is shown as “Metsaran”. “Mets” means “big, great”. Rest of ruins of the castle still remains.  
 
REFERENCE  
 
On 25 February 1992, at about 22 o’clock attack of armed groups of fictitious “Daghlig-
Garabagh Republic” together with personnel staff and military techniques of the 366th regiment of CIS 
in the Khankendi to Khojaly town began. FFM and D-30 guns, tanks of 2nd battalion under the 
leadership of Ohanyan, major of the 366th regiment as well as 3rd battalion under the leadership of 
Nabokikh, major of 2nd battalion were participated in the attack to Khojaly town.  
As a result of attack, Khojaly town was set on fire, peaceful people were killed, and others 
were taken to the captivity. Those who could run away from captivity were savagely killed by 
Armenians who were ambushed in the forests and on the way. The massive bloodshed was on the way 
to the Aghdam region near the Armenian village Nakhchivanik.  
In connection with these events criminal case according to the Item 3 of the Article 255 and 
Items 4, 6 of the Article 70 of Criminal Code of Azerbaijan Republic was opened by Interregional 
Procurator’s Office on Garabagh on 27.02.92.  
Many evidences were gathered about Y.Y.Zarvigorov, commander of the 366th regiment, other 
officers Nabokikh, Krauel, Likhodey and about military crimes against Azerbaijani people which 
violates International Military Tribunal Charter, Geneva Conversion passed on 1949 and other 
International agreements.  
Trancaucasus military circle procurator’s office opened criminal case about the command staff 
of 366th regiment. After Khojaly events hundreds of military techniques, tanks, FFM were given to 
Armenian armed group of Armenian commune in Nagorno-Garabagh, and other who were Armenian 
in birth stayed in Daghlig-Garabag hand continued their crime against the Azerbaijanis.  Personal staff 
of regiment was moved to the Zaziani station of Georgian Republic and now lives in Russian 
Federation.  
   In order to complete the criminal case on command staff of 366th regiment, we twice appealed 
to the Prosecutor-General of Russian Federation V.G.Stepankova in 14.12.92 and 28.06.93. It was 
proposed to interrogate criminal acts of regiment’s officers. But still our proposals stay unanswered by 
Prosecutor-General of Russian Federation.  
Interrogator of investigation group went to Zaziani station, Tbilisi city and tried to examine 
Y.Y Zarvigorov, commander of regiment and other officers. But former prosecutor of Khankendi 
Military garrison Lazutkin, deputy of commander on Trancaucasus military circle captain Ohanyan 
(Armenian by nationality) laid obstacles and didn’t let them to speak.  
Besides they tried to question officers who witnessed how military techniques were given to 
Armenian because of the participation of air-forces from RF jurisdiction in the removal of 366th 
regiment from Khankandi. But division’s commander after consulting with Moscow didn’t let for 
examining.  
This was the hardest part of the investigation. In this direction, more than 3 thousand Khojaly 
refugees that live in 53 regions of the republic were determined. Majority of Khojaly population were 
questioned except underage children. The other difficulty of this investigation was that there were 
many Azerbaijanis that were banished from Armenia, Khankendi and other villages of Garabagh, as 
well as Meshetis who moved to Khojaly from Uzbekistan. Most of them didn’t have passports, and 
they didn’t register on address office. That is why these people could hardly be determined. They were 
defined as injured, medical examination on dead and wounded people was organized, opinions were 
taken.  
According to the medical-examination opinions, testimonies of Khojaly habitants who could 
run from the captivity facts about the savageries of Armenians were determined. To strip skin off 
people head, cut of ear, noses, and sexual organs, behead of Azerbaijanis over the Armenians grave as 
sacrificial animal, and other savage facts were proved.  Armenians tortured all - women, olds and 
children with no mercy.  To cut breasts of women, to shoot sexual organs was usual.  
Number and cost of state and social objects in Khojaly town were determined separately. 
Documents on the building constructed by 35 Ministry and Offices of Republic, as well as devices, 
tools, raw materials in Khojaly town were gathered and expert commission was organized. According 
to the conclusion of commission, as a result of occupation of Khojaly, budget of the state office, 
institution and organizations was damaged on amount 4 billion 199 million, 668 thousand 338 rubles. 
Loss was estimated on the amount of December 1992.  
Investigations about the guilt of the republic leaders, military commanders, and armed groups 
in the Khojaly bloodshed were conducted in two directions.  
 
OCCUPATION 
 
Brief reference: The Azerbaijan Republic is an independent, democratic, unitary state in South 
Caucasus, east part being put to the Caspian Sea. Before the occupation by Soviet Russia in 1918-1920 
the territory of Azerbaijan was 114 thousand km2. In December of 1920 Zangazur region of Azerbaijan 
was united to Armenia. Now its population is 8 million 200 thousand people, and its territory is 
86,6thousand sq.km. Its capital is Baku. Azerbaijan Republic consists of 61 administrative regions and 
65 cities and towns.  
Occupied on 28 April 1920 by Soviet Russia, the Azerbiajan Republic restored its state 
independence on 18 October 1991.  
At present Daghlig-Garabagh territory of Azerbaijan Republic and 7 administrative regions 
around it are under the occupation of neighbor Armenian Republic.  
 
AZERBAJANI TERRITORIES OCCUPIED IN 1988-1993. 
 
- Daghlig-Garabagh occupation date – 1988-1993, territory 4400 sq. km. (Shusha, Khankandi, 
Askharan, Khojavand, Aghdara, Hadrud)  
- Lachin region: occupation date – 18 May 1992, territory 1875 sq. km 
- Kalbajar region: occupation date – 2 April 1993, territory 1936 sq. km 
- Aghdam region: occupation date – 23 July 1993, territory 1154 sq. km 
- Jabrail region: occupation date – 23 August 1993, territory 1050 sq. km 
- Fuzuli region: occupation date – 23 August 1993, territory 1112 sq. km 
- Gubadli region: occupation date – 31 August 1993, territory 826 sq. km 
- Zangilan region: occupation date – 30 October 1993, territory 707 sq. km 
 
As a result of military aggression of Armenian Republic, 20 percent of Azerbaijan territories were 
occupied, more than 20 thousand people were killed, and more than 50 thousand people were wounded 
and became invalid. More than one million people lives as refugees and internally dispersed persons 
for more than 10 years. They were the victims of ethnic cleaning and genocide policy, and were 
deprived from elementary human right. 
As a result of occupation more than 900 dwelling houses were ransacked, set on fire and destroyed, 
six thousand industrial, agricultural enterprises and other places, 150 thousand building with total area 
of 9 thousand m2, 4366 social cultural institutions, as well as 695 medical centers were ruined. 
Agricultural fields, water economy, hydro-technical devices, all transport and communication lines 
were spoiled in occupied territories. As a result of destruction our economy were damaged for more 
than 60 milliards USD.  
 During the military aggression 927 libraries, 446 historical monuments and museums, more than 
100 archeological monuments, 6 state theatre and concert studios were destroyed in the occupied 
territories of Azerbaijan. More than 40 thousand valuable things and rare exhibits were stolen from the 
ransacked museums. After destruction of Kalbajar Historical Ethnography Museum, rare gold and 
silver adornments, carpets knitted in the last centuries were taken to Armenia. Such was the destiny of 
historical museum in Shusha, bread museum in Aghdam, Stone monument museum in Zangilan. In a 
short, by violating Hague Convention on “The protection of cultural wealth during the military 
conflict” and Paris Convention on “Illegal circulation of cultural wealth”, Republic of Armenia is 
engaged in ransacking of Azerbaijan cultural wealth.  
Notwithstanding with the demands of recognition of territorial integrity of Azerbaijan Republic 
and unconditional liberation of occupied territories of Azerbaijan stated in the resolution No 822, 853, 
874, 884 of Security Council of United Nations Organization passed in 1993, Republic of Armenia 
continues its expansionist policy nowadays. 
 
THERE WERE MANY ARMENIAN OFFICERS AND WARRANT OFFICERS IN THE 366th 
REGIMENT. 
 
   Many tanks, FFM, D-30 guns and others of 2nd battalion under the leadership of Major Seyran 
Ohanyan, 3rd battalion under the leadership of major Nabokikhi participated in the attack to Khojaly 
town which haven’t been liberated.  
Armenians brought the standing army armed with 92 heavy military techniques against the 
defenders of Khojaly armed with 50 automatic rifle and shot-gun.  As a result, Khojaly town was set 
on fire, some of the peaceful people were killed, others were captivated, and the others who could run 
away from the siege were ruthlessly killed by Armenians ambushing on the roads and forests. The 
terrible bloodshed was in the road passing through Armenian village Nakhchivanik to Aghdam region.  
(In accordance with this, in 27.02.1992 criminal case was raised with Item “V”, Article 255, Item 4.6 
of the Article 94, the Article 7 of the Criminal Code of Azerbaijan Republic by the Interregional 
Procurator Office on Qarabagh). 
 
 
 
 
LIST OF OFFICERS AND WARRANT OFFICERS OF 366TH REGIMENT PARTICIPATING 
IN THE KHOJOLI GENOCIDE 
 
1. Zarvigorov Yuri Yuriyevich – was born on 02.03.1955 in Lugovaya station of Jambul settlement of 
Kazakhstan. Commander of regiment 366;   
2. Chitchiyan Valeriy Asaakovich – vice-chairman of headquarters of 1st battalion of regiment 366, 
major; 
3. Ayriyan Vachagan Grigoryevich – major, chairman of regiment intelligence; 
4. Ohanyan Seyran Mushegovich – was born in 1961, commander of 2nd battalion of the regiment, 
major; 
5. Arutyunov Alexander Alexandrovich  - major,  deputy of the commander of 2nd battalion; 
6. Akopyan Nerses Grantovich – chief lieutenant, commander of the 2 company of 1st battalion;  
7. Arutyunyan Vladislav Vladimirovich – captain, commander of the 2nd battalion; 
8. Baylaryan Armen Volodiyevich – warrant officer, technician of 1st company; 
9. Ayrapetyan Vachik Gurgenovich – sergeant-major of 3rd company;  
10. Mirzoyan Vachik Grantovich - sergeant-major of 3rd company; 
11. Shikhanyan Andrew Artyushevich – organization commander of  1st battalion;  
12. Khachaturyan - sergeant-major of 6th company; 
13. Abramyan V.V – head technician of 2nd battalion, warrant officer; 
14. Baylaryan Sergey Yurikovich – troop commander of 2nd battalion; 
15. Danilyan Armen Barinovich – sergeant-major of 7th company;  
16. Avanesyan – chief technician of 2nd company;  
17. Zakharyan –  troop commander of the anti-aircraft company, warrant officer; 
18. Bagdasaryan Valeri – sergeant-major of tank company;  
19. Kisabayyan Grigoriy Akopovich – troop commander in communication company, warrant officer; 
20. Arustamyan -  chief technician in the communication company;  
21. Amelyan Garik – head of the canteen, warrant officer; 
22. Avenesyan Robik – head of the good depot, chief warrant officer; 
23. Arutyunyan Kamo Rafaelovich – troop commander of the repair company, warrant officer; 
24. Musaelyan – troop commander of the repair company; 
25. Sarkisyan Alexander – chief technician of the repair company, warrant officer; 
26.  Osipov Yuri – head of the rocket artillery depot; 
27. Simonyan Valeri – sergeant-major of material supplies company;  
28.  Petrosyan Ashot – head of the secret unit, warrant officer; 
29. Nabokikh Yevgeniy – major, commander of 3rd battalion (his wife is Armenian);  
30. Likhodey Igor Ivanovich – commander of artillery division, captain;  
31. Miroshnichenko Igor – commander of material supplies company, head lieutenant;  
32. Smagin – lieutenant, commander of tank division; 
33. kuznetsov andrew – commander of chemical defense company, lieutenant; 
34. Garmash Viktor -   head lieutenant, commander of tank company; 
35. Belyazin – troop commander of tank company, lieutenant; 
36.  Mirmehdiyev – commander of 3rd company, head lieutenant;  
37. Fotimski – commander of 3rd company of 2nd battalion, captain;  
38. Bugayenko – 3rd troop commander of 4th company of 2nd battalion, lieutenant;  
39. Potapov – commander of 4th company of 2nd battalion, captain; 
40. Krut – commander of the 6th company f 2nd battalion, captain; 
41. Savintsev - commander of 4th company of 2nd battalion, lieutenant; 
42. Dobranski – intelligence troop commander of 4th company of 2nd battalion, lieutenant; 
43. Bobolev – headquarters head of 2nd battalion, captain; 
44. Minin – deputy of commander of 2nd battalion, captain; 
45. Tevosyan - commander of 5th company of 2nd battalion, captain; 
46. Bogachev – officer of 3rd battalion, head lieutenant;  
47. Kurchatov – officer of 3rd battalion, head lieutenant;  
48. Maftullin - officer of 3rd battalion, head lieutenant; 
49. Kuzmanovich - officer of 3rd battalion, head lieutenant; 
50. Ivanov - officer of 3rd battalion, captain; 
51. Matveyev – commander of artillery division of the 3rd battalion, captain.  
 
 
INVESTIGATION STILL GOES ON… 
 
Reference of Investigating Office on Felony about the crime of Armenian armed forces and 
366th regiment which belonged to former USSR against the villagers of the Khojaly town of 
Azerbaijan Republic.  On 28.10.90 after Mi-8 marked civil helicopter belonging to Azerbaijan Airlines 
was shot in Daghlig-Garabagh by Armenians and after the death of more than 40 people in this 
helicopter, our air communication with Khojaly was broken off.  
On 25.02.92 at about 22:00 o’clock command staff of the 366th regiment together with military 
technique attacked to Khojaly town. 2nd battalion of the 336th regiment under the leadership of Major 
Ohanyan Seyran Mushegovich, 3rd battalion under the leadership of Yevgeni Nabokikhi, Chitchiyan 
Valeri Isayevich, head of the headquarters of battalion No 1, more than 50 soldiers and warrant 
officers from Armenia and Russia serving in the regiment participated in the attack, and guns, foot 
fight machines, D-30 guns and other equipment were used. Reference on the Armenians and Russians 
who participated in the genocide against the Azerbaijanis were added.  
Entering to the city with FFM and armored technique, they began savagely to kill peaceful 
people. By the examination of corpses, opinions of medical examination, words of Khojaly inhabitants 
who could escape from the captivity, facts of torture, cruelty, cut of ear and nose, beheading of 
Khojaly villagers as sacrifice over the graves of Armenians were determined. The body of Karimova 
Firangiz Mahammad gizi was completely cut, apples of eyes were lanced, and bosoms were cut. Eyes 
of Mammadova Tamara Salim gizi, Dadashova Asli Babir gizi, Amirova Mahi Babir gizi, Humbatova 
Anahat Eldar gizi, Nuraliyeva Dilara Oruj gizi and others were pulled out, breasts were cut. As a result 
of destruction of properties of state and public offices, institutions and organizations during the 
occupation of Khojaly town, there were lost on the amount of 4 milliard  199  million 668 thousand 
338 ruble for the December of 1992 and personal property of Khojaly dwellers lost 229 million 861 
thousand 800 ruble for the march of 1992.  According to the speech of Teshov Sergey Danilovich, 
former deputy chief of the headquarter of battalion No 1 of the 366th regiment, it was determined that 
in the end of the September of 1991 with the order of Zaroviqov, regiment commander, Ohanyan 
Seyran, commander of 2nd battalion, Yevgeni Nabokikh, commander of the 3rd battalion, Likhodi Igor, 
commander of the artillery division, Miroshnichinko Igor, commander of material supply group, 
Smagin, commander of tank company were going to fight-duty. At those moments they were firing 
Azerbaijanis’ points in Dagligh-Garabagh. Seyran himself spoke to him that he personally commanded 
to the armed Armenians in the occupation of Karkijahan and Malibayi villages.  On the night passing 
to the 26 February of 1992, Yevgeni Nabokikh, commander of the 3rd battalion, commanded to the 
occupation of Khojaly town. Ohanyan Seyran commander of 2nd battalion, Chitchiyan Valeri, head of 
the headquarters of battalion No 2 were questioned, and according to the expression of P.Y. Antini 
who served in the 366th regiment, joint work of S. Ohanyan with armed Armenians were determined. 
Major Ohanyan, lieutenant Potanov, captain Fotinski, captain Krut, chief lieutenant Savintse, 
lieutenant Dobranski, captain Bobolev, captain Minin, chief lieutenant Mirkhaydarov had participated 
in the firing to Azerbaijani dwelling house. Armed Armenians offered 3 thousand ruble to Antini to 
fight against the Azerbaijanis, when he refused they had beaten him. They had broken the ribs of 
Armenian warrant officers, soldiers from Uzbekistan Porov and Dushmanov as well as soldier from 
Ukraine. Sergeant-major Khachaturyan obliged Antini to participate in the military operation by 
beating him on December 1991. That is why Antini had left the 366th regiment.  
According to the Item 2 in the Convention No 26-A dated on 09.12.48 “On the prevention of 
genocide crimes and punishment” of Head Assembly of UNO, acts toward the complete or partial 
annihilation of national groups are considered as genocide. According to the Item 9 of Convention, 
disputes over the responsibility of this or other countries in the genocide, may be submitted to the 
International Court by the demand of one disputing part. 
 
COMMON ARMENIAN TERRORISM 
Facts on terror-sabotage done in the territories of Azerbaijan 
 
From the end of 80th years Armenian terror organizations acting in different countries of the 
world had begun consistent and horrible terror war against the Azerbaijan by the finance and 
organizational help of Republic of Armenia and authoritative Armenian Diaspora. During the 
occupation of Daghlig-Garabagh and 7 regions around it, in order to create mass terror and to achieve 
great losses, special service bodies of Armenia had organized terror acts in the point, far from the 
territories where military operations were conducted and where peaceful Azerbaijanis lived, as a result 
of this thousand innocent people died.  
- 16 September 1989. Passenger bus was blown up on the Tbilisi-Baku route, 5 men had been 
killed, and 25 men had been wounded.  
- 18 February 1990. Bus on the Shusha-Baku route in the 105th km of Yevlakh-Lachin had been 
blown up, many people had died.  
- 10 August 1990. Passenger bus was blown up on the Tbilisi-Aghdam route, 20 men had died, 
and 30 men had been wounded. A. Avanesyan and M. Tatevosyan, organizers of the crime, were 
drawn to criminal responsibility.  
- 30 May 1991. “Moscow-Baku” passenger train had been blown up near the station 
Khasavyurd, Dagestan Republic, Russian Federation. As a result 11 people had been killed, 22 had 
been wounded.   
- 31 July 1991. “Moscow-Baku” passenger train had been blown up near the station Temirtau, 
Dagestan Republic. As a result, 16 people had been killed, 20 had been wounded.   
- 8 September 1991. As a result of the firing the Aghdam-Khojavand bus 5 men had been 
killed, 34 men had been seriously injured. It had been proved that the organizers of this act were 
members of terror group – Khachaturyan Volodya, Yeremyan Saro, Chalyan Sasha, and Arustamyan 
Armo.  
- 8 September 1991. Bus on the Aghdam-garabagh route had been fired by Armenian brigands, 
8 men had been killed, and 42 men were seriously injured.  
- 20 November 1991. As a result of firing to the helicopter “MI-8” by Armenian terrorists near 
the Garakand village of Khojavand region, personnel of the helicopter and passengers – state and 
government representatives of Azerbaijan, observers in the Russia and Kazakhstan – 19 men had been 
killed.  
- 8 January 1992. As a result of terror act conducted in the ferry-boat that carried passengers 
from Turkmenistan with Krasnovodsk (at present Turkman city)-Baku route, 25 men had died and 88 
men had been wounded.  
- 20 January 1992. Civil helicopter “MI-8”   flying on Aghdam-Shusha route had been fired by 
Armenian terrorists near the Shusha city. As a result 44 people especially women and children had 
died.  
- 28 February 1992. “Kislovodsk-Baku” passenger train had been blown up near the Gudermes 
station in the North Caucasian territories of Russia, 11 men had died, 18 men had been wounded.  
- 2 July 1993. As a result of explosion of the passenger carriage in Baku railway station, state 
had been suffered financial damages. Executor of the explosion Igor Khatkovski, Russian citizen, 
confessed that he had been involved to the secret cooperation by chief colonel of Intelligence 
Department of National Security Office of the Armenian Republic, had been sent to Azerbaijan with 
purposes of espionage and terrorism, and that he got the task to make explosion which would be result 
with great losses. During the investigation it had been proved that, this group organized explosion of 
railway trains coming to Baku from Russia in 1991-1994, as a result 47 men had died, and 83 men had 
been wounded.   
-1 February 1994. Terror act had been conducted in the “Kislovodsk-Baku” passenger trains in 
the Baku railway station, 3 men had died, and 20 men had been wounded.  
-19 March 1994. As a result of explosion in the metro station “20 January” of Baku 
Underground, 14 men had died, 49 men had been wounded.   
 
BRIEF REFERENCE: The court had proved that, terror acts had been organized by special 
service bodies of Armenia, and had been realized by the members of separatist Lezghin organization 
“Sadval”.  
It had been determined that the most active members of separatist organization “Sadval”  had 
been in Armenia since 1992, National Security Office of this country had participated in the formation 
of organization, in their financing and arming. In the April-May in 1992, 17 men Azerbaijan citizen 
who was Lezghin by nationality had passed special terror trainings in the training base locating in the 
Lusaker settlement of Nairi region of Armenia. During the investigation it had been determined that 
according to the trainings saboteurs planed to make explosions in the cinema “Nizami”, in Republic 
Palace, and in Baku Electric Lamp Factory as well as in the metro station “20 January”.  
30 Sadval members who had been charged in the explosion in the “20 January” metro station 
and who had passed special terror trainings had been involved to criminal responsibility.  
- 13 April 1994. Moscow-Baku passenger train had been blown up near the station “Dagestan 
Ogni” of Dagestan Republic, 6 men had died and 3 men had been wounded. 
- 3 July 1994. As a result of explosion in the electric trains between the metro station “28 May” 
and “Ganjlik”, 14 men had died, 54 men had been seriously injured. Terror act had been done by 
Aslanov Azar Salman, citizen of Azerbaijan Republic who was captivated on 13 January 1994 and 
who had been involved to the secret cooperation by special service bodies of Armenia.  
BRIEF REFERENCE: during the court investigation it was determined that one of the 
Armenian separatist ideologist writer Zori Balayan met with military captive Azar Aslanov, Lezgin by 
origin, on 14 January 1994, and explained him the importance of joint action of minor nations in the 
struggle against the Azerbaijanis. On 9 June 1994 Artur, collaborator of Armenian special service 
bodies, rang to the apartment of A.Aslonov in Baku, informed that he was alive, and noted that in 
order to set him free, one of the relatives must come to Yerevan. Tacibat Aslanova, Azar Aslonov’s 
mother came to Yerevan. They informed Azar Aslanov that his mother was in danger, and under this 
pressure, he was involved into the cooperation with Armenian special service bodies by pseudo 
“Omar-75”. In order to come to Baku without obstacles, fictitious documents had been prepared for 
Azar Aslanov and explosive materials were hidden in the box for chocolate and deodorants.  
A.Aslanov had come to Azerbaijan with Yerevan-Minvodi-Baku route, realized terror act in the 
train between the metro station “28 May” and “Ganjlik” on 3 July 1994, and again returned to 
Armenia. His mother, who was kept as hostage, was set free only after this.  
 
ARMENIAN TERROR ORGANIZATIONS 
List of Armenian terror organizations that conducted bloody actions in different part of the 
world: 
“Armenican” party: This party was founded in 1885. The party that led terror acts and armed 
conflicts in territories of Turkey - Van, Mush, Bitilis, Trabzon and Istanbul- had been in cooperation 
with Armenians living in Iran and Russia.  
“Hinchak” party: This party was founded in Geneva in 1887.  The main aim of the organization 
is to create State of Great Armenia by consolidating territories of Turkey - Anatolia – territories which 
they name as “Russian” and “Iran” Armenia. On the fourth item of the program of the party: “to 
achieve our object we must choose the method of propaganda, agitation, formation terror and 
destructive organization”.    
“Dashnagsutun” Armenian federative revolution party: It was founded in Tiflis in 1890. Its 
main purpose is to create “Great Armenia” in the territories of Azerbaijan Republic – Daghlig-
Garabagh and Nakhchivan – and in Anatolia. “Dashnagsutun” which held its first congress in Tiflis in 
1892, passed a resolution about the organization of conspiracy against the Turks. Namely after that 
congress “Dashnagsutun” party ordered “Everywhere in every circumstance kill Turks, Kurds, those 
who retract from their words and Armenian traitors. Take revenge!” 
There are a lot of  terror groups established by “Dashnagsutun” party: “Avengers of Armenian 
genocide” group which was established in 1973, killed Turks diplomats in Austria, Denmark, Portugal 
in 1980-82; formed different terror groups such as DRO and its sectors: DRO-8, DRO-88, DRO-888, 
DRO-8888. Dashnagsutun’s activity in this direction still continues. 
“Armenian Secret Liberty Army” (ASOA): It was founded in Beirut in 1975.  Its headquarters 
is situated in Damascus. There are more than thousand fighters in the Philistine bases where they are 
training. During its first six years, this group had conducted terror acts as a result of which 19 Turk 
diplomats died in the different countries of the world.    
“Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia” (ASALA): Being founded in the 1975 
its headquarters is situated in the Beirut and its training bases are in Syria. The aim of the organization 
is to form “Great Armenia” in East Turkey, North Iran, and in Nakhchivan and Daghlig-Garabagh 
territories of Azerbaijan. ASALA in general lead the terror acts against Turks and Azerbaijanis. One of 
the main figures in the collaboration with terror groups such as “Abu Nidal” and “Black September” 
was the leader of ASALA Akop Akopyan. Akop Akopyan who undertook responsibility in the death 
of Turkish ambassador, who was killed in Afina in 1980, stated the following in his interview to the 
newspaper “New-York Times” in 01.08.80: “Our enemies are Turkish regime, NATO and Armenians 
who don’t want to cooperate with us”.  
In April 1980, ASALA came to an agreement with PKK to hold terror acts and legalized this 
intention in Libya.  In its declaration in Beirut on 28.08.1993, ASALA stated that they wouldn’t let to 
the realization of the project on “Panturkist Oil-pipe” (Baku-Tbilisi-Jeyhan).  
“Gegaron” was established by ASALA in February of 2001. The purpose is to lead terror act 
against the Turkish political leaders, diplomats, businessmen in the South Caucasus and Middle East.  
“Armenian Liberty Movement” (AOD): It was formed in France in 1991. It realizes its terror 
acts in close relation with ASALA.  
“Armenian Liberty Front”: This terror organization which was founded in 1979 is considered 
as a part of ASALA. It is training terrorists against Turkey and Azerbaijan.  
“Orli Group”: It was founded in 1981 by young Armenians living in France. The organization 
realized more than 10 terror acts in the world airports until 1987.  
“Equity Commandos of Armenian Genocide”: It was founded in the congress of 
“Dashnagsutun” party held in Vienna in 1972. Aim of the “Equity Commandos of Armenian 
Genocide” is to gather young Libyan citizens with Armenian origin in military Unions and to organize 
terror acts against the Azerbaijanis. 
“Armenian Union”: It was created in Moscow in 1988. It has close relations with “ASALA”, 
and provide terrorist with fictitious passports for the terror acts in former soviet place. It is participated 
in the delivering of guns and freelances to the Daghlig-Garabagh.  
“Democratic Front”: It is acted in the USA, Canada, and West Europe. Its main purpose is the 
division of Turkish states.  
“Apostle”: It was founded on 29 April 2001 by Armenian Ministry of Defense which consists 
of Armenian, Syria, Libyan citizens. The aim of the organization is to realize terror acts in Turkey and 
Azerbaijan.     
 
 
 
Khanlar Naghiyev: 
ARMENIANS ARE MORE BLOOD-SUCKERS THAN THE FASCISTS 
 
Children of our village used to sit around the uncle Khanlar and asked:– “Speak about nazis”. 
Uncle Khanlar had neither star nor medal on his breast as others who returned from the Great Patriotic 
War.  
Uncle Khanlar had gone to the front as soon as the war began. In the battle for Sevastopol he 
had been captivated. During his captivity life he dreamed about Sevastopol, near the banks of the 
Black Sea where he last time fought and about the Khojaly River in Khojaly villiage.  
His captivity life began in Germany, and then he was sent into exile to Iran, and at last to 
Siberia. He visited many cities of Europe. Once it was told in Iran: “Who wants to return to his mother 
land, step forward!” As Uncle Khanlar missed his mother land very much, he wanted to step forward, 
but Mukhtar from Aghdam who once worked in Komsomol whispered to Uncle Khanlar and said: 
“Stop! They are lying to us”. Uncle Khanlar made him to believe that they don’t lie. “Let’s go to our 
motherland,” – he said to Mukhtar. They both grieved for motherland so much that instinctively 
stepped forward. There were 40 men in each ship. “The ship arrives to port at dawn; we could hardly 
hold our joy”.  “Thanks God, we returned to our motherland” – said Uncle Khanlar. We saw the 
Caspian Sea. But the ships didn’t near to the port. In the evening the ships neared the port, captives 
were loaded to the train and the door was locked. They went a long way. One morning captives were 
let out from the train. It was Siberia. Siberia where even marrow of the man can stiff. He witnessed 
many bloody, horrible, tragic human lives. Not even half of people who were exiled with Uncle 
Khanlar stayed alive…  
God saved Uncle Khanlar. After two years life gave chance to Uncle Khanlar. Government 
decided that they can return to the country. But that time I didn’t imagine that I would again live 
terrible captivity life… During the Great Patriotic War we were offended very much in captivity. Eight 
days we were left without water. Our lips were chapped and were bleeding. Once we were performing 
Namaz (the ritual prays of Islam). Although we tried to explain German soldier, he couldn’t 
understand. We said the name of Prophet Muhammad but he again didn’t understand. But when we 
said Muhammadia, at last he understood and let us to continue our praying.  They not only forebade 
captives to return to motherland, but also reproached them. Uncle Khanlar was the victim of these 
reproaches. He was very angry at that time. But Uncle Khanlar endured.  But those who were 
captivated in Garabagh War were awarded with medal, title and so on. 
Now Uncle Khanlar lives in “Shirvan” sanatorium in Naftalan city, far from Khojaly. Passing the 
narrow, dark corridors I knock the door of the room where Uncle Khanlar stays. His wife Aunt Antiga 
was rocking her grandchild sleeping in the cradle with one hand and with the other she was holding the 
hand of Uncle Khanlar. Aunt Antiga lives face to face with my sister at “Shirvan” sanatorium in 
Naftalan city. As usually she greeted me with smile. She used to speak and walk slowly. Now although 
she speaks in low tone she can’t walk slowly anymore. Leaning toward her walking stick she wanted 
to stand up. But couldn’t. “One of my legs parched, darling, doctors did their best but there is no use. 
You see, Uncle Khanlar is as child, doesn’t let my hand. I returned from outside a little bit late. I was 
busy with few chickens. When I returned, I saw that the child became blue in the cradle, and tears were 
coming down from the eyes of the man as current. So I can not go a step away from them. I am as a 
woman with child”. After war, Uncle Khanlar married in Khojaly. I can recall, every victory day Uncle 
Khanlar used to visit our school. There were no medals in his breast.  He used to speak about cruelty of 
the Germans, horrors of the captivity life. He always used to name Germans as “Nazis”. Even when 
children in the village sat around him and asked him: “Uncle Khanlar, speak about Nazis, about 
Nazis,” – he said gently “God damn them!” And spoke about the battle with Nazis. And when children 
asked: “Why don’t you have a medal?” he answered:  “I was captivated that is why I hadn’t medals”. 
Now Uncle Khanlar who fought against the Nazis hasn’t strength to fight against the Armenians.  
Captivity life exhausted him, he is blind to daylight. That day Uncle Khanlar and his wife Aunt Antiga 
were captivated together with other villagers near Nakhijivanik village. Air came into the stalls at the 
pig farm where they were kept, from the narrow hole. Infants were crying from hunger and thirst. 
Young girls, brides were hidden in the corners of the muddy cold floor in order not to be seen. “We 
were suffocating from nasty smell,” – said Aunt Antiga. But armed Armenians searched all the corners 
of the stall. Seeing young girls, brides they were dragging them with their hairs and took out. Covering 
four young girls with her wool shawl Aunt Antiga sat over them. “I will never forget that terrible night. 
Though it was dusk in the stall, one of bearded Armenians saw ring in my finger. He took a knife from 
his breast. The knife was shining. He yelled: “Hurry up, take off your ring, otherwise I will take it with 
your finger.” The women I sat over were trembling from fear. I quickly took my ring off and gave it to 
him in order to prevent brutal Armenian to come close. He grabbed ring greedily. They took all 
adornments of the captive women in the stall and put it into their bags. At this time I saw that Uncle 
Khanlar can’t stop his tears.  Forty years ago he gave it to me with trembling hands. And now not only 
my hands were trembling, my heart was jumping out of my breast. I was afraid that if this Armenian 
soldier came close he would see the young girls I sat over. They took our children. They were 
dragging, kicking us if we didn’t give them. Our mouths were bleeding. Matan, mother of three boys 
was entreating the Armenian who was taking her sons to return one of them. She was rebuking her 
husband Kamran to entreat as well. Maybe they will take pity. Kamran hopelessly began to speak: “I 
can not manage with them. They won’t return him if I entreat.”  But they both together with us 
unwillingly were pleading them not to take our young boys and girls. At this time one of these 
Armenian soldiers took Matan from her hairs and spit on her face, and beat her with the butt of the 
rifle. They began to beat whoever with the butt of the rifle. We felt over others. Our yelling was risen. 
Thus they took out 12 of our sons. Shootings were heard from the outside. All of us were crying. Only 
brother of five sisters Rovshan were together with us. When he wanted to kill himself his elder sister 
Khuraman stopped him.  Ulfat, only son of miserable Zoya, was among the 13 person. Aunt Antiga 
told about the day when she was freed from the stall in Dahraz village: “When we were set free Roza, 
wife of my middle son, over whom I sat, fainted. I entreated Armenian that she is my daughter-in –
law. Her infants are crying. Let me take her. He smiled and said: She is dead, who needs her?” I 
dragged my daughter-in-law to the bounder where the captives were changed. Here I witnessed to 
another tragedy. 16 years old Malak, daughter of my “dead” daughter-in-law, died. She left her granny 
and mother. When they lost Malak, Aunt Antiga couldn’t reconcile with her death. She began yelling 
as she did in the stall. Malak Eyyubova, born in Chaykand village of Krasnoselsk region of Armenia, 
came to Khojaly with her family. She named her daughter after Khan gizi Natavan. On 26 February at 
the dawn, doors of the basements were knocked firmly. Armenians gathered them together and took 
them to Khankendi. Malak pressed her baby to her breast, and spit on the face of the Armenian soldier.  
And saying “God damn you”, she began to run. Armenians shot her many times. In her last breath she 
cried “It is better to die rather than to be captivated.” doing the same thing Malak’s sister-in-law 
Malahat died. That day people threw branches over the killed girls in order Armenians wouldn’t insult 
the dead bodies.  
There is a Khojaly wound in the breast of Aunt Antiga that can’t skin over.  While speaking on that 
day Aunt Antiga and Uncle Khanlar wipe their eyes with the back of their hands. Uncle Khanlar was 
more hopeful when he fought against the Nazis. I knew that there were my fellow-men, mother, and 
father waiting for me. But the most terrible is that now I haven’t my village.   
- Uncle Khanlar you were captivated twice.  Which of them was most horrible?  
- Armenian captivity. Nazis were fighting against the soldiers; they never bombarded the 
kindergartens, schools. But Armenians bayonet the infants, pull out their eyes, and cut off the 
stomachs of pregnant women. It is unseen cruelty. The war has its own laws. Armenians are 
more blood suckers than Nazis. I saw this in the captivity.  
 
48 DAYS IN ARMENIAN CAPTIVITY 
KAMAL KHUDAYAROV: “Khojaly grief killed me.” 
 
When Allah gifted relatives with son, everybody desired: “It would be good if Allah gave such 
a son to Sister Gumru”. Aunt Gumru had a long at the bottom of her heart, she longed for son. He that 
is born to be hanged will never be drowned.   Aunt Gumru couldn’t meet her darling. She gave birth to 
seven girls. All were clever, wise and beautiful. She named them neither Basti nor Tamam, she named 
her elder daughter Sevda and the last-born daughter Matanat.  
Though it was hard for deceased Uncle Kamal  to take care of these girls, he never let 
somebody to feel this. Together with his wife aunt Gumru they could endure everything.  They brought 
up worthy children for the society. Uncle Kamal was a tractor driver. He used to enjoy abundant crop 
taken from the ploughed  land. As he was only man in the family, he did every hard work by himself. 
How tired he returned from work, he always rejoiced when his daughters got  excellent marks. Girls 
rolling their sleeves up as boy, used to cultivate in the garden, made haystack, and used to cleave a 
wood. “Let our father not long for son”. In hard works they helped to their father. Years passed. His 
elder daughter Sevda finished secondary school in Khojaly and entered to Agricultural Institute.  His 
second daughter Sevil entered this university as well. They became first woman specialists in this 
sphere in our village. Their father  was very pride of his daughters. Everyday their mother thanked 
Allah for such children. Sevda got marry to a boy named Murtuzali with whom she studied together at 
the same high school. Her destiny brought her to Baku. I will never forget that day. While  turning and 
blessing her around the lamp, her father was trembling. Saying “You are my son gift” – her father’s 
eyes filled with tears and he cuddled  his daughter to his breast.  Great Allah gave gift of Aunt 
Gumru’s son to her daughter. When her grandson Vusal born tears came down from her check. One of 
her daughters became agronomist, other was doctor and the other teacher. At present Sevda khanim 
who loves to write poems, is going to  get academic degree on agricultural sphere. Sevda khanim 
works on position of great scientific worker in Azerbaijan Husbandry Institute of Scientific 
Investigation. She is the author of 15 scientific work. Those works were published in the conferences 
held in abroad and in Azerbaijan. She took her father name as pen-name. Sevda Kamalgizi. Khojaly 
was developing. Villagers were building nice and wide houses. Sevil together with her husband 
Alamdar built  one of these house for themselves. As they themselves built this house, sores of their 
hands were on each stone. But man proposes God   disposes. Although  uncle Kamal’s village was 
developing, its grief was growing as well. That day uncle Kamal left his house with a piece of bread. 
He let the door of the house, stall, hen-house to remain open, he even let out gray dog that was licking 
its legs and hands. By saying “God, save us!” he left the yard with trembling hands, with full of tears, 
and didn’t close the gate. Gray dog fellowed  him till the end of the village.  Uncle Kamal lost his way 
as other villagers that became dispersed because of the thunder of the guns, and tanks. Together with 
other villagers he lost his way and in spite of going to the villages of Aghdam he reaches to the  
Dahraz village where Armenians were living. Two days and two nights  he stayed in the snow. But 
most horror was waiting here. Witnessing how many olds, children, youth cannot stand cold, frost and 
die wounds uncle Kamal’s heart deeply. There were armed people among that group. As soon as they 
entered the village they were set on fire. Exchange of fire lasted for several times. In unequal fight, 
Armenians killed olds, children in that group. Those who stay alive were captivated. These captives 
were kept in pig-farm and they were tortured. One day one bearded Armenian had ordered to separate 
16 men from others. They would be changed with Armenians who were captivated in Aghdam. They 
made about 150 olds, child to take off their clothes and go out. Uncle Kamal didn’t know what 
happened with them. He was taken to Khankendi and kept in stall with other 18 person. There were 12 
soldiers of National Army. They let 18 people in and set 12 people free. They formed up line and shot. 
But those who were inside didn’t know what was going on outside.  Every day some captives were 
kicked and bludgeoned. Armenians gave a piece of bread and turbid water. They beat 2 soldiers of the 
National Army and then poured iced water to their wound. One day representatives of Red Cross 
Society came from Sweden. Representatives of Red Cross Society gave a blanket to captives, and 
asked Armenians to be kind with peaceful people. After the representatives gone they took blanket and 
again treated us savagely. They threatened captives, and ordered us not to say a word about offense. 
When captives said they are fed up and they will say everything, Armenians threatened them that they 
will humiliate our women. We all dropped our eyes down.   One day we were very thirsty. I 
remembered that I sold my cow for 1000 ruble and sewed money to line of my suit. I gave that money 
to Armenian and asked for water. He filled oil bucket with snow and brought it to us. We were in 
desperate and put our handkerchief into bucket and then put it over our chapped lips. I was handing a 
piece of bread to other captives. After handing the bread I ate crumbs that were in my pocket. 48 days 
that I spent there cost 100 years of my life. His daughters did their best to liberate their father. They 
could able to exchange him with Armenian prisoner. Head of the Aghdam's Popular Front, National 
Hero of Azerbaijan late Allahverdi Baghirov was amazed with these girls and said: “I would never 
change such girl even for 7 men”. Kamal who returned from captivity lived only for 8 years. In his last 
breath saying “I am going to Khojaly”, he told mournful bayati.  
  
Then he turned to his daughter who was a doctor, and said: “Take this heave stone from my 
chest my child; Khojaly grief killed me.” His younger daughter Matanat doesn’t reconcile with the 
death of her father. Standing in front of his picture she says poem about father. His soul joined the 
anxious souls of others who died in Khojaly 8 years ago. While opening the faces of 48 corpses that 
were disfigured in the Aghdam mosque, Sevda dies together with them. But how could she know that 
after her father’s death another tragedy was waiting for her. Her sister wanted to give a birth; she 
wanted to have a boy that would be support for girl.  After serious operation she gave a birth to boy. 
Doctor could save neither her nor her child. Both died. Far from Khojaly there is a grave of father and 
a tombstone of a bride with nappies in her arms. In the forest there was a child in the arms of her killed 
mother, he sucked his mother’s nipple. Soldiers of National Army took the live child and cried. 
Armenian grief killed not only uncle Kamal but all Khojaly inhabitants as well.  
 
SHE DIDN’T WANT TO COMMIT SUICIDE… 
 
Last year when I read in the newspaper about the suicide of Khojaly refugee student Afag 
Salmanova, I had stiffened in my place. I was very upset and I was taken back to that day fourteen year 
ago.  
Afag, born in Khankendi, was very young when she came to Khojaly.  The day when her 
mother took this swarthy girl to school stands in front of my eyes as well. Her first teacher was affable 
teacher Afila. Those days Khojaly was living her hard times. Neither little Afag nor the Khojaly people 
could image that after several months the land named Khojaly would be destroyed completely.   
Afag’s first teacher would be killed together with her family (her husband Vagif, her three 
children, Azar, Jeyhun, Niyamaddin). Her classmate sweet and angel-faced Nazakat together with her 
father Tapdig would be shot. This event would embed in memory of Afag lifelong. That in every 
ceremony devoted to the Khojaly tragedy Afag would tell bayatis.  
 
Afag used to tell this bayati very often. Afag as well as our other villagers suffered from the 
wandering life. She grew up in sanatorium. Finished secondary school in Baku. The school No 104 in 
Surakhani region where she studied became very familiar to her. She justified the hopes of her 
literature teacher Gulkhar and English teacher Intizar. The same year she entered the university. To the 
faculty of pedagogy of Azerbaijan Pedagogical University. But Afag wasn’t very happy then.   
When she got red-colored student card No 2001/Ц-44, tears came down from her face. Only six 
days were for the end of the 2001, when the life of the holder of this card ended.  
31 years ago, Afag’s grandmother Gudrat khanim died on such a winter day on 26 December, 
on the same day with her granddaughter.  Ogtay was very shaken from the untimely death of his 
mother and cried bitterly. He couldn’t come to himself for a long time. But birth of Afag rejoiced 
young father. Sorrow and joy joined each other. This little baby could even make Ogtay to forget the 
notion of “motherlessness”. Though Afag was the second child in the family she was much loved. Her 
parents fondled her very much. She had the luck, she was a student. But this child from Khojaly could 
enjoy sweetness of the student life only for four month. Semester had begun. It was the preoccupied 
days of student life.  From the words of her mother: “She had to give a copybook to her friend who 
lived near the metro station “Ganclik”, to prepare to the examinations and then return home. She 
returned a little bit late. I reproached her and rebuked. And she began to felt nervous. I couldn’t arm 
myself with patient. At that moment she went to balcony. Then a roar and I heard someone cried: “She 
threw herself”. I ran to the yard and saw my child on asphalt, her nose was bleeding. She was taken to 
the hospital in the ambulance. But it was too late. She died. I read following words from the expert 
opinion in death act: “Late Afag Salmanova had very strong stress. When she went balcony she 
couldn’t keep her balance. While falling she tried to catch from the iron rods and ropes in the 
downstairs and balconies but she couldn’t. There were many bruise in her fingers, her nails were 
broken.”  
Dear reader, though 14 year passes from the Khojaly tragedy, children of this unfortunate place 
faces with such tragedy very often.  
There were many of us who died because of heart infarction, blood pressure and nervous 
disease. Although 14 year passes but Afag became one of these victims. It is pity that her last flat 
wouldn’t be Khojaly. One more mother and father left with tears.    
 
DESTINY OF SARIYYA… 
 
Once upon a time… There was a village behind the mountains. When a little girl was born in 
this village her grandmother named her Sariyya.  When Sariyya was one years old, her father died 
untimely.  
A girl named Sariyya was also born in Sarvan, village of Azizbayov region of Armenia. 
Fatherlessness was written in her destiny as well. Aunt Guljahan by herself brought up Sariyya, 
endured to all of her caprices, she was her favorite. And Sariyya grew up as boy rather than girl.  
Fearless, quick girl was Sariyya. She used to say everything to face. Aunt Guljahan who 
changed her parents married Sariyya off, and uncle Samad was son but not brother-in-law for her. She 
gave a birth to five children. Aunt Gulcahan was very proud of her grandchildren. She cherished her 
grandchildren and brought them up.  Her grandchildren grew up and received secondary school. One 
of the beautiful houses in this village was Samad’s.  
When Garabagh problem began one of our fellowmen who was banished from its country was 
uncle Samad’s family. In 1988 He came to Shusha with his elder son Sohbat who was agronomist by 
profession and his wife teacher Shahla. But none of them could imagine that here they would witness 
to a tragedy. After one year in Shusha, in 1989 uncle Samad moved to Khojaly and dwelled in one of 
the newly built houses.  
That terrible night his daughter Mehriban, married recently, was together with them at home. 
At dawn a lot of Khojaly habitants who stayed at the cellar were captivated. They were brought to 
Khankandi. Elshan, husband of the daughter of her brother-in-law, was also captivated. Sariyya 
witnessed to terrible tragedy.  While speaking about captivity live her mouth trembles.  
- Armenians took us to captivity and brought to a cemetery. Here they sacrificed four Mashati 
Turks and 3 Azeri Turks. They killed parents in front of the eyes of their children. Blood-
thirsty Armenians pulled out eyes of two Azeris with screw-driver. They threw corpses to the 
valley and burned them. I can not understand, if they wanted kill them so why they tortured 
them? When Sariyya escaped captivity she couldn’t believe her eyes: “Thanks God, I was 
reborn!”   When aunt Guljahan saw her granddaughter, her daughter, brother-in-law, husband 
of her granddaughter alive she embraced them and cried bitterly. “God take pity of me. My 
only child could escape the claw of the blood-suckers.” Though aunt Guljahan was living her 
old ages, she looked after the children of her granddaughter Sohbat, helped teacher Shahla. I 
will never forget that day. When uncle Samad’s middle son Akif heard that his mother, father, 
sister were captivated in Aghdam he couldn’t hold his tears. He shed bitter tears. To see how 
men cry was unbearable for me.  
  Aunt Guljahan who changed her mother and father fell seriously ill. Her daughter, brother-in-
law, grandchildren took care of her. But there was no cure for her illness. In her last breath sighing that 
“I want to see my land” Guljahan died. On the shoulders of her brother-in-law and grandchildren, aunt 
Guljahan went to her grave. Sariyya was very brave when she lost dearest person who changed her 
parents.  
 But the biggest tragedy was waiting for her. How could she know that she would lose the 
dearest son Akif. That this courage woman would melt as candle. Akif was guest of his new apartment 
only a night. At dawn when he lit the heater in the bath, everything was set on fire. Who could know 
that heater was leaking. Akif was brought to the hospital with serious grade of burn. Akif was brother 
for Shahla rather than brother-in-law. She said to doctor to help him, to do everything that he could, 
not to leave two children without father. But doctor didn’t say any hopeful words. Akif was a real man; 
he tried to make his relatives, parents, his wife Kamala, children to believe that he will live. He joked 
with them. But it lasted only 8 days. In the eighth day he deceased. Aybaniz who loved her uncle very 
much and teacher Shahla wrote and told bayatis for Akif.  
Lines from the Aybaniz’s diary: “This world lost its significance without you, my uncle Akif. 
You will bring us to a life if you return”. Teacher Shahla wrote this poem to Akif. These lines are said 
by her mother-in-law aunt Sariyya.  
This year Sariyya who was named after her grandmother will go to school. Akif waited this day 
in impatience. But doom didn’t give a chance. He couldn’t hold her fat hands and took her to school. 
This was bitter fate. Neither Sariyya who was born in Khojaly, nor Sariyya who came to Khojaly and 
Little Sariyya could grow with father kindness.  
Sariyya who came to Khojaly and banished from Uzbekistan together with her father Firdovsi, 
mother Yegana, brother Fituris, Jamal, Shahin, Asgar, sister Saadat were killed.  
Davud Kheyriyan who participated in Khojaly bloodshed and who was Armenian wrote in his 
book. “By throwing her over the 100 corpse soldiers of terrorist group burned this live girl at the age of 
10, who was wounded in the hand and foot, who could stand the cold.” Maybe this girl was Sariyya. 
Killed together with family.  
Who knows? 
Time will come and secrets will be revealed. Children like Sariyya will be born. Let them to 
grow up with their fathers. Let them not live the tragedy. Amin!  
 
 
KHOJALY REFUGEE HAD BEEN KILLED IN STAVROPOL 
KILLERS WERE ARMENIANS 
 
When I reached there I saw black trees without leaves. Zigzag road in the side of the trees…  
This road was taking me to another mourning ceremony of Khojaly villager who was killed by 
Armenians in the Ivanovka village of Kachbi region of Stavropol… 
These barbarians, who savagely killed everyone from infant to old ones, weren’t satisfied with 
Turkish blood that they shed during the Khojaly tragedy.    
But we still keep silence. And Armenians bring Khojaly tragedy to the world’s notice as 
suitable for them. It was very hard for me to meet with the mother of the deceased, with Elmira 
khanim.  She was suffering for not taking revenge on the enemy who killed her only child, her only 
refuge. This great mother was ready to die for her child. Even if she could kill many Armenians, it 
wouldn’t be soften her sufferings. She couldn’t believe that her only son Rovshan had died. She 
couldn’t reconcile with his death. Our mothers were again crying as they did ten years ago.  
 For some reason the cry of these mothers doesn’t reach to Baku from Naftalan.  
 When Khojaly tragedy took place God saved Rovshan and his mother. They settled in Naftalan. 
Although Roshvan tried to earn money for piece of bread, it didn’t give results. In order to earn money 
for the treatment of his wife and for his four infants, Rovshan went to Russia. He could send money 
for his family. “My mother worked hard for me and now it is my turn.” – saying this he worked night 
and day.  
 From the words of his sister Surayya: “I live here with my family for many years. One day my 
brother returned home in anger. I asked the reason. He said: “There were several Armenians in the 
center of the village. I wanted to bypass them, but they sworn in Armenian language. They said that 
Garabagh belongs to them. I think they knew that I am from Garabagh. Everybody knows each other 
as the village is too small. I learnt that one of them was Slovin who is known as drug-addicted and 
others were his friends.”  
 Several days passed, they stopped my brother Rovshan when he was coming home late night 
and fought with him.  Suddenly one of them stabbed awl to his stomach and run away. As the inward 
parts of the organ were opened, it was bleeding inward. When we heard about the fought of 
Azerbaijanis with Armenians in bazaar, we run there. The fought was becoming more excited. Though 
I was looking for my brother I couldn’t find him. Together with my brothers-in-law Rasul, Bakhtiyar, 
Atamoghlan we looked for him. They were calling Russians for help who were spoiling the fruits and 
vegetables on the bar of our villagers. One of our villagers Samir said something to my husband Agil, 
after this we all got in cars and left. At this time my brother was living his last moments in hospital. I 
lay over my brother. When I entreated to Uzbek doctor, he said that he was already dead. He didn’t 
know that I was his sister.  
When my brothers-in-law said they had to take revenge I stopped them begging that we had to 
take his corpse to my mother. I asked to Uzbek doctor to close his eyes, but he refused. I closed the 
eyes of my brother. I took the corpse of my brother to Azerbaijan to my mother who was in Naftalan.” 
After Khojaly tragedy, Rovshan who lost his relatives, friends returned to the side of Taleh 
whom he liked very much and whose corpse was lying in foreign land. He kept his promise. Rovshan 
always used to say: “How could I return Khojaly without Taleh?” Now Rovshan’s grave is near the 
grave of Taleh, they are together again as it was in old days when they both were alive. His 
grandparents’ corpses lie in foreign land as well.  
If decent son of Khojaly uncle Yasit were alive, he would hold good post. The light of uncle 
Iman also turned off before time. Merciless death broke down the last hope of family. It took the live 
of man who lit the lights of Yasit.  
 
DEVASTATED LAND  
SORROW OF LAST YEAR 
 
Our greatest sorrow is Garabagh. It is the first political problem of the country. We did our best 
to publish about the horrors, grieves, tortures, sorrows created by the war.  This time one writer 
introduced us writing. We read her writing, we were affected and…. 
… Sariyya Muslimgizi “tunings us up” with this sorrow note.  
* * * 
That year broiling sun was scorching the world. The weeds in the fields and plains were 
reduced to ashes. Gardens that were cultivated with labor were turning pale day by day.   
Cracked earth, as well as thirsty animals was moaning from thirst. God tested Khojaly people 
with water. Our villagers, who were desperately struggling in the poverty whirl, were fed up from 
everything.   Though it was thundering rarely, people were exhausted.  
Our aryk was dried. As there were Armenian dwellings near our millpond, they had destroyed 
it.   At that moment late uncle Salman who came Khojaly from Seyidli village of Aghdam, helped the 
people, lit the hope in the hearts of villagers. He gathered everybody to the top of the village. With 
authoritative voice, he ordered men to take hook, pitchfork, spade and to fight down our millpond.  
  Leaning against his walking-stick uncle Salman who was cripple since his childhood, went to 
the top of the millpond together with people.  
That day loud voice of uncle Salman was heard in everywhere. “Hey, men how could you look 
to your hungry children’s face tomorrow? If we have to die then let’s die as man,” – he cried.  
In the evening, black water was overflowing in our aryks. Tears were coming down the face of 
old women as stream. Late aunt Asya, aunt Madina, aunt Sona, my grandmother Tamasha were crying 
as well. I was child then. Taking off shoes I used to play in the aryks together with other children. We 
used to jump there. We used to soak through.  But we liked to play in the aryk. At last our mothers 
pulled us out from the aryk by force.  
We watered our gardens. Leaves were becoming alive… 
Stiffen life again came to life. That year there was heavy harvest in the gardens of Khojaly 
habitants. That year due to the money we got from the harvest we could buy new clothes and go to 
school. Now uncle Salman had become post officer. He brought letters with good news from the 
soldiers, and from people living abroad. At New Year, I was expecting that uncle Salman would bring 
postcard for me.  And I always achieved what I wished. Uncle Salman was a man who helped to every 
one. He was frank man. We were face to face neighbors with uncle Salman. Our spotty hens were 
lying at the same fence. Uncle Salman’s wife aunt Tamasha was very open-handed woman. She shared 
her bread with her neighbors. We used to share everything with them. When my mother was ill in bed, 
aunt Tamasha didn’t leave us alone. She used to bake our bread in oven.  
 We used to spend life in this way.  But how could we know that there were few days left to the 
troubled life. How could we know that we would miss these … That we would whimper for those 
days… That we would long for the smell of green hays in the spring… That we would long for the 
lavash, for roasted wheat that fried at Novruz.  We used to look this with enthusiasm. We used to fill 
our dirty bags with hot roasted wheat, and then eat them delightfully. We used to put long fire-brand 
under the bonfire. But we couldn’t imagine that on that ill-fated day Armenian savages would throw 
Khojaly habitants to the fire and would burn them in that bonfire.  As they burnt eight year old 
Khanzangul in front of her parent’s eyes... 
 That night had wounded the heart of aunt Tamasha deeply. Aunt Tamasha was in Khojaly 
together with her sons Vasif and Rasif. They had sent uncle Salman to Aghdam – to their relatives, as 
his both feet were cripple. Rasif was on post. He learnt about the occupation of Khojaly by Armenian 
when he was in the post. Remembering that he had left her mother alone at home, he returned back. On 
his way he came across with Armenian and Russian soldiers.  By speaking in Russian, he could escape 
the danger. He came home, and took his mother. Together with her, they went to the school. Aunt 
Tamasha recall that day as follows:  
- When we reach to the schoolyard, we heard strong voice. I thought that it was Armenians. 
When I came close, I saw teacher Afila and children. Afila said that they could hardly bring her 
husband Vagif in stretcher. Although Vagif insisted very much, neither Afila nor their sons Azar, 
Jeyhun left him alone. Up to day there is no news about them.   
 When I together with Rasif reached to the bridge, Khojaly villagers were assembled at the top 
of the Katik forest. As my son was wearing soldier boots, he took me to his back and crossed the river. 
We had to walk long way and he didn’t want my feet to get soaked. We had two breads in the bag. It 
was freezing very hard. Sometimes we felt and sometimes we even rolled to valley. But we were very 
afraid, so we kept on running. We were dragging even if we were exhausted. And Armenians were 
firing intensively. Many people died there. We were covered with the blood of death people. Thus, we 
kept running. Near the Nakhchivanik military machines stopped our group. At that very instant, bullet 
shot from the sniper killed my son. It entered to his forehead and came out from his neck.  I wanted to 
take his corpse with Vasif and hide him. I lifted him from his head. I wanted to raise his head, but 
blood spurting from his neck covered all my clothes.  I was completely in blood. I could hardly hide 
my son. I laid branches over his corpse. Our enemies didn’t give us a chance, we all were captivated. 
They gathered us in the pig farm in Nakhchivanik village.  
 Cry of the children rose up to heaven. I cut the bread which was in my bag into pieces and gave 
it to the children. Infants were crying of hunger. Milk of women was dried as well. That day is the 
hardest day of my life.  
 On the next day they took us to Department of Interior Affair of Askharan region. There I 
learnt that my son-in-law, my daughter Fitat’s husband Salim and son of my elder son Ramiz, my 
grandson Zahir were also captivated. They were in the cell next to ours. Zahir’s condition was 
hopeless; he was wounded in the forest… 
 They tortured our children before our eyes.  
 My son Vasif and son-in-law Salim were the soldiers of the Red Army. They had joined self-
defense battalion in Khojaly when it was firstly created. Armenians broke the arms, legs of captives 
with iron and stone.  
 In frost weather they made captives to take off their clothes completely and then shot them. 
And then they obliged other captives to dress the corpses. Armenians had become more unbridled and 
had tortured our children and women. They demanded to tell who had thrown the missile in Khojaly.  
 Vasif and Salim asked them to set free children and women and they would answer their 
question. They stopped torturing them. Salim and Vasif said that they had thrown the missile. 
Unbridled Armenians had killed these two young men with more ruthlessly. They had thrust hot pivot 
to their neck, and had branded their hands. They did wildness. Salim till the last moment said: 
“Garabagh belongs to us!”   What remained from these two brave men as memory are their deeds, their 
love to their motherland, and Salim’s only daughter, his little child Nishana.  Vasif’s two sons Asif and 
Ravan. Rasif’s child Intizar.  
 Uncle Salman’s chilren, his sons didn’t leave their motherland in the lurch. They gave their life 
as a sacrifice for their land. Uncle Salman lives wandering life in the sanitarium “Garabagh” in 
Naftalan. With wound of four brave sons in his heart.  Nishana, only sign that remained from Salim, 
Intizar who waits anxiously, Asif and Ravan are longing for their fathers as well. Noisy uncle Salman 
now was silently sitting in chair for invalids. Bending down I kissed his forehead. I hugged his head. I 
burst into tears. This old man couldn’t remember me. Even his children Mazahir, Valeh, Ayaz, Ramiz, 
Fitat, Parvana can’t calm down his pain. Uncle Salman touched my faces with his hands and said: 
“Who are you, my darling? You are very familiar to me.” When I told him who am I, he burst into 
tears. We both cried. Our most serious sorrow made us cry. This was sorrow of homelessness. Does 
our destroyed land cries as well? Uncle Salman was crying bitterly. We couldn’t quite him. “Darling, 
will we return to our land? I want to die in Khojaly but not in other place,” – uncle Salman said. He 
didn’t speak about his four brave sons. He said in one word: “They paid their duty before their 
motherland.”  
 I thought: “Oh my God, will there be person like uncle Salman who brought water to our dried 
aryks? Will there be a man who will bring life to hundred people like Salman? Almighty, save me and 
my land from this sorrow.” 
  
 P.S. Uncle Salman couldn’t achieve what he desired.  He died in Naftalan but not in Khojaly.  
 
THERE IS NO ONE TO VISIT ME 
THERE IS NO ONE TO TAKE CARE OF ME 
 
Old Minara looked after her three grandsons, and her daughter Shukhaddin was working the 
vineyards of the sovkhoz. Although she had divorced from her husband, he didn’t let his children be in 
need of money.    
During the bloodshed, the candle of his house gone out – their three sons had died. And no one 
had made inquires about their grandmother. Their elder son Etibar was in post and his younger brother 
Mobil was baking bread in the Khojaly bakers when his mother together with villagers went to Katik 
forest.  That day breads in the oven were reduced to ashes. Though Mobil was soldier of the National 
Army, he did other works as well.  
All around were shuddering. There was such confusion that mother lost her son, and son 
couldn’t find his mother as well. Unaware of her sons, mother was running with dressing-gown and 
slippers on. And it was freezing hard that day. The mother didn’t think of herself. She was just 
whispering: “God, help my sons”. Lots of bullets were howling over her head.  She had forgotten 
about herself. She was asking about her sons. Somebody said: “He was in the group of so and so.” 
Others said: “Last time we saw him in the village.” the mother could neither go with villagers nor stay 
in the forest. She saw that Khojaly was set on fire…  
She had nothing to do but to go. There were many mothers like her. Now she was dragging. 
She wanted to stay alive, to see her sons. Hopeless mother stood up. “I won’t drag. If my sons come 
across to the bullets of the enemies it will better to hit me.” – saying this words she stood up furiously. 
The bullets were flying over her head. Now she was going straight. She neither bent down nor 
dragged. “I won’t bend down unless I come together with my children. I will go straight. Maybe, Allah 
would save them. I hope that Allah will hear my prayer.” One would become deaf because of the voice 
of machine-gun.  
When she reached to Aghdam, she came together with Etibar’s wife Aida who gave birth to a 
child and with granddaughter Habiba who died in birth. That day many mothers lost their children and 
many children lost their mothers. In Khojaly there was grandmother who stretched out her hand for her 
walking-stick. She was worrying about her daughter and grandchildren. As it was dark she couldn’t 
find her walking-stick. Suddenly she heard confused sounds in the yard. She heard the steps of 
soldiers. For a moment she recalled her grandson Habil. Those days, Habil was driver of Victor 
Polyanichko, head of the Garabagh Organization Committee of Daghlig-Garabagh Autonomous 
Region, second secretary of Central Committee of Communist Party. During the tense period of the 
events, he was driving to Aghdara, Khojavand and other Armenian dwellings. He used to say: 
“Armenians can’t kill me. They are coward nation.” He used to gather fruits in the garden. He used to 
give those fruits to old Armenian man sitting in the side of the pavement. He used to say that he felt 
bad when he saw how this old man looked to the people returning from the bazaar with full bags. 
When he bypassed, he used to give these fruits to him. But how could Habil know that Armenian by 
name Garo would kill him together with his aunt in the center of Askharan. That his child would be 
born not knowing who was his father. That terrible night that is on 17 November 1991 Habil became 
first martyr of this family. They had named his child as he willed – Ulkar. Ulkar was the victim of 
another tragedy after Khojaly tragedy. The grandmother could hardly recall the death of Habil. Thus, 
the sounds coming from the yard couldn’t belong to him. These are Armenian and Russian soldiers. 
They had come to torture old helpless people. A father heard about the death of his son in Aghdam. He 
went to Askharan. All these took place in front of the eyes of Russian soldiers. Habil was taken to 
Aghdam Central Hospital. Though they transferred blood, they couldn’t help him. Blood was pouring 
to the floor. His father cried bitterly and asked doctor: “Save my son!” Unfortunately! They couldn’t 
save him. In his last breath he said: “Don’t cry, father,” – and asked for water. The father gave water to 
him. This was his last desire. That day father took his corpse and carried it to Khojaly by his car. That 
day all around wept bitterly. It was raining all day long. At dark night they burnt Habil in Khojaly 
cemetery. His brothers said: “We can’t live after the death of Habil.” His mother cooked the dish 
which Habil liked very much in his childhood and gave funeral repast. Fire-brands under the bonfire 
were on fire.  By wiping tears with the end of the apron, his mother said: “God save us.” But greatest 
tragedies were before us…  
Khojaly were living its dark nights since months. Khojaly Tragedy had begun from remote 
past. But when the road of Askharan castle were build with concrete wall on 1 November 1991, our 
land communication with Khojaly  had been broken off. They could communicate only by air. That 
night Etibar looked for his mother a lot. He didn’t know to save either his grandmother or mother.  
About morning desperate Etibar decided to go to village, at least to find his mother. It was hard to go 
after his grandmother.  He was shot when he crossed the main road in Khojaly and reached to the 
petrol filling station. The Red Cross Organization found his corpse and brought to Aghdam. Mobil had 
fought with his fellow-men in the five-storeyed building in Khojaly built by Baku house-building plant 
No 1, and about the morning went to the forest. He was captivated near Askharan region, and there is 
no news of him up to day.  None of the captive soldiers of National Army were returned. Those who 
were freed said that Armenians killed captive soldiers with torture. And his mother was unaware of 
this. All day long, she begged late Allahverdi Baghirov, National hero of Azerbaijan, head of the 
Aghdam Popular Front, to save her son who was captivated. But Unfortunately! When she met with 
Allahverdi Baghirov, he said that there people on our side who laid obstacles to liberate our captives. 
If it were, who knew maybe they could save last hope of Shukhaddin, maybe he would be consolation 
for her. Mother who longed for her sons named her granddaughter Intizar.  Now Intizar is at the age of 
14, she is at the same age with Khojaly tragedy.  
This road takes me not to Khojaly but to Gizilgum sanatorium in Pirshaghi settlement where 
Khojaly villagers settled. The sanatorium was look like as dried mill. Its walls were cracked; there was 
no sign of flowered yard. Everywhere were in dust. I stepped over the tattered carpet. I knocked the 
door of little room in the second floor. Hoarse voice came from the inside: “It is open, you may enter.” 
There were two stools, a little table and sofa in the room.  There was mother with snow-white hair 
sitting in the corner of the sofa. There was ash-tray with full of stubs and cigarette lighter.  She was 
smoking gluttonously and drove away smoke. There was a long silent. I wanted to find consolatory 
words to say but I couldn’t. Great Sorrows are always dumb. At last, she crushed the stub into the ash-
tray. 366th regiment crushed old women in Khojaly in the same manner. She turned to me and said: 
“how nice of you that you came and remembered these poor people. There is no one to visit me, 
nobody inquires after me. They had stoked up bonfire in Novruz Holiday. Everybody wished to 
celebrate next Novruz holiday in our land. Looking to the bonfire I remembered my children. What do 
I need Khojaly without them for? As though I didn’t give birth to them. I am still unaware of my 
mother. Sonless mother couldn’t go to her last point on the shoulders of her grandsons. I can’t cry 
anymore. My mother used to say: “Thanks God, You didn’t give me sons but You gifted my daughters 
with sons. I will go to grave on the shoulders on my grandchildren. But she couldn’t.” Her 
grandchildren Habiba and Intizar were sitting at her side and sleeked down her hair. “Do you know 
what did my grandchildren make a present? They bought cigarette and cigarette lighter. But there were 
days when my sons bought gifts separately.” Intizar couldn’t believe that her father was dead. “No, I 
will look for him. I will find him wherever he is. I will be a journalist,” – she said. “But why do you 
want to be journalist?” “Journalists can collect information from everywhere.” Maybe one day Intizar 
who long for her father would write most effective book on Khojaly.  
That day that is on 26 February many statesmen, head of the committees, official persons had 
passed bypassed the little monument “Ana harayi” (Mother Cry) devoted to the Khojaly tragedy near 
the metro station Khatai. They put sown greater than monument itself. Neither this mournful mother 
nor ill-fated bride was remembered. There was nobody who could console mournful father who was 
driving in his car with black band.  At last father went to the Pirshaghi settlement and hugged his 
grandchildren. He was burst into tears. Father who couldn’t once fondle his sons now was fondling his 
grandchildren. And mother with great sorrow stayed alone in her little room together with her grieves. 
There are 60 women organization, about 3000 society, organization and committees, and Khojaly Red 
Cross Organization that benefits from Khojaly tragedy. .. 
Mother could escape the death. But couldn’t escape the great sorrow… there are two verdures 
of this tree. They will shoot. They will light the candle of three heroes. Amin! 
 
 
KHOJALY PEOPLE WERE BEHEADED OVER THE ARMENIAN GRAVES 
 
ARMENIAN AND RUSSIAN OFFICERS IN 366th REGIMENT MUST ANSWER IN FRONT 
OF THE COURT 
 
I couldn’t stop looking to the way. I was plunged into the dreams. And suddenly I saw a tree 
with snow-white flowers in one of the yards in the side of the road. Oh my God, spring comes! People 
had changed as seasons.  
14 years ago while walking on this road I put my head over the shoulders of aunt Shargiyya 
and cried noiselessly. In the evening we reached to the board-house built by House-Building Plant No 
1. Delivering the keys to us director of board-house Saleh said: “Let God, give you patience.” Those 
days, trees in the ash-gray field were dark black. A few leaves were on the branches. Place where we 
had to stay was flat houses. As this place was considered for the people who come to rest in summer, 
the walls of the rooms were wet. Wounded children alongside with frostbitten olds were shivering with 
cold. Though it was bitter cold, later the olds slept. Infants were crying because of cold and hunger. 
Making sweet tea, workers of board-house gave it to the women with infants in order to make children 
to stop crying. Infants drank sweet tea and fall asleep. Mothers’ milk was dried because of fear.  
Several hours passed from the evening when I left my fellow-villagers and went to my own-room. The 
whistling wind winnowed the sand. Sometimes it was breezing up so that it threw pebbles and 
cockleshell to the windows. Sea was becoming strong. My dreams were up to the heaven. My dream 
was in the Katik forest where my mother’s corpse was lying. Armenian didn’t let us even to take our 
corpses.  It was hard to calm down children who lost their mothers. They asked: “Why our mothers 
don’t come?” We couldn’t bury our martyr’s whose soles still wander in that forest.  
In that long, mournful night wind and sea were my bosom friends. As if they were crying for 
our victims. I couldn’t sleep till the morning. Oh my God how long night was it! It is said that there is 
day after dark night. But the day of this dark night opened with more terrible news. Soldiers, especially 
commander of military group No N in Aghdam, Azerbaijan National Hero Shirin Mirzayev’s soldiers 
were fired, and many of our soldiers died when they went to Katik forest to take the corpses. As we 
hadn’t professional helicopter-pilots it made things even harder. Many helicopter-pilots were killed. 
Those who didn’t afraid hadn’t enough experience. Armenian armed soldiers who lied in ambush on 
the height were firing to the helicopters. To pilot a helicopter between the electric conductors needed a 
special experience and ability. One who could do this was Khanlar Sattarov. But still there were many 
martyr’s in Katik forest. Up today they are waiting. Let’s again look thorough the content of the 366th 
regiment that killed many innocent people on that terrible night.  
 
AUNT TAMAM’S PENSION 
Uncle Kochari: “We had no one neither in Khojaly nor here…” 
 
Knocking at the door I heard hoarse man voice from inside: “My dear, the room is flooded. Let 
me clean then you may come in.” I’d waited for a while at the narrow corridor. At last a man 
opened the door and invited me to enter the room. There was an old woman sitting on the bed and 
watching through the window. After inquiring, a man began to speak sadly: “My dear child, water 
from the pipe in the bathroom flows often and floods the room. It’s been 14 years since these pipes 
were changed. It had better if we die. At the TV it’s spoken such way as if the refugees live like 
nobles. After we moved here neither sewerage nor water pipes have been changed. We are 
homeless people. We had no one neither in Khojaly, nor here” then he turned his head to his wife 
and said: “Aunt Tamam is a hero mother. She had 9 children and receives low pension. That 
pension is not enough even for medicine.” 
Aunt Tamam was the only woman in our village who gave birth to three twin girls. That time 
this family was given a cow in order to provide children with milk. Nurses Huru and Ayulduz used to 
take care of these children. These girls have grown up. Now they are mothers. After Tahir, the only 
son of uncle Kochari, three girls were born. Though uncle Kochari had one son he always thanked God 
for all his children. His daughters’ names were Rahila, Rubaba and Arzu. Their father was proud of 
them. He’d promised to sew dress for his daughters when they went to school. When they finished 
school uncle Kochari’s eyes were filled with tears of joy. Uncle Kochari and Aunt Tamara were 
working at sovkhoz. But they’d had bad living conditions. Their daughters could finish only secondary 
school. Aunt Tamara had never worn expensive clothes. What she wore was only black galoshes. 
He always thanked God for the provisions. He used to have good harvest. He used to say that 
God gives it to his children. He loved his children very much. He used to sleek down hair of his 
daughters as though they were little girls. His eyes were filled with tears when his daughters married. 
How did the years pass so quickly? Yesterday they were children, now they are grown-ups. He cried 
with joy when he married off his son. Now he wasn’t crying.  
Uncle Kochari’s teenagers’ years coincided with war time. They were living very poor. 
Sometimes they used to eat cotton-cake. In winter it was too hard. During those years many people 
died of cold, disease, starvation. That time there were approximately 15 Armenian houses in our 
village (that is, Gala Dara village in Khojaly). I remember well with the children from the village we’d 
brought wood from the forest Katik to the old Armenians- Astxey, Maria, Ambarsum, Shura. 
-Uncle Kochary, who ruled Khojaly that time? 
- Though the Armenians had 15 houses they ruled. At the position of the Soviet chief firstly 
was Bakhshi Sarkisyan, then an Armenian named Usub. In 1967 the Armenians left the 
village. 
- Why did they leave?  
- Because they didn’t have schools in their own language.  
- What about before? 
- Armenians studied at schools in the Azerbaijani language as we did. Even Armenian 
teacher Rachik taught in the Azerbaijani language. When Armenians burnt three 
Azerbaijanis in Khankandi, I mean Arshad’s family, we didn’t touch those families. We 
didn’t let destroy their relatives’ graves. I should note that, until Khojaly was occupied that 
grave-yard hadn’t been destroyed. But the Armenians destroyed our grave-yards after 
Khojaly was occupied. 
Uncle Kochari’s only son was a police officer. During hard days of Khojaly he was defending 
his homeland. That night he was on his post. He’d saved many women, children from the death. 
When uncle Kochari’s son returned home safe and sound he raised his hands and thanked God: 
“Thanks God. You saved our children.” 
Years passed. Because the sufferings Tahir endured, he died of hemorrhage of the brain. But 
uncle Kochari didn’t lose his hope and kept his patience. Uncle Kochari: “I have his four children. I 
can visit his grave. But we have so many heroes who don’t have graves, who are not buried. We left 
them the forest, mountains, plains. They killed our sons with torture. It would be better if we died. Not 
we, but they’d had to bury us. We keep the wound of our sons and homeland in our hearts. It had better 
die than live this way… ” 
Uncle Kochari stood up, took his children’s photo went to Mosque to ask Mullah to read yasin.  
Talking about his little daughter Tahira uncle Kochari’s eyes filled with tears: “She had just 
had 16 years. That autumn was the hard one in my life. It was vintage period. She had gone to cut 
grapes. Crossing the highway through Khojaly an Armenian driver taking students from Knankandi to 
grape cut crushed her with bus and killed her. When that man came to my house I forgave him. I said 
that was an accident. We didn’t treat with them badly. It appears that these people were the savages.  
Man can not treat in that way. They behaved like wild animals”.  
This moment aunt Tamam stood to make plov, because today was Thursday. The souls of died 
heroes are not happy today, because Khojaly is still under occupation.     
 
“I WON’T DIE BEFORE SEEING MY SON” 
 
Return of Mehman means the overturn of president of Armenia Robert Kocharyan.  
There were few high educated young people in our village. One of them was teacher Gudrat, 
son of miller Jumshud. Grandfather Jumshud’s eyes were filled with tears of joy when his son Gudrat 
entered the university. How could it happen, miller’s son entered to the university? Gudrat began his 
pedagogical activity as a teacher at the educational center in Karkijahan settlement. There he married 
to a girl named Shukufa, they had five children. Teacher Gudrat was a director of Khojaly secondary 
school where I studied, for a long time. He was a geography teacher. I remember him teaching us 
showing countries, rivers, lakes, oceans on the map with thin stick. When he was a director our school 
gained cups, honorary titles at the olympics on subjects, sports, military games such as “Gartal”, 
“Shahinlar”. Our volleyball and handball teams consisted of girls and boys used to win the first and the 
second places. Teams of the secondary school of Askharan region were jealous. They considered 
Khojaly School as their main competitors.  
Teacher Gudrat had married off his daughters and sons. He had grandchildren. Teacher Gudrat 
with his cheerful appearance looked young than he was.  
When the events began his sons were one of the defenders of Khojaly. They worked in the day 
time, in the evenings they stood at the post. His middle son Mehman was brave and courageous. In 
order to return one man captivated from Khojaly, he caught one Armenian and changed him with the 
captive.  
That night when teacher Gudrat wanted to warm his freezing hands and feet near the gas pipe 
explored near Askharan he was captivated with other fellowmen and was taken to the Body of Interior 
Affairs of Askharan region. My cousin Mobil also was with them. One night at the next camera his 
middle son Mehman was so tortured that he cried till the morning. Having heard his son’s voice 
teacher Gudrat thought his son to be dead. Teacher Gudrat was speaking that, that night his heart 
almost came off. That night teacher Gudrat had infarction for the second time. Many high positioned 
Armenians had eaten with teacher Gudrat at his home. They had drunk to their friendship. That night 
one Armenian doctor named Balasanyan who used to visit teacher’s house entered the camera. Teacher 
Gudrat was shot on his back in the forest, in captivity his right eye was beaten with the butt of riffle.  
Teacher Gudrat thought that in that situation doctor Balasanyan would execute his doctor duty. 
As he had also made Hippocratic Oath.  But Balasanyan even didn’t look at him. Teacher Gudrat had 
reminded him that once when they ate together he used to talk of their friendship. But he asked him 
indifferently to forget about that. That night teacher Gudrat couldn’t sleep of the wound. Every day the 
armed Armenians entered the cameras, beat the captives, offended, and humiliated them. Teacher 
Gudrat was released from the captivity, but he didn’t live long and died. Those who were saved from 
captivity talked that, the savages had cut the tongue of Mehman, pulled out all of his teeth with 
pincers, had broken his arms.  
When teacher Gudrat died his last word was Mehman: “My poor son, I can’t even sleep quite 
in the grave. I can hear your voice even there”. 
It appears that Mehman wasn’t killed. A telecast about Mehman shown recently on 
independent “Space” TV Channel shocked us deeply.  Mehman’s tongue really was cut. They had 
chained him and kept at the door like a dog. He had become crooked, looked like an old man, his 
appearance ached the hearts. Mehman is 46 years. Once he was brought for the exchange, but it didn’t 
happen and was taken back again. Armenians had said that release of Mehman means the overturn of 
the president of Armenia Robert Kocharian.  
Mehman had a terrible captivity life. After this telecast our hearts ached. The release of our 
girls and boys like Mehman from captivity is a prior duty of the authorized bodies. Unfortunately, all 
captives from Khojaly are not free. Underage girls captivated that time now are young women. And 
now they have children from the enemies. In future these children will turn against us. They are treated 
as kamikazes, terrorists, and etc. Khojaly is our uncured wound. At present situation of Mehman’s 
mother is getting worse. One mother is waiting anxiously for her son to be free from captivity: “I can’t 
die before seeing my son”   
 
WE HAVE NO RIGHT TO FORGET 
 
…On the 28th of February 1988 Sumgait events happened (done by Armenians) the Armenians 
living in Khankandi erected a monument to them. Azerbaijanis living in Khankandi were witness of 
Armenian women putting flowers in front of the monument and swearing to revenge. That day I also 
went to Khankandi. All of my body was shaken seeing that crowd. While walking 14 km from 
Khankandi to Khojaly I got greatly excited.  
 
* * * 
But in Khojaly hardworking village women were planting potatoes in the gardens…  During 
Khojaly bloodshed old aunt Yakhshi was whipping her Armenian bride Valya. This poor Armenian 
woman was speaking and crying: “What’s the difference either Karabakh is Armenians or 
Azerbaijanis? We couldn’t plant potatoes if it be Armenians.” But she wasn’t aware of great tragedies. 
She didn’t know that her daughter Nurida’s husband Tavakkul would be executed, her 12 years old 
grandson Sakhavat would be shot and she would carry her son’s dead body on her back to the Mosque 
in Agdam, and would damn Armenians. Aunt Yakhshi would also die in Khojaly. And no one could 
bury her dead body.  
 
* * * 
… This is sister Elmira, lost her husband a police officer Yasit, when she was young. After the 
death of her only son, being both a son and a daughter to her mother-in-law and father-in-law sister 
Elmira would take them on her back and would send them to Agdam by helicopter, but she would stay 
in the village. But she wasn’t aware of that Armenians would kill Rovshan who was gone to Russia 
because of bad living conditions. She would be both grandmother and mother to his four children. Her 
bride Gatiba would get blind because of “Alazans’ thunder” dropped to their yard in Khojaly.  
 
 
THESE ARE PROUD, FIRM WOMEN OF KHOJALY 
 
Events intensified. On 16th of November 1991 Habil the second son of my uncle worked as a 
drive of Polyanichko was shot savagely by Armenian named Gara. Since that day road from Askharan 
castle to Khojaly was fenced with concrete. It’s been 4 months that people of Khojaly couldn’t go to 
Agdam, Shusha by helicopter. Former minister of Justice Alisahib Orujov had brought bread to 
Khojaly by helicopters. That time the only child of Allahverdi bey, daughter of aunt Adila died in 
Khojaly bloodshed Nazila had said to former minister: “We don’t need bread, we need gun in order 
men of Khojaly surrounded with Armenian settlements could fight”. 
 
* * * 
On 17th of December 1991, under the leadership of deceased Yaman Hasanov who wanted to 
trap those who fired Khojaly with Alazan missiles from Boz Dagh, together with 21 people had 
successfully carried out the “Boz Dagh” operation, in this operation Shakir had died, Firuddin and 
Mahammad Tusi were wounded seriously. While confused Armenian and Russian soldiers were 
fighting each other those who implemented that operation could take the corpse and wounds and run 
away. These brave sons were treated by proud women of Khojaly, of Azerbaijan.  
That night Yavar Hassanov’s deceased mother aunt Ruzanda was as a mother to Muhammad 
Tusi a police officer came from Baku, then after four days she sent him to Baku by helicopter.   
* * * 
…That night we were in information blockade. Journalists from all over the world had come to 
Agdam. As there was chaos and non-authority in Agdam, local journalist couldn’t go to the forest 
Katik for two days. But that time Armenians acted quickly, and reflecting pictures of our martyrs on 
the stamps as a heroes died on the way of “Great Armenia”, and passing them through the world 
media, presented them as “heroes of Artsakh”. The world believed to the Armenian lie. After two days, 
video recordings of deceased Chingiz Mustafayev, National Hero of Azerbaijan and operator Seyidaga 
Movsumlu showed the reality to the Azerbaijanis. People believed that Armenians made terrible 
bloodshed in Khojaly. On 28th of February a group of foreign journalist went to Khankandi. There was 
neither Azerbaijanian nor Turkish journalists in that group. Reporter of “The Washington Post” had 
been to Khojaly before said that no one guaranteed security to Turks. They had arranged that work by 
themselves voluntarily. They went to Khankandi on their account. I should note that many of them had 
insured themselves. The journalist of “Voice of America” an American Thomas Tolts brought Khojaly 
tragedy to the notice of the world. He said that that was his duty as a journalist. But we did so many 
over the frustrated Khojaly. We thought ourselves to be hero. Even those journalists couldn’t bring all 
the reality as the way it was. Because there were Armenian journalists among them. Though they had 
represented them as American, French, English they were Armenians.  
Let’s remember writings of foreign media of that time.  
“The Times”: “Armenian soldiers executed hundreds of refuge families. Many of them are 
women and children. Armenian soldiers shot more that 450 Azerbaijanis, most of them are women and 
children. Gulsabah, being invalid from her childhood, daughter of Raisa Aslanova saved from Khojaly 
had been executed in the house, her husband Gayyum Aslanov had been captivated, and though he was 
released from captivity he is very ill. He suffers of heart attack.”   
“The Times”: “Bloodshed is made know”. Anatoli Levin: “More than 60 corpses, among which 
there were women and children, were found on the slope, valley of Daghlig-Garabagh. This proves 
information about execution of Azerbaijanian refugees by Armenian forces.” 
“The Times”: “Many of them are unrecognizable. There was a little girl whose head remained 
only.” 
“Izvestia”: “Videotapes showed children with ears cut off. Half part of an old woman’s face 
was cut off. The skin head of men was stripped off.”  
“The Sunday Times”: Thomas Tolts is the first reporter informed about the bloodshed 
Armenian soldiers made. “Khojaly was quite, simple Azerbaijan village, home of thousands who were 
engaged in farming. Last week this village was wiped out.” 
“The Financial Times”: “Armenians shot refugees column going to Agdam. The Azerbaijanis 
counted 1200 dead bodies. Reporter from Lebanon confirmed that rich dashnak community sent 
weapons and people to Garabagh.” 
“Izvestia”: Major Leonid Kravest: “I myself saw about hundred corpses on the slope. One of 
boys didn’t have a head. I saw bodies of the old, women and children executed savagely everywhere.”   
 
 
YOU MUST PROVE YOURSELF TO BE ARMENIAN  
 
There had been abundant harvest in grape and apple orchards.  Pupils used to help workers. 
Yellow, red, green apples were so amazing. Apples gathered from Hasanabad   village of Khojaly 
had been selling to the villages of Daglig Garabakh for low price (people living there were 
Armenian nationality). The Azerbaijanis had been driven out from those districts so the Armenians 
were formed the majority of people living there. The Azerbaijanis lived in the villages with bad 
condition. In short, the Azerbaijanis lived in the areas where not asphalt roads but natural soil roads 
began.  
Deceased uncle Hasan worked as a guard in those apple gardens of Hasanabad village. The 
Armenians took responsible posts. Uncle Hasan’s wife was Armenian. Uncle Hasan and his wife Rita 
had six children, all were girls. Their daughters had had their secondary and high education in Russian 
and Armenian. Shafiga and Gulnara had graduated the faculty of Language-Literature of Pedagogical 
Institute in Khojaly in Armenian. Their husbands also were Armenians. Shafiga lived with her family 
in Yerevan. They had two children. Situation of such mixed families were miserable, when the events 
began. Shafiga talked that one night the Armenians attacked their house, beat her husband and 
demanded to divorce the wife with Turkish blood. Otherwise, they would kill him. Shafiga with her 
two children were banished from Yerevan to the father’s home. Her sister Asia was married with 
Azerbaijani in Khojaly. Coming to her sister she taught Russian at the secondary school in Khojaly. 
Though she had graduated the faculty of Language-Literature in Armenian. That night Russian and 
Armenian soldiers killed uncle Hasan. His wife and daughters having been banished from Hasanabad 
to Khojaly were captured. I should remind that, Khojaly had opened its arms not only to the 
Azerbaijanis- Mahsati Turks banished from Armenia, Uzbekistan and Daghlig-Garabagh, but also to 
such mixed families. The captives held in interior affairs department of Askharan region had been 
tortured a lot, but they hadn’t been so. After being released from the captivity they are living in DGAR 
and different regions and cities of Azerbaijan. 
 
ZABILA AGAYEVA: 
 
At long winter nights chestnut-colored hair girls used to weave carpets from colored threads. I 
used to look at the pictures of landscapes, mountains, valleys, hunter hunting gazelle and etc. on the 
carpets. Not everyone in our village could weave carpet. Aunt Zabila could both weave beautiful 
carpets and draw amazing drawings. She made all pictures on the carpets which wove by her. She 
could also easily pull out decayed teeth. Villagers were thankful to her. Aunt Zabila was also one of 
the hero mothers of our village. She had ten children. She had recent seen the brides off to the house of 
bridegroom, and had married off her son. When Kharabakh events had occurred one of the defenders 
of our country was her husband uncle Sattar and her son Zahid. That terrible night uncle Sattar with his 
ten years old son Allahverdi had been walking through the forest.  Couldn’t stand cold and frost little 
Allahverdi had died in the arms of his father. Uncle Sattar had lost his mind. Having opened his eyes 
he had supposed that the soldiers standing above his head were the soldiers of our national army. 
When he’d asked them to help, they took the dead child from his arms and threw him on the ground, 
and began to kick him. Being hopeless uncle Sattar begged them to let him bury his child in the nearest 
village where Azerbaijanis were living.  Hardly finished his words they kicked him so hard that blood 
spurted from his mouth. Then they shuffled him. In the semi-darkness stable in Dahraz village uncle 
Sattar firstly couldn’t see anything, but then he recognized his fellowmen by their voice. Then a lamp 
had been brought to the stable, and suddenly uncle Sattar saw the dead body of his son Zahid and 
sobbed. Zahid was the soldier of self-defense battalion in Khojaly. Uncle Sattar was taken as a clew 
and thrown to one side. He couldn’t even know where he was. “I felt ache while my second tooth was 
pulled out with pincers. Then I lost my mind. When I opened my eyes I saw that all teeth were pulled 
out from my mouth”. Then 19 people with uncle Sattar were taken to Khankandi. “When we passed 
through Khojaly the armed Armenians blocked our way and poured the captives to the ground and 
demanded to override us. But the one who commanded them didn’t permit them”. The most terrible 
days of uncle Sattar began in Khankandi. One soldier of our national army was beaten so much that 
when I hold his head the soldier said “uncle I am dying”. The wounded leg of uncle Sattar had 
gangrened. He couldn’t sleep at nights, cried, and moaned. He begged the Armenians to kill him. But 
they laughed and told that he would die in any case, but they wanted him to die grievously. 
Once kicking the door he asked them to take him to the chief of the police department where he 
was kept. They took him to the chief. His leg had already been swollen and turned into stump. The 
chief called for a doctor. He poured iodine on the wound and bandaged it. He told everything what had 
happened to him. That day uncle Sattar had been changed with one Armenian. He stayed at the 
hospital for a long.  Now his wounds are making themselves felt. Aunt Zabila and uncle Sattar were so 
shaken that at last their family departed. Aunt Zabila had very hard life. There’d been a time that she 
was in need of a piece of bread, but she had suffered. Aunt Zabila now calms by reading Koran to her 
children. She prays to God for their spirit to be in paradise…  
…At the last station approximately 10-12 years old boy crying “Arrived at Khojaly” began to 
collect the departure pay. The placed called Khojaly is a hostel of the house-building plant No 1 in 
Pirshagi settlement. We had arrived in such freezing day.  But we hadn’t lost our hope.  We thought 
that we would soon return to Khojaly. But 14 years passed. I went to meet young family not born in 
Khojaly. I knocked at the door. Hoarse voice came from inside: “I’m coming!” The door was opened. 
A young lady with baby on her arms and two juvenile boys appeared at the door.  
I hardly recognized naughty, quite round, swarthy Zanura. She had changed a lot. She had 
turned to an old woman. She had just married when she came here. During the bloodshed Zanura had 
lost her uncle Husein, aunt Zarifa, uncle Tavakkul and his 10 years old son Sakhavat. Now she lost her 
mother Sahiba and grandmother Marish who couldn’t stand to these grieves. Having many troubles 
than her age this woman looked like a person carrying a load on her shoulders. We both kept silence. I 
hardly kept myself of crying. I sleeked down children’s hair looking at me with surprise. I asked their 
name. The elder’s name was Rinat. He was 12 years. 12 years, 12 months, 12 days, 12 hours, 12 
minutes, 12 seconds have passed since then. We entered the inside. Rinat acted as an old boy. He 
wasn’t naughty. He behaved as an old one.  
- Where are you from, Rinat?  
- From Khojaly. 
- A minute ago one boy of your age, earning for bread, said that here is Khojaly. Is here 
Khojaly? 
- No, my mother and father say that the Armenians occupied there. As people living here are 
from Khojaly here is called Khojaly.  
- When did it happen?  
- In 1992, at night from 25 to 26 February, the Armenians killed the olds, women, and 
children. 
- What will you do if you see an Armenian of your age? 
- I will choke him. 
- What if you don’t be able to do that? 
- I will be able. 
- What kind of place was Khojaly? 
- My father and mother say that it is very beautiful place with its gardens, forests, rivers and 
valleys. 
- Will you go to there if it be liberated from occupation? 
- Of course I will go. 
Then he rubbed his forehead and was lost in thought. I should remind that Rinat’s great-
grandfather Allahverdi bey was one of the noble men of Khojaly. His grandmother’s fate during the 
bloodshed was unknown. Allahverdi bey was exiled by council government as a kulak. Neither father 
nor daughter had a grave.  
- Let’s think that you are grown up and entered the university. If war begins that moment, 
which will you choose, will you study or go to war? 
- I’ll go to war; it is never late to study.  
- Do you want summer holidays begin soon? 
- No, I don’t. I’ll spend my summer and winter here. The water in the sea  is dirty, and my 
mother doesn’t let us to swim, she says we could drown in the sea. Many people drown in 
the sea. 
Children of Rinat age in Khojaly used to swim in the water of Khojaly, Ilisu Rivers, bake in the 
sun lying on the sand. They used to drink spring water at the riverbank with pleasure. They used to eat 
mint grown on bank of the spring. Village children awoke early in the morning rolling up the hem of 
their trousers used to go to the riverbank. They had helped to elder boys in fishing and construct 
marguee.  They had never got tired of playing. They had looked like sportsmen. But Rinat looks very 
tired. Feel of fury, disgust have got him exhausted. He is grown up neither with churn butter nor with 
spring water of Khojaly. When I was of the same age I had known grandmothers, aunts in Khojaly, 
also Rinat’s old grandmother aunt Asia, aunt Adila. But Rinat knows neither me nor other aunts from 
Khojaly. Obviously, after 12 years children from Khojaly will recognize neither us nor their same 
aged.  Isn’t it a tragedy? So, our tragedies still go on. 
 
 
I DIDN’T WISHED GARABAGH TO JOIN ARMENIA, I WISHED TO JOIN WITH MY 
CHILDREN 
 
During my school years friendship meetings with neighbor schools had been holding. Then 
Armenians were very kin to mixed families that is to the children whose mothers were Armenian. 
They were very happy of their one word “Barivyeg”, which meant welcome. My Russian teacher 
Esmira also was an Armenian. But during the bloodshed these families also were executed. During 
these meetings their poems, songs dedicated to Garabagh were Azerbaijanian music and dances stolen 
from us. When we presented them Russian books they gave us books in Armenian which we couldn’t 
read. They had already made Garabakh theirs since then. But that moment we didn’t comprehend its 
meaning. Our thoughts were filled with the idea of internationalism and nation friendship. Teachers 
Lesmomiya, Esmira, Svetlana, Elmira, Suisan and etc. taught Russian language at our school were also 
Armenians.  One of them that are my neighbor teacher Esmira was married to biology teacher Ibish. 
They had three children. I witnessed of tortures of these families when the events began. They were in 
hopeless situation. Living in Khankandi after Sumgait events this woman’s father, brother, relatives 
had never returned to Khojaly. Teacher Esmira lost her mother when she was a child. Her father had 
never married anymore. He gave all his love to his children. He often visited his daughter. When the 
events began teacher Esmira had preferred her family. She said that couldn’t be apart with her husband 
and children. The villagers never treated them badly.  
Teacher Ibish was an influent person at school. He had many followers. His role in all who 
acquired profession of doctor, biologist couldn’t be forgotten.   The events were getting more excited. 
Teacher Ibish suffered from heart decease. He had a car “Jiguli 06”. During the bloodshed teacher 
Ibish died from infraction in Khojaly. His middle son covering his mother’s face brought her to 
Agdam. But her children were obliged to take her to Turkmenistan. They said that they couldn’t look 
at the faces of mothers who lost their children. Mother was shocked by the death of her husband. Now 
she was obliged to part with her children. She couldn’t endure these terrible sufferings. One Armenian 
woman named Valia who was gone to Turkmenistan with Esmira spent her days crying. Valia: “We 
felt ourselves as abandon. We even didn’t go to our relatives. Because the Armenians would wound 
them as they had accepted us. Armed Armenians were threatening such families”. Valia speaks: 
“Lately at one of the night teacher Esmira’s nerves were pulled tightly, because of concussions. My 
sorrow was also unbearable. My daughter Nurida died together with her son, my grandson Sakhavat. 
My daughter brought her child’s dead body on her back to the Mosque in Agdam. My grandson was 
10 years. God damn my nation.” 
Last night teacher Esmira spoke to her daughter on the phone for the last time. But her daughter 
had had no idea that it was their last talk. That she wouldn’t hear her mother’s voice anymore. Esmira 
put the receiver of the phone down, drank acid and killed herself. Now three children were obliged to 
stand hard trials of fate. Her elder son Eldar is a doctor. With his salary they could pay only for the 
rent. They have not yet made their own family. But the years pass. From her daughter’s speech: “Last 
time my mother damned the Armenians. She said that she didn’t care of joining Daghlig-Garabagh 
with Armenia, she wished to join with her children.” One mother couldn’t come together with her 
children; children couldn’t join with their mother. But that night when teacher Ibish was at the post, 
teacher Esmira went to aunt Dilbar. All of them together with my mother hid in stable. Then our 
women felt sorry for teacher Esmira. But her own people, her own nation didn’t. 
 
 
AZERI TURKS MADE ME HAPPY, BUT MY NATION UNHAPPY 
 
When uncle Bashir was chief of the Soviet in Khojaly the villagers lived in bad conditions. The 
villagers had worked day and night, hung tobacco, and grew vegetables. My grandmother used to 
say that they had been walking on snow barefoot. We didn’t have shoes. Each one had a pair of 
dress of satin. We were washing them in the evenings, then in the morning dried and dressed them. 
We used to sleep 3-4 hours a day. It wasn’t easy to be chief in the village that time. But uncle 
Bashir was strict and influential chief. He had four sons and three daughters. From his deceased 
wife Bayaz he had six children. When aunt Bayaz died he married with aunt Kubra. They had one 
child. No one could differentiate their own child from step children, they were very kind. All seven 
children called aunt Kubra a sister. Even her own daughter. Two of their sons Rasul and Rza were 
married to Armenian women named Julia and Aznif in Khankandi. Though uncle Bashir was 
against these marriages he couldn’t make them change their mind. That moment aunt Kubra played 
role of bridge between father and sons, and she made uncle Bashir agree with these marriages.  
Rasul had four children- three of them were girls, one was a boy. Rza had three children-two 
daughters and one son. I remember that well. When the third child of Rza was born his wife became 
nervous. When she was ill aunt Kubra was like a mother to her. She endured sufferings, took care of 
her from night till the morning.  
Once Aznif’s mother as one who wanted Garabagh to be consolidated to Armenia, took flag 
and went to meeting. When she returned her daughter got angry of her mother’s behavior. Crying of 
how she could now look at her husband’s face, she went to her room, drank acid and died. Her brother 
having heard of his sister’s death also killed himself. A tragedy came one after another. Their mother 
repented for her behavior. She said that she’d sacrificed with her children for her nation.  
The events were getting intense.  Armenians banished our fellowmen together with these mixed 
families from Khankandi. They came to their homeland Khojaly. Rza married to Banovsha for the 
second time. During the bloodshed Rza fell for faith. Banovsha with her underaged daughter were 
captivated. Armenians tortured them unbearably.  They burnt her body with the burning stub 78 times. 
They tortured the child as well. Their wounds have not been cured. Julia also was captivated. But she 
wasn’t tormented that way. After captivity she with her husband Rasul went to Russia. Rasul died and 
was buried there. Their life was miserable. Uncle Bashir had forgiven them. But life never forgives 
those who make unforgivable mistakes.  
Banovsha was a real mother for Rza’s children, took care of them. Aunt Kubra helped them to 
settle down to married life. She loved her step children like her own. During bloodshed aunt Kubra lost 
sister, mother, father, and her relatives. Now she can’t see; she is blind. Her only son Shahin looks 
after her. Raz’s grave was in Uzundara grave-yard in Agdam. Like others’ his grave also had been 
trampled. God forgive those innocent sacrifices who thought the marriage with Armenian woman 
sinless.  
 
 
 
 
PARTICIPANT  OF THE GREAT PATRIOTIC WAR: JANISH GULIYEV 
“IF WE BE SAVED I’LL MARRY OFF MY DAUGHTER TO YOUR SON” 
 
When the World War II began deceased uncle Janish going to front from Khojaly embraced his 
children, kissed them, cheered up his wife and left his home. Deceased aunt Maleyka kept her 
calmness near her husband; after he left she hugged her children and cried noiselessly. She damned 
people made that war. Then, wives of those who had gone to war damned Hitler. Sending my 
grandfather Museib to war, my grandmother Tamasha told him to kill bastard Hitler who killed the 
Russians’ wives and children. Then, crying she boiled a handful of cereals for hr children to eat. 
She hid her starvation. But Hitler’s soldiers killed my grandfather who went to kill Hitler.  
During war years two of four children of my grandmother died from disease and starvation. 
Talking about war my grandmother used to get angry. When we asked her about our grandfather she 
used to say: “Hitler had defeated your grandfather. I hope you will never see such terrible war, my 
dears”. Neither aunt Maleyka nor my grandmother could think that we would meet more terrible war.  
Passing through the flaming roads uncle Janish had said that it’s to God whether to live or not. 
At one of the battles when everywhere were shaken of the sound of tanks and weapons there were 
Russian, Tatar, Lezghin, Armenian and different nation soldiers in the trench he fought. At that battle 
he’d lost many of his front comrades. After the battle finished one of the soldiers approached him and 
asked him for a cigarette. Uncle Janish took the tobacco pouch out his bosom and gave it to him. He 
smocked the cigarette greedily. An Armenian named Shamil talked about his wife Arshaluz and his 
underage children. Then he raised his hands and said: “Astuvas (means God), help all of us.” Then 
uncle Janish talked about his family. Shamil was from Garakotuk, village in Nagorni-Garabakh. They 
were happy to be together. They became too close. They promised each other to marry their children if 
the war ended with victory and if they stood alive. Years passed, the war ended with victory. Uncle 
Janish returned from the war. That time few returned to the village. Aunt Maleyka’s eyes were full 
with tears of joy. She even gave spotted hen to those who brought happy news. As she’d promised she 
gave her tirme shawl kept in her bride pack to the herald. Then she made plov and laid the table to 
neighbors and relatives and then they made rejoice. Uncle Janish kept his promise. He married off his 
son to Shamil’s 13 years old daughter. Aunt Maleyka brought that little girl as her own child. And after 
she became older she married off her to her elder son Zakara. 
 He was one of the influent persons of our village. They had seven children. I should note that, 
there were 15 Armenian families in the Gala darasi village of Khojaly where uncle Zakar lived. They 
studied in the Azerbaijani language. Until Khojaly was occupied, in that village there was cemetery 
where the Armenians were buried. Even an Armenian teacher Rachik had been teaching in the 
Azerbaijani language. In 1967 when the Armenians burnt three Azerbaijanis together with Arshad, 
people of Khojaly didn’t touch those families. They sold their houses and moved to Khankandi. They 
used to visit graves of their fathers and grandfathers every year in May. The villagers used to join 
them, too.  Neither the Khojalys nor aunt Maleyka, nor my grandmother could imagine the Armenians 
whose weddings they had participated at would do such wildness… Three sons of my grandmother, 
who couldn’t suffer the death of the Russians’ wives and children, were executed by Russian soldiers 
together with Armenian soldiers. Aunt Maleyka couldn’t imagine that four daughters of uncle Zakara’s 
big family would be saved. Uncle Zakara’s wife Shurik, her daughter Zarifa, brother-in-law Tahir, 
sons Akbar, Tahir, grandchildren Lala, Sevinj, Samir, Mahir, other brother-in-law Novruz would die.  
Her son Tahir had fought with Armenians as a hero until his last breath. Tahir’s pregnant wife Ramila 
would witness execution of her husband and their baby Samir. That Ramila wouldn’t want to live after 
such a terrible fortune. She would call her daughter after her sister-in-law Zarifa who died during the 
tragedy. Now Zarifa is 14 years. Akbar’s son little Akbar also was born. He has immortalized his 
father’s name. These girls who got older before time want to hear their fathers’ voices. What is the 
fault of these girls? We’d never heard Shurik who cooked Azerbaijanian meals as aunt Maleyka at the 
weddings to speak aloud. As our women from the village she had also covered her face near the olds. 
She was buried as a Moslem in Agdam. Members of her family are buried far from Khojaly. That night 
savage Armenians didn’t felt sorry even for their own people. But once at the meetings held between 
the pupils from Khojaly village schools and the Armenian schools, the Armenians used to say that they 
were proud of such international families and estimated them as a bridge to their friendship.  
WAS BORN AS A CHRISTIAN, DIED AS A MOSLEM 
Many beautiful houses were constructed by deceased uncle Saydi. He used to wake up early in the 
morning, took his harrow, hammer, used to go to work. Wearing his apron he used to work in summer 
heat and in freezing winter. He never asked for delicious meals like other masons. He ate what he was 
given and then worked.  
Uncle Saydi’s wife was an Armenian. But everybody in the village called her Sona, not by her 
real name Vera. Like other women from the village she worn a frilly dress and covered her head with 
shawl. She spoke the Azerbaijani language so easily that no one could say she was other nationality. 
I’m not intended to praise Vera with these words. She named her first child Sevda. She had given birth 
to six children- 5 daughters and a son. As they had one son, all relatives shivered on him. Their son 
was hot-tempered. No one felt hurt of him. Two of his sisters were married. Three were single. As 
everybody they were longing for spring, too. Many people used to build houses in spring. Uncle Saydi 
built new houses for the just married and seeing light his heart beat with joy. He had built a two-stored, 
large, nice house with a big balcony for himself. He’d planted May flowers around the house. The 
more one looked at those flowers the more his heart renewed. His son Tofig kept different colored 
birds and enjoyed taking care of them. They lived in luxury. But Man proposes God disposes… When 
Garabakh events began uncle Saydi’s family was one of more shaken families. Raising his hands his 
wife damned her nation. Such families didn’t leave their husbands and children, they stood with them.  
She said: “Nation that doesn’t accept our children is not ours. We are very old people. What could we 
do after all?” 
The events were intensifying. Khojaly tragedy wasn’t far from. They didn’t move to another 
Azerbaijan districts. “We’ve been neighbors for a long time. Neither the Armenians nor the 
Azerbaijanis would accept us.” That night the armed Armenians and 366th Russian regiment destroyed 
uncle Saydy’s family. His son Tofig, Sevda’s husband Taleh, Saydi’s brother Bahadur, his three sons 
Fakhraddin, Araz, Mikail, were shot. Sevda’s underage child was wounded. Uncle Saydi was also 
executed. That child’s wound hasn’t yet been cured. All men of the family were killed. Hearts of 5 
sisters were broken deeply. Sevda didn’t know whether to cry for her father or calm her little child or 
Vafa who lost her father, brother she loved very much. Because of shakings Vafa couldn’t speak. She 
didn’t eat, she didn’t talk and she didn’t comply with these deaths. Elder sister had had to bear these 
sufferings. A mother doesn’t have nationality. But mother couldn’t be with her children in this hard 
situation. Crying she went to Uzbekistan. The girls were saying that how they could look at the faces 
of mothers lost their children. Years passed. A woman was crying and begging on the phone: “You are 
also a mother, you can understand me. I’m living my last days. Let me come and see you for the last 
time.” But her daughters were in dilemma: Mother or Homeland, Homeland or Mother!  
Years passed. Vafa was infected with tuberculosis as the place where they lived was humid. 
Her obstinacy as well as poverty didn’t let her to recover. One day she went to mosque, read Koran 
(holy book of Muslims) for her father’s and brother’s soul. One night she made her prayer for the last 
time, holding her both beloved ones photos went to bed. After some hours she died. Vafa was a tailor. 
She sewed many bridal dresses for many girls. She wished to sew a bridal dress for herself, too. But 
her bridal dress was sewed of shroud. 
But one mother in a distance couldn’t sleep. Her child wished to see her. She was full of joy. 
Early in the morning she phoned her children. But she heard her daughters crying. Mullah was reading 
Koran. The mother dropped the receiver of the phone. She saw her daughters neither in health nor in 
disease.  
A train was arriving in Azerbaijan… On that train there was a white hair young woman   gotten 
older at her young ages. She didn’t cry as before. Her tears had dried like the water of our springs in 
Khojaly.  The train arrived late in the evening. Children were not holding their mother and they were 
not crying anymore. As if she was guilty. Mother looked like a dry tree. She damned her nation that 
separated her from her children. Than she took her daughter Vafa’s picture on the closet, kissed her 
picture then said: “You were devoted than me. You went to your father and brother, but I’m still 
alive.” She didn’t leave the house. All days she cried for her children and her husband. And one night 
she held her children photos and closed her eyes forever. She had become a Moslem and was buried as 
a Moslem. She was born as a Christian, but died as a Moslem. 
But the tragedy of this family wasn’t finished. Middle sister died of high tension current when 
she used plug. Her two daughters stayed without mother. Having lost her relatives in Khojaly tragedy 
sister Sevda lost her two sisters and mothers at the hostel of the house-building plant No 1 in Pirshagi 
settlement. Didn’t all these people who suffered a lot have a right for happiness? Didn’t they have a 
right for marriage? Didn’t sister Sevda have a right for happiness?  During the war the Armenians 
killed not only Azeris, Turks or Ahiska Turks, but also the mixed families. I can’t forget tear-filled 
eyes of those people. There are so many Families faced tragedy in Khojaly. One of them was uncle 
Saydi’s family. 
 
COMMON LIST OF KHOJALY MARTYRS AND VICTIMS OF GENOCIDE 
 
1. Abbasov Elkhan Kamran oglu (8 May 1970 - 1992) 
2. Abbasov Eyvaz Kamran oglu (2 October 1983 - 1990) 
3. Abbasov Valiaddin Umidvar oglu (1963) 
4. Abbasov Taleh Umidvar oglu (1966) 
5. Abbasov Elbrus Garash oglu  
6. Abbasov Savalan  
7. Abbasova Elnara Tofig gizi (15  years old) 
8. Abbasov Antish Heidar oglu (42 years old, died of the bullet to his stomach, thorax) 
9. Abbasova Antiga Haidar gizi (1935) 
10. Abbasova Surgha Alish gizi (1917) 
11. Abbasov Salah Ismail oglu (1909) 
12. Abbasova Hamail Janish gizi (1940) 
13. Abdullayev Mahir Tanriverdi oglu (16 may 1971 - 1992) 
14. Abdullayev Mahish Nasib oglu  
15. Abdullayeva Malahat Mahish gizi 
16. Abdullayeva Maya Salah gizi (1911) 
17. Abdullayeva Latafat Hasan gizi (at the age 17, 1975) 
18. Abdullayev Yusif Goja oglu (1932) 
19. Abdullayeva Sevinj Sarhad gizi (1986) 
20. Abdinova Samira Imamverdi gizi 
21. Abdinov Seimur Imamverdi oglu  
22. Abdinova Rahida Mikayil gizi  
23. Abishov Ali Abdul oglu (dull trauma of the body, break of the skeleton bones) (1918) 
24. Abishova Khazangul Ali gizi  
25. Abishov Etibar Mohsum oglu (1965) 
26. Abishov Mobil Mohsum oglu (1968) 
27. Abishov Habil Mohsum oglu (1966) 
28. Abishova Maruza Mahammad gizi (1930) 
29. Abishova Latifa Babirkhan gizi  
30. Abishova Madina Babirkhan gizi (1908) 
31. Abishova Minara Rahim gizi (1910) 
32. Abishov Elshad Giyas oglu (1967) 
33. Abishova Mahbuba Gurban gizi (1960) 
34. Abishova Chinara Nazim gizi (1982) 
35. Abishov Chingiz Nazim oglu (1985) 
36. Abishov Fikrat Jafar oglu  
37. Abishova Mariam Mashadi gizi (1932) 
38. Abishova Gulzar Gulali gizi (1964) 
39. Abishov Saadat Niyaz oglu (1967) 
40. Agayev Allahverdi Sattar oglu (1982) 
41. Agayev Rasim Mirsalam oglu (1967-29 March 1992) 
42. Agayev Zahid Sattar oglu (1963) 
43. Agayev Allahverdi Sattar oglu  
44. Agayev Vidadi Sajaddin oglu (1960) 
45. Agayarova Zulekhha Yunis gizi (1965) 
46. Agayarov Nabi Isag oglu (1985) 
47. Agayarov Roman Isaac oglu (1986) (got stiff with cold) 
48. Agayarova Sevinj Isaac gizi  (1985) 
49. Agayarova Gullu Surkhai gizi (1934) 
50. Agayarov Sadig Shirkhan oglu (1932) 
51. Agamirzayev Husein Agamirza oglu  
52. Agamirzayeva Nargiz Bahman gizi 
53. Aliyeva Guljahan Bashir gizi 
54. Allahverdiyev Ziadkhan Saleh oglu (1957) 
55. Allahverdiyev Mahir Novruz oglu (1974) 
56. Allahverdiyev Novruz Salah oglu (1947) 
57. Allahverdiyev Vidadi Mursal oglu (1977) 
58. Allahverdiyev Salah Imamgulu oglu (1918) 
59. Allahverdiyev Aslan (1961) 
60. Allahverdiyeva Valida Astan gizi (1963) 
61. Allahverdiyeva Irada Astan gizi (1965) 
62. Allahverdiyeva Teyba Nabi gizi (1933) 
63. Allahverdiyeva Gamza Garash gizi (from the shot to this stomach) (1940) 
64. Allahverdiyeva Shafiga Zeinal gizi (1969) 
65. Allahverdiyeva Banovsha Ismail gizi  
66. Allahverdiyeva Gulnara Teimur gizi  
67. Allahverdiyeva Gulara Teimur gizi  
68. Allahverdiyeva Nazla Vali gizi 
69. Allahverdiyev Hidayet Bahram oglu (1936) 
70. Allahverdiyev Bahram Hidayat oglu (1976) 
71. Allahverdiyev Mumush Bahram oglu (1923) 
72. Allahverdiyeva Kifayat Huseinali gizi (1942) 
73. Allahverdiyev Ilham Bakhsheyish oglu (1963) 
74. Allahverdiyeva Yegana Naib gizi 
75. Allahyarova Farida Maharram gizi  
76. Allahyarova Kifayat Museib gizi  
77. Allahyarov Etibar Baloghlan oglu (1968) 
78. Allahverdiyeva Teyyuba Nabi gizi (50 years old, housewife, killed by shot to head) 
79. Allahyarova Zamina Museiib gizi 
80. Allahyarova Sadagat Museiib gizi 
81. Alpanayev Sohbat Ali oglu 
82. Alpanayev Fikrat Jafar oglu 
83. Alpanayeva Zarifa Agha gizi  
84. Alkhanova Sevinj Sahib gizi 
85. Aslanov Gulu Bahram oglu (1927) 
86. Aslanova Gulsabah Gayyum gizi (1972) 
87. Aslanov Igbal Gulu oglu (1970) (eyes were pulled out) 
88. Aslanova Elnara Tofig gizi (1978) 
89. Atakishiyev Farhad Rahman oglu (1970) 
90. Babayev Allahverdi Ali oglu (1970) 
91. Babayev Nasimi Ali oglu  
92. Babayev Khagani Ali oglu 
93. Babayeva Gariba Mukhtar gizi (1938 – 28 December 1991) 
94. Babayeva Fanar Farman gizi (1943) 
95. Babayev Fuzuli Ali oglu  
96. Babayev Baker Babir  oglu (1965) 
97. Babayeva Tofiga  
98. Babayev Gadir  Asgar oglu (1935 – 28 December 1991) 
99. Babayev Babir Asgar oglu (1942-1992) 
100. Bagirov Zeinal Mammad oglu 
101. Bagirova Zahra Sari gizi (1920) 
102. Bagirova Halima Alish gizi 
103. Bagirov Bahman Yagub oglu (1966) 
104. Bagirov Elshan Hasan oglu (1965) 
105. Bagirova Naila Hasan gizi (1956) 
106. Badshiyev Rais 
107. Badshiyev Ali Rais oglu (1968) 
108. Bayramov Jallad Samad oglu (1948 14 May 1991) 
109. Bayramov Rovshan Zahid oglu (1969) 
110. Bayramov Zahid Tapdig oglu (1965) 
111. Bakhshaliyev Elkhan Savalan oglu (1967) 
112. Behbudov Vagif Yusif oglu (1963) 
113. Behbudova Gulnaz Yusif gizi (1962) 
114. Behbudova Surayya Ibrahim  gizi (1920, died of bullet wound) 
115. Babirov Tofig Nifti oglu (1966) 
116. Badalov Tofig (trampled by tank, ears were cut, eyes were pulled out, and he was burnt)  
117. Bahmanov Mushfig Vagif oglu (22 years old, by bullet wound in head) 
118. Behbudova Gulbahar Yusif gizi (1968) 
119. Bashirova Rugiyya Ifrat gizi  
120. Bahmanov Akif Vagif oglu (1974) 
121. Rahmanova Dilara Maharram gizi (42 years old) (1950) 
122. Bashirova Ulviyya Ifrat gizi  
123. Boranov Magsud Ali oglu (1928) 
124. Bidzinov Mahmud  
125. Bidzinov Zeynal Mammad oglu (1926) 
126. Bilalov Namig Mahammad oglu (31 years old) (1961) 
127. Binaliyev Alishir Gulali oglu (1967) 
128. Binaliyev Jabbar Gulali oglu (1969) 
129. Butko Dmitrey  Nikolayevich (1930) 
130. Valiyev Aghasaf Zakir oglu (1988) (died  of the bullet wound in the stomach and right thigh) 
131. Valiyeva Guldana Zakir gizi (1989) 
132. Valiyev Firdovsi Fazil oglu (1966) 
133. Valiyev Zakir Yusif oglu 
134. Valiyev Avaz Alabbas oglu 
135. Valiyeva Zahra Alabbas gizi (had been killed in the forest) 
136. Valiyev Kamil Shahmar oglu  
137. Valiyeva Nazila Kamil gizi (1966) 
138. Valiyev Ali Imran oglu (1962) 
139. Valiyev Zahid Najib oglu  
140. Valiyeva Aziza Aliabbas gizi 
141. Garayev Asif Garakishi oglu (1953 – 28 January 1992) 
142. Garayev Saleh Asif oglu (1983-1993) 
143. Garayev Usubali Suleiman oglu (1961) 
144. Gasimova Rasmiyya Agha gizi  
145. Gasimov Agha Bayram oglu 
146. Gasimov Anvar Bahadur oglu (1925) 
147. Gasimov Zohrab Avaz oglu 
148. Gasimova Huriyya Avaz gizi 
149. Gasimova Sakina Ali gizi 
150. Gasimov Yashar Gaytaran oglu (1964) 
151. Gasimov Gasim Ahmad oglu  
152. Gojayev Guman Avaz oglu (1941) 
153. Gahramanova Raya Gabil gizi 
154. Gahramanova Elnara Tavakkul gizi 
155.  Gahramanova Gulnara Tavakkul gizi 
156. Ganbarov Safar Garsalan oglu (1961) 
157. Ganbarova Matanat Haji gizi (1967) 
158. Ganbarov Emin Safar oglu (1986) 
159. Ganbarova Esmira Safar gizi (1985) 
160. Ganbarov Garsalan Boran oglu (1939) 
161. Ganbarova Valida Garay gizi (1941) 
162. Gambarov  Nadir  Garsalan oglu (1971) 
163. Guliyev Zakara Gamish oglu (1932) 
164. Guliyev Samir Taleh oglu (1990) (at the age of two, was shot on the mother’s arms.) 
165. Guliyev Mikayil Zahid oglu (1977) 
166. Gojayev Guman Avaz oglu (1941) 
167. Guliyev Taleh Zakara oglu (1965) (by bullet  to heart) 
168. Guliyev Lalish Mursal oglu  
169. Guliyev Zakir Latif oglu (1965) 
170. Guliyeva Zohra Latif gizi (1968) 
171. Guliyev Shukur Garyagdi oglu (1985) 
172. Guliyeva Ravana Garyagdi  gizi (1979) 
173. Guliyeva Nurana Garyagdi  gizi (1981) 
174. Guliyeva Sara Husein gizi (1955) 
175. Guliyeva Shura Shamil gizi (1936) 
176. Guliyeva  Sevinj Akbar gizi (7 years old, from bullet  wound) (1985) 
177. Guliyeva Kubra Aydin gizi  
178. Guliyev Tahir Sultan oglu (1956) 
179. Guliyev Islam Idris oglu (1957 – 1 September 1992) 
180. Guliyev Mammad Yusif oglu  
181. Guliyeva Sahiba Abbas gizi 
182. Guliyev Akbar Zakara oglu (from the shot to head) (1962) 
183. Guliyeva Makhmar Khanlar gizi (1930) 
184. Guliyev Fikrat Ali oglu  
185. Guliyev Natig Valiyaddin oglu (1972) 
186. Guliyev Farhad Safar oglu (1970 -  May 1992) 
187. Guliyev Shukur Barkhudar oglu (1954) 
188. Guliyev Shahbaz Mursal oglu (1925-1989) 
189. Guliyev Elchin Balakhan oglu (1965) 
190. Guliyev Agil Sahib oglu (1963) 
191. Guliyev Vugar Sahib oglu (1975) 
192. Guliyev Nizami  
193. Guliyev Shamsi Ajdar oglu (1961 – 1 January 1994) 
194. Guliyev Zahid 
195. Guliyev Ganimat Ali oglu (1936) 
196. Guliyev Matlab Ganimat oglu (1963) 
197. Guliyev Ismayil Ganimat oglu 
198. Guliyeva Vasila Zahid gizi 
199. Guliyeva Ruba Haji gizi (1936) 
200. Guliyev Alish Mursal oglu  
201. Gurbanov Shamil Imran oglu  
202. Eyvazov Hidayat Ali oglu (left eye was pulled out, died from the shot to stomach and thigh) 
(1964) 
203. Abdulov Zahid Yelmar oglu (1973) 
204. Abdulov Mazahir Yagub oglu (1960) 
205. Abdulov Yelmar Isgandar oglu (1939) 
206. Abdulov Savalan Garash oglu (1937) 
207. Azizov Mehman Gudrat oglu (1959) 
208. Azizov Husein Nariman oglu (1956) 
209. Azizov Fikrat Abbas oglu  
210. Azimov Hasanbala Shahmar oglu (1935) (by shot to head) 
211. Azimova Parvana Husein gizi (by shot to mouth and thorax) (1937) 
212. Azimova Ulviyya Salman gizi  
213. Azimov Azim Mashadi oglu (1911) 
214. Azimova Zarifa Alakbar gizi (1953) 
215. Azimov Akif Seydulla oglu (1961) 
216. Azimov Natig Abbasgulu oglu (by shot to the back) (1986) 
217. Azimova Dilara Seydulla gizi (1956) (shot himself) 
218. Azizov Husein Nariman oglu (1956) 
219. Azizov Aydin Nariman oglu  
220. Azizova Zarif Nariman gizi 
221. Azizova Rashida Nariman gizi 
222. Azimov Anvar Natig oglu  
223. Azimova Antiga Anvar gizi 
224. Alakbarov Tavakkul Alakbar oglu (1956) 
225. Alakbarov Aydin Tavakkul oglu (12 years old, pupil, died by shot to head) 
226. Alakbarov Sakhavat Tavakkul oglu (1988) 
227. Alakbarov Asgar Gurban oglu (1930) 
228. Akbarov Humbat Mehdi oglu 
229. Alasgarov Vahid Rashid oglu (at the of 29) (1962) 
230. Alasgarov Mahir Maharram oglu (1969-1993) 
231. Alakbarova Zeynab Jumshud gizi (1923) 
232. Ayyubova Lamiya Ali gizi 
233. Ayyubova Leyla Ali gizi 
234. Alasgarov Mazahir Maharram oglu (1969-1993) 
235. Aliyev Elman Karim oglu (1960) 
236. Aliyeva Khavar Yusif gizi (1957)  
237. Aliyeva Svetlana Javanshir gizi (1957) 
238. Aliyeva Surayya Bayram gizi (1934) 
239. Aliyev Alasgar Mahammad oglu  
240. Aliyev Tavakkul Bakhish oglu (1955) (by shot to heart) 
241. Aliyev Nadir Gachay oglu (1967- 8 October 1991) 
242. Aliyev Ayyub Sari oglu (1928) 
243. Aliyeva Heyran Murshud gizi (1962) 
244. Aliyev Elchin Firdovsi oglu (1982, got stiff with cold) 
245. Aliyev Elgiz Firdovsi oglu (1984) 
246. Aliyev Agali Naib oglu (1932) 
247. Aliyeva Surayya Behbud gizi (1933) 
248. Aliyev Alakbar Alehsan oglu (1915) 
249. Aliyev Ilham Bahadur oglu (1966 – 13 January 1992) 
250. Aliyev Anvar Zaynal oglu  
251. Aliyev Akif Anvar oglu 
252. Aliyev Asif Anvar oglu 
253. Aliyev Mikayil Atababa oglu 
254. Aliyeva Aygun Rahim gizi 
255. Aliyeva Rahila Ahmad gizi 
256. Aliyeva Ruskhara Aliyar gizi 
257. Aliyeva Mahi Gabil gizi 
258. Aliyev Rufat Iman oglu (1974)  
259. Aliyev Sabuhi Cahangir oglu (1978) 
260. Aliyev Salim Cahangir oglu (1985) 
261. Aliyev Yusif 
262. Aliyev Eldar Karish oglu (1963) 
263. Aliyeva Chichak Alakbar gizi (1931) 
264. Aliyeva Dilara Anvar gizi (1939) 
265. Aliyev Baker Shiraslan oglu (1973) 
266. Aliyev Islam Abdulali oglu (1913) 
267. Aliyev Isa Abdulali oglu (59 years old, by shot to head) 
268. Aliyev Arif Khanlar oglu (1970) (by shot to thorax) 
269. Aliyev Ahmad  
270. Aliyeva Yegana Maharram gizi 
271. Aliyev Asgar Firdovsi oglu 
272. Aliyev Fituris Firdovsi oglu 
273. Aliyeva Saadat Firdovsi gizi 
274. Aliyeva Sariyya Firdovsi gizi 
275. Aliyev Jamal Firdovsi oglu 
276. Aliyev Shahin Firdovsi oglu 
277. Aliyev Firdovsi Ashraf oglu 
278. Aliyev Firdovsi Isa oglu (1956) 
279. Aliyev Elshan Abil oglu (1987) 
280. Aliyev Elshan Sahadar oglu (1973) 
281. Aliyev Faig Elman oglu 
282. Aliyev Ayaz Elamn oglu (1970 – 8 July 1992) 
283. Aliyeva Kubra Elman gizi  
284. Aliyeva Rahila Humbat gizi 
285. Aliyeva Sahar Charkaz gizi (1922) 
286. Aliyev Abulfat Ali oglu (1963) 
287. Aliyev Amil Rashid oglu  
288. Alimammadov Namig Shahmali oglu (1962) 
289. Alimammadov Faig Shahmali oglu (his body was cut into pieces, died by shot to thorax) 
290. Amiraliyev Rashid Hasan oglu (1958) (by shot to thorax) 
291. Amirov Tavakkul Bakhish oglu (was burnt alive) 
292. Amirova Maya Gabil gizi (1962) 
293. Amirova Yegana Tavakkul gizi (1986) (at the age of 8) 
294. Amirova Raya Gabil gizi (1959) 
295. Amraliyev Aynura Rashid gizi  
296. Amraliyeva Adila Ali gizi 
297. Asadov Yalchin Asif oglu (1957) 
298. Asadov Nuraddin Mahar oglu  
299. Asgarov Nizami  
300. Asgarov Eldar Nizami oglu 
301. Asgarov Asgar Imran oglu 
302. Asgarov Khazani Karam oglu (1962-12 February 1994) 
303. Ahmadov Rafail Naib oglu (1948) 
304. Ahmadova Durna Salman gizi (1912) 
305. Ahmadov Vagif Islam oglu (1957-1992) 
306. Ahmadov Natig Ilyas oglu (1969) 
307. Ahmadova Zibeyde Badal gizi (1928) 
308. Ahmadov Eldar Naib oglu (1935) 
309. Ahmadova Surayya Cavad gizi (1962) 
310. Ahmadova Chichak Savalan gizi  
311. Ahmadova Sarvinaz Ahmad gizi (1900) 
312. Ahmadova Khanim Farhad gizi 
313. Ahmadov Ahmad 
314. Ahmadov Yelmar Naib oglu (1963) 
315. Ahmadov Mazahir 
316. Zamanov Novruz Gulu oglu (1936) 
317. Zamanov Azad Novruz oglu  
318. Zamanova Nurida Novruz gizi 
319. Zamanova Khalida Novruz gizi 
320. Zamanov Firudin Alish oglu  
321. Zamanov Elnur Firudin oglu 
322. Zamanov Elkhan Firudin oglu 
323. Zamanova Firuza Firudin gizi 
324. Zeynalova Aynura Tafig gizi (1986) 
325. Zeynalov Mahammad Mikayil oglu (1948) 
326. Zeynalov Osman Bahadur oglu (1959 – 28 December 1991) 
327. Zeynalov Tahir Bahadur oglu (1963 – 8 November 1992) 
328. Zeynalov Majnun Zaman oglu (1969) 
329. Zeynalov Tofig Aslan oglu (1959 died from the shot) 
330. Zeynalov Mahammad Masi oglu (died from the shot) 
331. Zeynalov Eldar Aslan oglu (1963) 
332. Zeynalov Nadir Aslan oglu (1968) 
333. Ibadullayev Nadir Nabi oglu  (1967) 
334. Ibrahimova Fatma (1990) 
335. Ibishov Agha Fikrat oglu  
336.  Ibrahimov Alikhan Xalil oglu (1955) (shot to head) 
337. Ilyasov Ahmad Mammad oglu (1968) 
338. Ilyasov Mammad Ilyas oglu (1940) 
339. Ismayilova Manzar Mashadi gizi (1908) 
340. Imani Aghayar Salman oglu (1926) (burnt by Armenians) 
341. Imani Aghababa (1910) 
342. Imani Malik Aghayar oglu (1950) 
343. Isgandarov Alabbas Gara oglu (at the age of 24, died from the shot to thorax from back) 
344. Isgandarov Niyazi Humbat  oglu  
345. Ismayilov Ismayil Bahman  oglu 
346. Ismayilov Ingilab Alakbar oglu (1962) 
347. Isgandiyarov  Eldar Humbat oglu (1972) 
348. Ismayilova Shovkat Oruj gizi (1940 – 28 December 1991) wife 
349. Ismayilov Elyas Bayram oglu (1938 – 28 December 1991) husband 
350. Ismayilov Samandar (got stiff with cold) 
351. Ismayilov Ibish Karim oglu (1938) 
352. Ismayilov Nabi Mammad oglu  
353. Ismayilova Matanat Akif gizi 
354. Ismayilova Nuriyya Gachay gizi (1986) 
355. Ismayilov Husein Bahman oglu  
356. Ismayilova Nargiz Husein gizi  
357. Ismayilov Latif Ismayil oglu  
358. Ismayilov Vidadi Latif oglu (1951) 
359. Ismayilov Seymur Aydin oglu  
360. Ismayilova Gultakin Seymur gizi  
361. Ismayilova Aytakin Seymur gizi  
362. Ismayilova Aybaniz Seymur gizi  
363. Ismayilov Bahram Matlab oglu (1967) 
364. Yusifov Hamlet Mahyaddin oglu  
365. Yusifova Natavan Panah gizi (1988) 
366. Yusifov Hamid Mahyaddin oglu (1962) 
367. Kazimov Asif Kazim oglu (1967) 
368. Kazimov Khalil Mahmud oglu (1938) 
369. Karimov Mahaf Tanriverdi oglu (at the age of 23,  died of shrapnel wound to his head and 
sides) 
370. Karimov Yalchin (1950) 
371. Karimov Vali Alish oglu  
372. Karimov Gulu Alish oglu  
373. Karimova Samran Alsih gizi 
374. Karimova Hamayil Alish gizi  
375. Karimov Firuz Simran oglu (1960) (killed and then burnt) 
376. Karimov Soltan Simran oglu (1966) 
377. Karimova Atraba Husein gizi 
378. Karimova Samran Soltan oglu (1924) (eyes were pulled out) 
379. Karimov Intigam Shahmali oglu (1960) 
380. Karimov Samran Ali oglu  
381. Karimova Firangul Gurban gizi (1934) (ears were cut, eyes were pulled out,  body was cut into 
pieces) 
382. Karimova Firangiz Mutallim gizi (1930) (died by the shot to thorax) 
383. Karimova Rashid Rahim oglu (1922) 
384. Mahmudova Roza Safar gizi (from the bullet wound in stomach) (1930) 
385. Mahmudov Ahliman Behbud oglu (1941) 
386. Mehdiyev Shafa Baba oglu (1941) (died by shot to thorax) 
387. Mehdiyev Javanshir Isag oglu (1967) 
388. Mehdiyev Murad Shafa oglu (1964) (died by the shot to his thorax) 
389. Mehdiyeva Aysel Murad gizi (1987) 
390. Mehdiyeva Gulmira Murad gizi (1989) 
391. Mehdiyev Ilham (1967) 
392. Mehdiyev Fikrat Burzu oglu (1968) 
393. Mehraliyeva Basira Vali gizi  
394. Mehraliyev Ali Shukur oglu  (1964) 
395. Mehraliyeva Gulzar Gulali gizi (1970) 
396. Mehraliyev Orkhan Ali oglu (1971) 
397. Mamishov Shahin Talish oglu (1959) 
398. Mamishov Talish Husein oglu (1921) 
399. Mammadov Talish Imran oglu (1934) 
400. Mammadov Vagif Shukur oglu (1940) 
401. Mammadov Niyamaddin Vagif oglu (1978) 
402. Mammadov Azar Vagif oglu (1975) 
403. Mammadov Jeyhun Vagif oglu (1975) 
404. Mammadov Nuraddin Vagif oglu 
405. Mammadov Vagif Shamil oglu (1951) (by the bullet wound to the head) 
406. Mammadov Ogtay Shukur oglu (1957) 
407. Mammadova Afila Ibrahim gizi (1949) 
408. Mammadov Arif Ibad oglu (1956) 
409. Mammadova Gullu Abdul gizi  (1925) 
410. Mammadov Shohrat Ibad oglu (1956) 
411. Mammadov Shohlat Ibish oglu (1960) 
412. Mammadov Safarali Mehdi oglu (1918) 
413. Mammadov Razmik Suren oglu (1965) 
414. Mammadov Saday Suleyman oglu (1936) (was burnt) 
415. Mammadov Aydin Gurban oglu (1964) 
416. Mammadov Ramil Jalal oglu (1948) 
417. Mammadov Sarvar Yelmar oglu (1970 – 29 January 1992) 
418. Mammadova Maleyka Atash gizi (1933) 
419. Mammadov Baylar Khanlar oglu (1935) 
420. Mammadov Khosrov Bilal oglu (1949) 
421. Mammadov Eldar Amirkhan oglu (at the age of 34, died by the bullet wound in head) 
422. Mammadov Rasif Salman oglu (1967) 
423. Mammadov Vasif Salman oglu (1965) 
424. Mammadov Vagif Jamil oglu  
425. Mammadov Giymat Savalan oglu  
426. Mammadov Azad Suleyman oglu  
427. Mammadov Mammad Rahim oglu (1947) 
428. Mammadov Shohrat Mammad oglu (1976) 
429. Mammadov Yashar Yusif oglu (1956) 
430. Mammadova Dilbar Mahammad gizi 
431. Mammadov Jahangir Mammad oglu  
432. Mammadova Samaya Isa gizi  
433. Mammadova Parvana Jamal gizi 
434. Mammadov Tanriverdi Jamal oglu  
435. Mammadova Banu Ahmad gizi  
436. Mammadova Ziyaddin Bakhishali oglu  
437. Mammadova Aziza Bashir gizi 
438. Mammadov Charkaz Abbas  oglu  
439. Mammadov Jasarat  Ziayd oglu 
440. Mammadova Sevil Husein gizi (1971) 
441. Mammadova Aybeniz Asif gizi 
442.  Mammadova Gulkhanim Ibrahim gizi 
443. Mammadova Gulare Aghali gizi 
444. Mammadov Kamil Amir oglu (1958) 
445. Mammadova Saltanat Zulal gizi 
446. Mammadova Shovkat Eybat gizi (1963) 
447. Mammadov Zahir Ramiz oglu (1975) 
448. Mammadova Latafat Eyvad  gizi  
449. Mammadov Sadig Allahverdi oglu  
450. Mammadova Maruza   
451. Mammadova Tamara Salim gizi (was chot savagely… eyes were pull out  by screwdriver) 
452. Mammadov Rasim Salim oglu (died  from the torn of cover of the skull) 
453. Mammadov Mammad Gadir oglu  (1935) 
454. Mammadov Aydin Tahir oglu 
455. Mammadov Anar Tahir oglu 
456. Mammadov Yelmar Tahir oglu 
457. Mammadova Garina Tahir gizi 
458. Mammadova Zarina Karim gizi 
459. Mammadov Sabuhi Jahangir oglu 
460. Mammadov Ramiz  
461. Mammadov Allahverdi 
462. Mammadov Salim Jahangir oglu 
463. Mammadov Sohbat Mammad oglu 
464. Mammadov Zakir Qasim oglu (1966 – 28 January 1992) 
465. Mammadova Roza Safar gizi 
466. Mammadov Akbar Rahman oglu 
467. Mammadov Nizami  Murad oglu (1958) 
468. Mammadova Aysel Murad gizi  
469. Mikayilov Agil  Valikishi oglu (1969) 
470. Mikayilov Araz   (died from the bullet wound in stomach and thigh) 
471. Mirzayeva Altifa Kamal gizi  
472. Mirzayev Kamal Abbas oglu (1962 – 1994) 
473. Mirzayeva Gulshan Shamil gizi 
474. Mirzayeva Sevinj Shamil gizi 
475. Mirzayeva Sahila Shamil gizi 
476. Mirzayev Aydin Shamil oglu 
477. Mirzayev Shirin Vali oglu 
478. Mirzayev Aydin Eldar oglu 
479. Mirzayeva Aytakin Eldar gizi 
480. Maharramov Magsud Heydar oglu (1957) 
481. Maharramov Arif Asgar oglu  
482. Maharramov Fazil Arif oglu 
483. Maharramova Rahila Arif gizi  
484. Maharramov Babak Arif oglu  
485. Maharramova Nazli Vali gizi (1953) 
486. Maharramov Vagif Jamil oglu  (1951) 
487. Maharramov Tahir Agharza oglu (1956) 
488. Muradov Pasha Asgar oglu (1939) 
489. Muradov Taleh Asgar oglu  
490.  Muradov Taryer Taleh oglu  
491. Muradov Zahid Latif oglu (1965) 
492. Muradov Faig Tayyar  oglu (1954 – 22 April 1993) 
493. Muradov Elshan Kazim oglu (1971) 
494. Muradov Gunduz Kazim oglu (1961) 
495. Muradova Nurida Kazim gizi (1931) 
496.  Mukhtarov Kazim Eynulla oglu  
497. Musayev Ilgar Vagif oglu (1963) 
498. Musayeva Yakhshi Mehdigulu gizi (1900) 
499. Mustafayev Vidadi  Shafa oglu (1963) 
500.  Mustafayev Rza Bashir oglu (1948) 
501. Naghiyev Yusif Cavad oglu   
502. Naghiyev Toghrul Cavad oglu 
503. Naghiyev Cavad Ali oglu 
504. Naghiyeva Sureyya  Imran gizi 
505. Naghiyeva Sara   Ramiz gizi (1969) 
506. Naghiyev Yusif Shirin oglu (1928 died by the shot to thorax) 
507. Nabiyeva Sara Akbar gizi (at the of 24, died from the shrapnel wound, her right hand was cut 
off) 
508. Nabiyeva Sakina Nabatali gizi (1930) 
509. Nabiyev Mahiyaddin Hasan oglu (1952) 
510. Nabiyev Hasan Garash oglu (1930) 
511. Nazarli Hikmat Baba oglu  (1966) 
512. nasibov Ramiz  Sari oglu (1961) 
513. Nasirov Jahid Afgan oglu  
514. Nasidov Tohid Afgan oglu 
515. Nasirova Tatyana Dimitriyevna (1952) 
516. Nacafov Etibar Gulu oglu  
517. Nacafov Vugar  
518. Nacafov Alov Nasib oglu (1966 – 15 December 1991) 
519. Nacafov Shiraslan Mamish oglu (1952) 
520. Nacafov Gamattin Shiraslan oglu 
521. Nacafov Ali Aghali oglu 
522. Nacafov Asgar  Hidayet oglu (1940) 
523. Nacafova  Zohra Mammad gizi  
524. Nishana Khojaly (1990) 
525. Novruzov Alasgar Khanlar oglu  (1949) 
526. Novruzov Akbar Cannat oglu 
527. Novruzov Novruz Maharram oglu (1937) 
528. Novruzova Adila Mammad gizi (1937) 
529. Novruzov Zakir Novruz oglu (1971) 
530. Novruzova Rahila Novruz gizi (1975) 
531. Novruzova  Rubaba Novruz  gizi (1977) 
532. Nuriyeva Aydin Nariman oglu  
533. Nuriyev Hafiz Yusif oglu (1962) 
534. Nuriyeva Dilara Oruj gizi  
535. Nurmammadov Husein Rza oglu (1987) 
536. Nurmammadova Pakiza Islam gizi (1936) 
537. Orujov Ali 
538. Orujova Izafa Ali gizi (at the age of 27, died from the bullet wound in head and thorax) 
539. Orujova Irada Ali gizi (1964) 3  
540. Orujova Malahat Ali gizi (1975) (was shot) 5  
541. Orujov Faiq Ali oglu (1954)2  
542. Orujov Fazil Anvar oglu (1981, died by the  shot to thorax) 
543. Orujov Elman Anvar oglu (1956)  
544. Orujov Telman   Anvar oglu (1957) 
545. Orujova Khayala Telman gizi (1986) 
546. Orujova Malak Ali gizi (1968) 
547. Orujova Natavan Nabi gizi (1989) 
548. Orujov Miryusif Karim oglu (1940 – 6 August 1991) 
549. Orujov Rafiq Miryusif oglu (1972) 
550. Orujova Tamara Yunis gizi (1944) 
551. Orujova Vatan Habib gizi  
552. Orujova Gozal Heydar gizi (1931) 
553. Orujov Mugham  
554. Orujov Cavan Canan oglu (1976) 
555. Pashayev Aleksandr Tapdig  oglu (1932) 
556. Pashayev Elshad Aleksandr oglu  
557. Pashayev Aladin Bahlul oglu (1961) 
558.  Pashayev Gadim Razil oglu (1953) 
559. Piriyev Hatam 
560. Rajabov Jabrail Mehdi oglu (1961, Armenians burnt  him with oil by  fastening his feets  with 
wire) 
561. Rashidov Nazim Adil oglu (1972 was lost) 
562. Rashidov Adil Mahammad oglu (1941) 
563. Rzayev Janpolad Yagub oglu (1965) 
564. Rzayev Tapdig Kochari  oglu (1964 – 20 June 1991) 
565. Rustamov Hasan Isfandiyar oglu  
566. Rzayev Ildirim Barat  oglu (1970) 
567. Rustamova  Zivar AllahHusein gizi 
568. Rustamov Fizuli Salah oglu (1966) 
569. Rustamova Jeyran Imran gizi  
570. Rustamov Eldar Amir oglu (1938 – 9 May 1992) 
571. Sadigova Chichak Jalil  gizi (1928) 
572. Sadigov Vagif Imamverdi oglu (1952) 
573. Sadigov Avaz Asif oglu (1929) 
574. Salahov Chingiz Mammad oglu  
575. Sadigova Goncha Mammadbaghir gizi (1937) 
576. Salahov Mahammad Abdul oglu (1931) 
577. Salahova Shakar Saday gizi (1963 – 10 January 1992) 
578. Salahova Zahra Alabbas gizi (1932) 
579. Salahov Shakir Shamil oglu (1966) 
580. Salahov Natig Fardali oglu (1961) 
581. Salmanov Mushfig Vagif oglu  
582. Salmanova Aynura Ismayil gizi 
583. Salmanov Salman Salman oglu  
584. Salmanova Ayna Soltan gizi 
585. Salmanova Dilara Salman gizi 
586. Sevindiyev Vahid Sevindik oglu  
587. Sevindiyev Shamakhi Vaihd oglu 
588. Sevindiyev Fikat Vahid oglu 
589. Salimov Bahadur Mikayil oglu (1928) (was burnt) 
590. Salimov Araz Bahadur oglu (1960) (was killed in the captivity) 
591. Salimov Mikayil Bahadur oglu (1970) (died by the shrapnel wound in the skull) 
592. Salimov Fakhraddin Bahadur oglu (1958) (died in the captivity)  
593. Salimov Saydi Mikayil oglu (1934) 
594. Salimov Tofig Seyid oglu (1968) 
595. Salimova Adila Allahverdi gizi (1930) 
596. Salimov Rafayil Ilyas oglu (1970 – 5 January 1994) 
597. Salimov Khazar Sayavush oglu (1974) 
598. Salimova Tamilla Aghamirza gizi (1936) 
599. Samadov Gunduz   Hidayet oglu (1957 – 8 May 1992) 
600. Samadov Hamid Baylar  oglu (1958) 
601. Samadov Taryel Baylar  oglu (1964) 
602. Safarov Ordukhan Aydin oglu (1961 – 12 June 1989) 
603. Safarov Shahverdi Bahlul oglu (1956 – January 1992) 
604. Safarov Ali Xalid oglu  
605. Safarova Pari Mukhtar gizi (1930) 
606. Safarov Osman Aydin oglu (1964 – 2 December 1991) 
607. Safiyev Elkhan Nasib oglu (1961) 
608. Safiyev Sarvan Elkhan oglu (1991) 
609. Safiyeva Gozal Vali gizi (1923) (died from the bjullet wound) 
610. Suleymanov Rashid Surxay oglu (1951) 
611. Suleymanov Tofig Yusif oglu  
612. Suleymanova Nubar Lalakishi gizi (1953) 
613. Taghiyev Mubariz Alish oglu  
614. Taghiyev Elvin Balish oglu  
615. Taghiyev  Zala Balsih oglu 
616.  Taghiyev Muzaffar  Balish oglu  
617. Taghiyeva  Makhmar Alish gizi  
618. Taghiyeva Narmina Alish gizi 
619. talibov Rahim Khudaverdi oglu (1908) 
620. talibov Aghja Alkhan gizi  
621. Usubov  Elshad Kamran oglu (1974) 
622. Usubov Aliyar Kamran oglu (1967) 
623. usubov Zakir Kamran  oglu (1965) 
624. Usubov Sayavush Ramiz oglu(1971) 
625. Usubova Shargiyya Usub gizi (1948) 
626. Farzaliyev Jahan  Humbat oglu (1962 was savagely burnt ) 
627. Farzaliyev Mazahir Gulu oglu  
628. Farzaliyeva Gutaba Mazahir gizi  
629. Farzaliyev Qadim Farzali oglu (1933) 
630. Farzaliyev Farzali Mazahir oglu  
631. Farzaliyeva Huru Mazaur gizi 
632. Khanlarov Kirman Mamish oglu 
633. Khanlarova Shafiga Rahim gizi  
634. Khanmammadov Barat Kamil oglu (23 years old, died by the shot to  thorax) 
635. Khalilov Gachay Rahim oglu (1943) 
636. Khalilov Tahir Gachay oglu (died by the shot from submachine gun)  
637. Khalilova Lala Tahir gizi (died by the shot to thorax) (1978) 
638. Khalilova Zarifa Zakara gizi (died by the shot to thorax) 
639. Khalilov Arzu Khalil oglu (1977)  
640. Khalilov Araz Khalil oglu (1984) 
641. Khudaverdiyev Tavad Rizvan oglu  
642. Khudaverdiyev Mushvig Rizvan oglu  
643. Khudaverdiyev Kamal Safiyar oglu 
644. Khudayarova Surayya Alish gizi (1916) 
645. Khudayarova Matanat Kamal gizi  
646. Khudiyev Zahid Bahlul oglu (1965) 
647. Khudayarova Sona Mahammad gizi  
648. Hagverdiyeva Havva Zeynalabdin gizi (1927) 
649. Hagverdiyev Davud Mashadi oglu (1951) 
650. Hagverdiyev Shahin Mashadi oglu (1962) 
651. Hajiyev Suleyman Latif oglu (1949) 
652. Hajiyev Alif Latif oglu (1953) 
653. Hamanova Gulchohra (died from the shot to his thorax and stomach; left hand was cut) 
654. Hajiyev Ali  
655. Hajiyev Tahir Haji oglu (1957) 
656. Hamzayev Abdulla Kochari oglu (1965) 
657. Hamidov Mubariz Yusif oglu  
658. Hamdiyeva Mehriban Rajab gizi (1954) 
659. Hamidov Liya Aftandil oglu  
660. Hamidov Osman Hamid oglu 
661. Hamidova Kifayat Oruj gizi 
662. Hamidova Kifayat Chiraq gizi (1955) 
663. Halili Malahat Abbas gizi 
664. Hanifayev Bahman Salman oglu (1957) 
665. Hasanov Imran Alakbar oglu (1940) 
666. Hasanova Tofiga Hasan gizi (1955) 
667. Hasanova Mehriban Allahverdi gizi and her children 
668. Hasanova Khayala Eldar gizi (1987) 
669. Hasanov Tajir Eldar oglu (1990) 
670. Hasanova Rafiga Husein gizi 
671. Hasanova Aygun Nazim gizi  (1991) 
672. Hasanov Elgun Nazim oglu (1988) 
673. Hasanov Shohrat Usub oglu (died by the shot to thorax) (1944) 
674. Hasanov Hasan Ibrahim oglu (1933) 
675. Hasanova Fitat Ahmad gizi (1940) 
676. Hasanova Goychak Haydar gizi (1933) 
677. Hasanova Latafat Hasan gizi (1976) 
678. Hasanov Ramil Ibrahim oglu (1947) 
679. Hasanov Tabil Gasim oglu (1961- 29 March 1992) 
680. Hasanov Mehdi Ramil oglu (1973) (died by bullet wound) 
681. Hasanov Vahid Mohsum oglu (1958 – 21 December 1991) 
682. Hasanov Jamil Soltan oglu 
683. Hasanov Elshad Gachay oglu (1949 – 2 October 1989) 
684. Hasanov Rovshan Gachay oglu (1958) 
685. Hasanova Rubaba Kochari gizi 
686. Hasanov Tofig Baylar oglu (1970- 23 October 1990) 
687. Hasanov Elnur Elkhan oglu 
688. Hasanov Telman Yelmar oglu (1939 – 30 September 1991) 
689. Hasanova Aynur Elkhan gizi  
690. Hasanova Nurana Elkhan gizi  
691. Hasanova Gunash Abdul gizi (1910) 
692. Hasanova Makhmar Alakbar gizi (1942) 
693. Hasanova Sevil Eyyub gizi (1961) 
694. Hasanova Gulchohra Yagub gizi (1968) 
695. Hasanova Afiga (her husband, three son, two daughters had died) 
696. Hasanov Ali Mursal oglu (1936) 
697. Hasanov Gafur Eldar oglu  
698. Hasanov Aladdin Safar oglu  
699. Hasanov Ramiz Allahverdi oglu (1971 – 5 avgust 1993) 
700. Hashimov Parviz Vorashil oglu  
701. Hashimova Shovkat Shukur gizi (1943) 
702. Hashimov Salim Karim oglu (1963) 
703. Humbatov Mugan Jalil oglu (1973) 
704. Humbatova Anahid Eldar  gizi (1979) 
705. Humbatova Firuza Mussa oglu (1934) 
706. Humbatov Talish Isgandar oglu (1931) 
707. Humbatova Sevil Jalil gizi (1967) 
708. Humbatova Simuzar Jalil gizi (1976) 
709. Humbatov Hatam Gurban oglu  (1960) 
710. Humbatova Sudaba Rashid gizi (1969)  
711. Humbatov Bahlul Museyib oglu (1937) 
712. Huseinov Husein Faraj oglu (1936) 
713. Huseinov Rashid Husein oglu (1962)  
714. Huseinov Murshud Samad oglu (1934) (died in forest near to Shelli) 
715. Huseinova Zinyat Yunis gizi (1940) 
716. Huseinova Maral Kamil gizi (1985) 
717. Huseinov Rajab Elkhan oglu (1984) 
718. Huseinov Mahshar Elkhan oglu  (1991) 
719. Huseinova Shabnam Elkhan gizi (1986)  
720. Huseinova Rasmiyya Alexander gizi  (1968) 
721. Huseinov Emin Alexander oglu (1975) 
722. Huseinova Saadat Gadim gizi  (1974) 
723. Huseinov Zaur Nazim oglu  
724. Huseinova Zahra Ismayil gizi 
725. Huseinova Mahbuba Eldar gizi 
726. Huseinova Afarim Yusif gizi 
727. Huseinov Hamza Oruj oglu 
728. Huseinov Vugar Hilal oglu (1971) 
729. Huseinova Shovkat Oruj gizi 
730. Huseinova Rafiga Javanshir gizi 
731. Huseinov Mirsiyab Hazratgulu oglu (1922) 
732. Huseinova Minash Jumshud gizi  (1934)  
733. Huseinov Sabir Aga oglu  (1968) 
734. Huseinova Gizbas Mardan gizi (1936, on 9th May 1992 stayed in Kosalar village) 
735. Huseinov Huseyin Shukur oglu (1956, 7 April 1993)  
736. Huseinova Atraba Jabrayil gizi (1932) 
737. Huseinova Nargiz Jabrayil gizi (1963) 
738. Huseinov Tofig Mirsiyab oglu (1954) 
739. Huseinov Bakir Mirsiyab oglu  (1956)  
740. Huseinov Makhmar Gurban oglu  (1949) 
741. Huseinova Sara Safar gizi  (1964) 
742. Huseinov Allahverdi Gulu oglu (1967) (buried completely) 
743. Huseinov Shakar Eldar oglu 
744. Huseinov Elman Nemat oglu 
745. Huseinov Isa  Ali oglu 
746. Huseinov Husein Ismayil oglu  (1934) 
747. Huseinova Emma Husein gizi  (1969) 
748. Huseinov Zohrab Husein oglu  (1971) 
749. Huseinova Khoshbakht Husein gizi  (1973) 
750. Huseinova Susan Husein gizi  (1971) 
751. Huseinov Tajir Husein oglu    (1972) 
752. Huseinova Nasiba Husein gizi  (1982) 
753. Huseinova Aziza Alish gizi (1956)  
754. Huseinov Kamil Dadash oglu 
755. Huseinov Elshan Hassan oglu 
756. Huseinova Gatiba Mirsiab gizi (1952) 
757. Huseinov Hatam Imran oglu 
758. Huseinov Shakir Mustafa oglu (1956) 
759. Huseinov Namig   
760. Huseinov Alasgar Hilal oglu 
761. Huseinova Novrasta Farmaiyl gizi  (1922) 
762. Huseinov Chingiz Usub oglu  (1955) 
763. Huseinova Mehriban Allahverdi gizi  (1965) 
764. Huseinov Emin Elkhan oglu  
765. Huseinov Elmir Elkhan oglu 
766. Chobanov Tapdig Khadija oglu   (1949) (died of bullet wound of the head) 
767. Chobanova Nazakat Tapdig gizi  (1984) (died of the shot to the stomach) 
768. Jabbarov Khidir Sadraddin oglu (1969) 
769. Jabbarov Shahin Talish oglu 
770. Jabbarova Khanim Ali gizi 
771. Jabbarova Irada Aslan gizi 
772. Jabbarov Azad Pirgulu oglu  (1969) 
773. Javadov Ahmad Amir oglu  (1973) 
774. Javadov Ali Mussul oglu  (1953) 
775. Javadov Vagif Alish oglu  (1966) 
776. Jahangirov Alish Jahangir oglu 
777. Jahangirov Kamran Jahangir oglu 
778. Jahangirova Sariya   Jahangir gizi 
779. Jahangirova Solmaz Jahangir oglu 
780. Jabrailova Jahan  
781. Jabrailova Samaya Sari gizi (1950) 
782. Jafarov Museyib Safiyar oglu (1895) 
783. Jafarova Rafiga Imran gizi (1937) 
784. Jafarova Khazangul Ali gizi (1951) 
785. Jafarov Nusrat Fazil oglu (1975) 
786. Jafarov Samir Tajir oglu (1987) 
787. Jafarova Baghdad Hatam gizi (1910) 
788. Jafarov Mahammad Valikishi oglu (1895) 
789. Jafarova Banovsha Ali gizi  
790. Jafarova Pari Mukhtar gizi (at the age of 6 died of the bullet wound in thorax) 
791. Shamuradov Nemat Musa (1962) 
792. Shahveranov Maharram Chovdar oglu (1930) 
793. Shahmuradov Mubariz AliHusein oglu 
794. Shahverdiev vugar Amirkhan oglu   (1963 – 8 May 1992) 
795. Shahmuradov Natig Amirkhan oglu (1963-8 May 1992) 
796. Shiraslanov Goja Isa oglu 
797. Shirinova Sahila Akif gizi 
798. Shirinova Irada Akif gizi 
799. Shirinov Elshan Eldar oglu and his 6 month old son 
800. Shukurov Akif Rasul oglu  (1965) 
801. Shukurov Vagif Rasul oglu  (1968) 
802. Shukurova Antiga Isfandiyar gizi  (1934) 
803. Shukurov Vakil Isfandiyar oglu  (1947- December 1991) 
804. Shukurov Tofig Zakir oglu  (1964- January 1992) 
 
MAY THEM REST IN PEACE 
 
LIST OF CHILDREN DIED IN KHOJALY GENOCIDE 
 
1. Agayev Allahverdi Sattar oglu    1982 
2. Agayarov Sevinj Isaac    1985 
3. Agayarov Nabi Isaac oglu   1981 
4. Agayarov Roman Isaac oglu    1986 
5. Abishov Chingiz Nazim oglu    1985 
6. Abishova Chinara Nazim gizi   1982 
7. Allahverdiev Bahram Hidayat oglu   1976 
8. Allahverdiev Mahir Novruz oglu   1974 
9. Aslanova Elnara Tofig gizi   1978 
10. Jafarov Nusrat Fazil oglu     1975 
11. Jafarov Samir Tajir oglu     1987 
12. Chobanova Nazakat Tapdig gizi   1984 
13. Aliyev Elchin Firdovsi oglu    1982 
14. Aliyev Elgiz Firdovsi oglu   1984 
15. Aliyev Sabuhi Jahangir oglu    1978 
16. Aliyev Salim     1985 
17. Azimov Natig Abbasgulu oglu    1986 
18. Amirova Yegana Tavakkul gizi   1986 
19. Hasanov Elgun Nazim oglu   1988 
20. Hasanova Aygun Nazim gizi   1991 
21. Huseinov Rajab Elkhan oglu    1984 
22. Huseinova Shabnam Elkhan gizi   1986 
23. Huseinov Mahsar Elkhan oglu    1991 
24. Hasanova Latafat Hasan gizi   1976 
25. Humbatova Simuzar Jalil gizi   1976 
26. Humbatova Anahid Eldar gizi   1979 
27. Huseinov Emin Alexander oglu    1975 
28. Huseinova Nasiba Husein gizi   1982 
29. Huseinova Maral Kamil gizi   1985 
30. Huseinova Saadat Gadim gizi   1974 
31. Hasanov Tajir Eldar oglu     1990 
32. Ibrahimova Fatma     1990 
33. Nishana Khojaly     1990 
34. Khalilova Lala Tahir gizi     1988 
35. Guliyeva Parvana Garyaghdi gizi   1979 
36. Guliyev Shukur Garyaghdi oglu   1985 
37. Guliyeva Nurana Garyaghdi gizi   1981 
38. Gambarova Esmira Safar gizi   1985 
39. Gambaov Emin Safar oglu    1986 
40. Guliyev Mikayil Zahid oglu    1975 
41. Guliyev Samir Taleh oglu    1990 
42. Guliyeva Sevinj Akbar gizi    1985 
43. Mammadov Jeyhun Vagif oglu    1975 
44. Mammadov Niyamaddin Vagif oglu   1978 
45. Mammadov Azer Vagif oglu   1974 
46. Mammadov Zahir Ramiz oglu    1975 
47. Mehdiyeva Gulmira Murad gizi    1989 
48. Mehdiyeva Aysel Murad gizi   1987 
49. Orujova Malahat Ali gizi    1975 
50. Orijov Javan Janan oglu    1976 
51. Orujova Khayala Telman gizi   1986 
52. Orujova Natavan Nabi gizi   1989 
53. Salimov Khazar  Sayavush oglu    1974 
54. Safiyev Sarvan Elkhan oglu    1991 
55. Usubov Elshad Kamran oglu    1974 
56. Valiyev Agasif Zakir oglu   1988 
57. Zeynalova Aynura Tofig gizi   1986 
58. Yusufova Natavan Panah gizi   1988 
59. Rustamov Eldar Amir oglu    1988 
60. Huseinova Shakar Eldar gizi   1984 
61. Ismayilova Matanat Akif gizi   1985 
62. Alakberov  Sakhavat Tavakkul oglu  1988 
63. Aliyev Elshan Abil oglu    1987 
 
 
 
 
LIST OF FAMILIES COMPLETELY EXECUTED ON 26TH OF FEBRUARY 1992 DURING 
KHOJALY GENOCIDE  
 
1) 
1. Mammadov Vagif Shukur oglu  -   father   1940 
2. Mammadova Afila Ibrahim gizi – mother  1949 
3. Mammadov Jeyhun Vagif oglu –   son   1972 
4. Mammadov Azar Vagif oglu –   son  1975 
5. Mammadov Niyamaddin Vagif oglu–  son     1978 
 
2)    
1. Karimov Samran Soltan oglu –     father   1924 
2. Karimova Firangiz Gurban gizi –  mother  1935 
3. Karimov Firuz Samran oglu –   son   1960 
4. Karimov Soltan Samran oglu –   son   1969 
 
3) 
1. Aliyev Firdovsi Isa oglu –   father   1956 
2. Aliyeva Heyran Murshud gizi –   mother  1962 
3. Aliyev Elchin Firdovsi oglu –   son   1982 
4. Aliyev Elgiz Firdovsi oglu –   son   1984 
 
4) 
1. Ganbarov Garaslan Garay oglu –  father   1939 
2. Ganbarov Valida Boran gizi –   mother  1941 
3. Ganbarov Nadir Garaslan oglu –   son   1971 
 
5) 
1. Ganbarov Safar Garaslan oglu –   father   1961 
2. Ganbarov Matanat Haji gizi –   mother  1967 
3. Ganbarov Emin Safar oglu –   son   1986 
4. Ganbarova Esmira Safar gizi –   daughter  1985  
 
6.) 
1. Huseinov Mirsiyab Hazratgulu oglu –  husband  1922 
2. Huseinova Minash Jumshud gizi –  wife   1934 
 
7) 
1. Hasanova Gunesh Abdul gizi –   mother  1910 
2. Hasanova Gatiba Mirsiyab gizi –  daughter  1951 
 
8) 
1. Huseinov Husein Ismayil oglu –   father   1934 
2. Huseinova Aziz Alish gizi –   mother  1946 
3. Huseinov Khoshbekht Husein oglu – son   1963 
4. Huseyinova Nasiba Husein gizi –  daughter  1982 
5. Huseinov Tajir Husein oglu –   son   1972 
6. Huseinova Susan Husein gizi –   daughter  1971 
 
 
THEN HOW COULD GENOCIDE BE? 
 
From the examination of corpse, opinion of court-medical examination, and from the words of 
Khojaly, facts about  the savagery, torture that soldiers had done against the Azerbaijanis were 
determined: villagers who could escape the captivity: strip of the skin of head, cut of the ear, nose, 
sexual organs, behead of the Azerbaijanis over the Armenian grave as sacrifice. Armed soldiers had 
tortured everybody be it women or child and old. They cut the bosoms of the women, shot at their 
sexual organs.  
 
• It was defined that, Mustafayev Vidadi Shafa oglu, born in 1956, Nuriyev Hafis Yusif oglu, born in 
1962, Ilyasov Ahmad Mahmad oglu, born in 1968 and others were beheaded. Badalov Tofig from 
Baku, Racabov Jabrayil Mehdi oglu, born in 1961, were squashed with tank, their ears were cut, 
eyes were pulled out.  
 
• Eyes of  Mammadova Tamara Salim gizi, Dadashova Asli Babir gizi, Amirova Mahi Babir gizi, 
Humbatova Anahat Eldar gizi, Nuraliyeva Dilara Oruj gizi and others were pulled out, their breast 
were cut. Teeth of D.O. Nuraliyeva were pulled out as well.  
 
• Sexual organs of Salimov Bahadur Mikayil oglu – Aslanov Igbal Gulu oglu were cut, their eyes 
were pulled out, and they were burnt alive.  
 
• Salimov Fakhraddin Bahadur oglu was kept wounded and killed by torturing him with 
reinforcement in front of his child.  
 
•  Sexual organ of Behbudova Surayya Yusif gizi was shot.  
 
• The body of Karimova Firangul Mahammad gizi was completely cut, eyes were pulled out, and 
breasts were cut.  
 
* * * 
 
(Lists on the facts of the savagery, torture, humiliation acts against the corpses was attached to the 
reference) 
 
As a of destruction of properties of state and public offices, institutions and organizations during 
the occupation of Khojaly town, there were lost on the amount of 4 milliard  199  million 668 thousand 
338 ruble for the December of 1992 and personal property of Khojaly dwellers lost 229 million 861 
thousand 800 ruble for the march of 1992. 
 
During the investigation information about the Armenian military officers and command staff of 
the 366th regiment that committed genocide against the Azerbaijanis was determined.    
 
According to the testimony of Abbasov Alamdar Mammadvali oglu, Khojaly habitant, it was 
determined that, while he and the other Khojaly villagers  were going to Aghdam, Armenians who lay 
in the ambush had killed some of them with savagery, others were taken to captivity. They were 
tortured and beaten in the captivity. He and Salahov Mahammad Adbul oglu were taken to the prison 
of police department of Askharan region and were tortured with reinforcement. Two ribs and arm of 
A.M. Abbasov were broken, and M.A. Salahov died in his arms from the torture and beat.  
 
The name of one of the Armenians who caught them near the Dahraz village was Serjik. He was 
the Armenian who lived in Sumgayit.  He can recognize the Armenians by name Mavel and Garik who 
were among the police group that beat them in the Askharan police department.  
 
• In his testimony  of Abbasov Elbrus Alamdar oglu who was kept as hostage during the occupation 
of Khojaly town, it was determined that, sergeants by name Artur and Slavik, lieutenant by name 
Felix had beat them regularly while they were captive in the police department of Khankandi. They 
killed Novruzov Alasgar Khanlar oglu and Shaliyev Elchin Vakil oglu by torturing.  
 
• Humbatov Amir Salim oglu, Khojaly habitant who was in captivity said that, in 26.02.92 at about 4 
o’clock a.m. he was captivated by the group under the leadership of Armenian by name Armo in 
Khojaly, other Armenian in that group by name Sergey had broken his teeth and took his gold.  
 
• By the testimony of Khudayarov Rovshan Adil oglu, Khojaly inhabitant, it was determined that the 
one of the Armenians who had shot them in the Dahraz village while they had broken out of 
encirclement, was Samvel working in the Cinema union in Askharan.    
 
• By the testimony of Khojaly villager Jafarov Hummat Museyib oglu it was determined that the 
Armenian by name Ararat who worked in State Automobile Inspector of Police department of 
Askharan region had guided the FFM against the Azerbaijanis.  
 
• Khojaly habitant Karimova Elmira Shahmali gizi said that, Aghajanyan, head of the Askharan 
police department took the Khojaly captives to question, young Armenians by name “Yura”, 
“Vitali”, “Samvel” killed the captive men, raped the young girls. Armenians gave all the gold and 
adornments of captives to Russians.   
 
•  Khojaly habitant Hasanov Hasan Seyidagha oglu said that, Armenian by name Vova who fired 
them Khojaly and captivated them, pulled out his golden teeth. Other two Armenians who 
captivated them were the sons of Ruben villager of Hasanabad. The elder’s name was Vagif . 
Other’s name he doesn’t know.  
 
• By the testimony of Valiyev Avaz Aliabbas oglu, it was determined that one of the Armenians who 
captivated them near the Dahraz village was Samvel, other was captain from Yerevan.  
 
• Besides, by the testimonies of Mammadov Zulfu Ibrahim oglu, Sevdimaliyev Abbasali 
Mammadali oglu, Eyvazov Dadash Ali oglu and others who were in captivity and could escape it 
by the means of exchange or money, the information about the Armenians who killed Azerbaijanis 
with torture was determined. (Extracts from the testimonies of such kind were attached to the 
reference in the form of list).  
 
• By the testimony of P.Y. Antipin who served in the 366th regiment and who was questioned on the 
issue, it was proved that, S. Ohanyan, commander of the 2nd battalion was in agreement with 
Armenian soldiers. Major Ohanyan, lieutenant Bugayenko, lieutenant Potapov, captain Fotimiski, 
captain Krut, chief lieutenant Savichev, lieutenant Dobrinski, captain Bobilev, captain Minin, head 
lieutenant Mirhkaydarov had participated in the firing to the Azerbaijani dwelling-houses. Armed 
Armenians offered 3 thousand ruble to Antipi to fight against the Azerbaijanis, when he refused 
they had beaten him. They had broken the ribs of Armenian warrant officers, soldiers from 
Uzbekistan Porov and Dushmanov as well as soldier from Ukraine. Sergeant-major Khachaturyan 
obliged Antipi to participate in the military operation by beating him on December 1991. That is 
why Antipi had left the 366th regiment.  
 
• According to the opinion No 428 of medical examination on 28.02.92, signs of torture and beating 
were determined in the body of Antipi. According to the opinion, date of the sufferings is proper 
with the period he was beaten by Khachaturyan.  
 
• By the testimonies of O.V. Buqraz, A.Y. Kostrev and A.A. Savkin who served in the 366th 
regiment as private soldiers, it was determined that, the officers obliged soldiers to participate in 
the military operation against the Azerbaijanis. Those who refused were beaten and were exposed 
to other tortures. 
 
• By the testimony of B.N. Zuyev, private soldier, it was determined that, S. Ohanyan, Tevosyan, 
A.A.Artunyov, officers of the 366th regiment, obliged soldiers to fire at the dwelling-houses of 
Azerbaijanis. Major Yevgeni Nabokikh with military technique had participated in the occupation 
of Jamilli village in 1991. Plotnikov, commander of Intelligence Company had participated in the 
military operation against the Azerbaijanis.  
 
• By the testimonies of private soldiers Y.N. Lyakhovich, A. A. Bondaryev, I.A Yurkov, it was 
determined that, officers of the regiment Mirkhaydarov, Bogachov, Kurchatov, Matfullin had 
participated in the occupation of Malibayli village with military techniques. At night raids more 
than 12 FFM were going. Ohanyan, Ayrapetyan, Plotnikov, Yefimov, Matveyev, Tevosyan had 
participated in the military operation against the Azerbaijanis. 
 
• By the text of the tape-recorder that soldiers took themselves during the attack to the Khojaly town 
and which was presented by National Security Ministry of Azerbaijan Republic, the participation 
of the 366th regiment in the attack to Khojaly was proved.  From the content of the record it is 
obvious that the talk is about the attack to Khojaly and that they would earn millions of money 
from this. 
 
• Thus, by the facts gathered during the investigation, genocide against theAzerbaijanis living in the 
Daghlig-Garabagh by Armed Armenians and command of the 366th regiment were approved.  
 
But as the officers, warrant officers, soldiers of the 366th regiment and Armenians who committed 
the crime are in foreign countries, it was impossible to gather information about them and draw into 
responsibility. Thus, it is important to take measures for the judgement of these offenders who 
committed genocide against the Khojaly villagers, by the international organizations.  
 
As the genocide was against the laws of humanity, it had been judged in the laws adopted by 
the international organizations repeatedly.  
 
According to the Item 2 in the Convention No 26-A dated on 09.12.48 “On the prevention of 
genocide crimes and punishment” of Head Assembly of UNO, acts toward the complete or partial 
annihilation of national groups are considered as genocide. According to the Item 9 of Convention, 
disputes over the responsibility of this or other countries in the genocide, may be submitted to the 
International Court by the demand of one disputing part. 
 
Besides, International Tribunal established by the Security Council of UNO can take into its 
consideration materials on the genocide crime committed against the Khojaly villagers. There were 
such states in the international experience. For example, by the decisions No 808 dated on 22.02.93 
and No 827 dated on 25.05.93 of National Security Council, an international tribunal is established and 
acts to investigate crimes committed in the territory of Yugoslavia against the humanity laws.  
 
Thus, the government of Azerbaijan Republic must raise question in the International Court of 
UNO, in International Tribunal for the hearing the materials on the genocide crime committed against 
the Azerbaijanis living in the Khojaly and for the punishment of the Armend forces of Republic of 
Armenia and command staff of the 366th regiment.  
 
Khojaly investigation group  
    
 
WHY DID I WRITE THIS BOOK? 
 
If this question is addressed to me then it would be better to ask: “Why did you write this 
book”. I have ready answer for this question: “Because I am from Khojaly”. But such answer won’t 
satisfy me either. Because I wrote this book not only for the reason that I am from Khojaly but also to 
acquaint the people with the horror of the world, to avoid people from this. I fed up from seeing the 
pages of the history in blood. I don’t want to see these pages to be written in the blood. I don’t wish 
people to hate each other. This book is the product of reality. This is the reflection of the committed 
horrible events. This is tragedy I witnessed with my own eyes. Let’s share the sorrow, grief, sadness, 
languor with people. But I don’t want to make them fellow suffer of my grief. Besides, the world had 
changed so much that, sorrow can’t unite people as hundred, hundred and fifty years ago. Now they 
established on other kind of grieves. Let it be in such way. Everyone has it is own reality. But my 
reality is Khojaly, the tragedy happened there, are the people who died there, who had been lost there. 
My reality is the parents who suffer who lost their children. My reality is the children without grave. 
My reality is Chingiz Mustafayev who couldn’t hold his tears.  
This is my reality.  
This is the reality of the history as well.  
The reality which can’t be bore. I wrote this book in order to deliver the reality of that tragedy 
to future generation. Did I do right?  
Let this question be answered by others…  
 
 
 
Author: Sariyya Muslum 
 
