MINISTRY OF EDUCATION 
OF AZERBAIJAN REPUBLIC
BAKU SLAVIC UNIVERSITY
EDUCATIONAL CULTURAL CENTER 
OF AZERBAIJAN STUDIES
SADIR MAMMEDOV
KHOJALY
GENOCIDE
Azərbaycan Respublikası Prezidentinin 
işlər İdarəsi
PREZİDENT KİTABXANAS!
BAKU- 2015
+еэ.Ъ(1'Агс)6
К  Ч  Я,
Recommended fo r  printing by the decision o f  the Academic Council o f BSU dated 
December 30, 2011 minutes (protocol No 24).
The book was published on the initiative 
of Kamal Abdullayev, the active member of Azerbaijan National 
Academy of Sciences
Author: candidate o f science of law, distinguished
scientist
Mammadov, Sadir Surkhay
Editor: irmer mayor o f Khojaly city, deputy
in Jamal Mammadov
Reviewers: candidate o f historical science, associate
professor
Aliyev Shirinbey Hadjiali
candidate o f philosophical science, associate 
professor
Barkhalov Galib Najmi
S.Mammadov. Khojaly Genocide, Baku, 2015, -  16 p.
The book called "Khojaly genocide" is aimed to inform the youth and 
foreign guests about this tragedy. The reference book was written by Colonel 
Sadir Mammadov, who fought against Armenian occupants and saw with his own 
eyes all the crimes committed by Armenians against Azerbaijanians. This edition, 
beginning with addressing to the world society tells about the destruction o f 
Khojaly, with population o f more than 7000 and with territory o f 930km, by 
Armenian fascist on 26 February o f  1992; monstrous murder o f civilian 
population and the decision o f investigation commission experts. At the same time 
it provides the photographs o f monstrously murdered people.
© Baku Slavic University, 2015.
DON’T FORGET KHOJAL Y GENOCIDE!
Dear reader!
I apply to you regardless of your nation, religion, native language 
and credo!
The monstrous armenian chaos occurs in the world. The 
Armenian masses, strewn on different countries of the world, realize 
genocide against one or another nation by means of terror and other 
facilities. Armenians, thirst to rule the world, have been living during 
already more than 200 years by this pipe dream. In the name of 
reaching this goal, they perform the uncountable terrorist acts and 
genocides during nt history periods. Never having either
state, or statehooc rritory of Caucasus, Armenians leading
roguish lifestyle, 1 rotectors and were able to settle down in
Azerbaijan. Then, U11UL/1 me auspices of Russian empire, they 
committed genocide against our nation and created Armenian republic 
on the land of our forefathers. Not having stopped on this and not 
having left their own loathsome plans, Armenians continued their 
aggression against Azerbaijan and seized our lands, committing 
genocide. One of the terrorist acts made by Armenians against 
Azerbaijani occurred in Khojaly city.
Our distinguished statesman and national leader H.Aliyev was 
the first, who gave objective political-legal estimation to this terrible 
tragedy:
"Dear compatriots!
Dear citizens!
Today I address to you on cause of bitter and tragic page in our 
nation history -  Khojaly genocide. This cruel and merciless act of 
violence was marked in the history of mankind as one of the most 
monstrous events of mass terror".
3
And really if we put a glance on our history, it would be clear 
that Khojaly tragedy is the bloodiest page and continuation policy of 
violence and ethnic cleaning policy performed against Azerbaijani by 
armenian chauvinist-nationalists during more than 200 years. This 
hateful policy, which uses support of number of government’s official 
circles, consecutively lasted during the tsarist Russia and Soviet 
Union’s ruling. After the collapse of the USSR we could be the 
witness of the expulsion of our people from native lands, conversion 
them in refugee and migrant; and many cases of mass bloodsheds. 
Armenian nationalists and ideologues of “Great Armenia” policy of 
ethnic cleaning and genocide bring to consequences, which completely 
felt on themselves more than 2 million Azerbaijanis.
Expansionist policy of armenian separatists in Nagorno- 
Karabakh, which began after Azerbaijan gained independence, was a 
reason of thousands settlement and village destructions, bloodshed of 
ten thousands innocent people, a hundreds of thousands of people were 
separated from their houses and native lands. However Khojaly 
tragedy was the most monstrous from all.
Contrastive analysis and real facts give the basis to suppose that, 
by performing Khojaly genocide, which have no analogues in the 
world history on range and monstrosity, Armenian chauvinists and 
ideologists pursued the low-lying purposes. The aim was to seize 
Nagorno-Karabakh and other Azerbaijani lands and crush the will of 
our nation to fight for our independence and territorial integrity. But 
the enemy wasn’t able to reach the goal. The tragedy shocked the 
whole Azerbaijani nation, and has inflicted cureless wound to 
inhabitants of Khojaly, spiritual wound that has never healed. 
However, even on the day of merciless genocide, people of Khojaly 
behaved as true heroes, courageously fought in unequal fighting with 
soviet-armenian military associations and, not having bent before 
enemy and have written the glorious page in heroic history of our 
nation.
4
Today the issue of telling the whole truth as it is to world states, 
parliaments, the general public, about Khojaly genocide and on all 
savagery in common realized by Armenians in Nagorno-Karabakh and 
obtaining the recognition of it as a genocide is the most crucial task 
that should be realised.
Commenced its activity in this process at February 2009 
campaign "Justice for Khojaly ", created under the auspices of Leyla 
Aliyeva, the main initiator in cross-cultural dialogue in Youth Islamic 
Forum conferences, successfully continued its activity for previous 
year and volunteers from many countries of the world join it. It is our 
civil and human debt before spirit of Khojaly shahids. On the other 
hand it is an important condition for perceiving right international 
political and law estimation to tragedy, worthy punishment for its 
ideologues, organizers and performers and to prevent repetitions of 
such cruel acts against mankind as a whole in the future.
Based on judicial hearings and minutes of the commission, we 
will try to carry some facts of Khojaly genocide to you.
At night between 25th to 26th February of 1992, in the second half 
of the XXth century, one of the greatest tragedies in the history of 
Azerbaijani Turkic peoples occurred -  the Khojaly bloodshed. In 23:00 
of that evening Armenians attacked Khojaly from three directions. 
Armed forces of the Armenian Republic, mercenary soldiers, and 
Armenian associations of Nagorno-Karabakh called itself as Arcahsk 
Public Army, and 366th Soviet military shooting regiment took parts 
in attack. Military equipment of 366th shooting regiment and russian- 
armenian power groups attacked from the direction of Khankendi, and 
more than thousand of well armed highwayman attacked from the 
direction of Askeran.
At first foot forces, went forward toward the city, with the help 
of 366th rifle regiment’s tanks, and destroyed all the military 
headquarters and shooting positions, placed in city by artillery fire. 
Defenders of the city courageously fought with enemy till morning.
5
Some of them having shown courage of kamikaze put explosive device 
on themselves and dashed to military equipment of the enemy. The last 
staff of opposition was destroyed at 7 in the morning. During the 
skirmish in Khojaly the hundreds of people died, courageously 
fighting. Civilian population moved toward the Agdam from different 
directions, came under fire from Armenian armed forces, was taken as 
a hostage and went through the monstrous torture. The Armenian 
soldiers hid on the roads, by which civilian population could run, and 
killed everyone, who passed. The Military units of Armenia, carried 
out special operations over the killed, removed the skin from their 
heads, cut the different limbs, put out the small children’s eyes and 
disemboweled pregnant woman, buried people alive, or burned them. 
We will list only several from multiple documents, reflecting 
savageries of Armenians.
Material and facts presented by the medical expert A. Efendiev, 
whether intentionally or not bring indeed horrid. From conclusion of 
the medical report it is seen that at night from 25 to 26 February of 
1992 in the city of Khojaly armenian highwaymen performed the 
tortures and executions, which have no analogue in the history. Then in 
column on analysis of the damages of the killed persons is noted: 
judicial-physical examination of 181 dead bodies was organized during 
Khojaly event by experts of our associations. 130 of them belonged to 
men and 51 to women. 13 dead bodies belonged to the juvenile 
children. Division accordingly to damage mechanism was following: 
1) from splinter -  20 persons; 2) from bullet -  151 persons; 3) from 
blunt injury -  10 persons.
Areas of damages were following: 1) head -  40; 2) chest -  74; 3) 
belly -  17; 4) other-11.
Besides 3 from examined dead bodies have traces of frostbite; 
the traces of the tortures beside 33 of them i.e. removing the skin of 
head, cutting women s chest, cutting isthmus of cartilage of auricle and 
nose, shooting on sexual organs of women from firearm. At the same
6
time puting out the eyeballs, breaking teeth and cutting men’s 
genitales. 31 dead bodies have traces of combining i.e. bullet 
wounding in different areas of the body and blunt injury or injury by 
cutting-stabbing weapon.
People, possessing human senses! You know well that everyone 
who was bom has right to live. However, Armenian terrorists, trying to 
deprive them from the right given by God, continue their terror against 
Azerbaijanians. And today they continue their own criminal actions 
against the world, exactly as at the time they brutally killed the 
thousand of Khojaly people.
Having committed these criminals Armenians present them in 
such a way, that foreigners who aren’t well informed about the 
situation as it is, are compelled to believe their slander. Today, 
important steps are making towards the presentation of all true facts 
related to Khojaly tragedy to the world community, recognition of 
slaughter, also different books are presented and journalistic 
investigations are carried out. This tragedy is brought up for 
discussions at parliaments of different countries and in international 
organizations, the world community’s attention is drawn to this 
problem, the most monstrous tragedy of XX century is presented to 
world community with true facts and materials.
Let’s not close our eyes on antiworld actions of this gang of 
robbers who at night from 25 to 26 February 1992 succeeded to raze to 
the ground the city of Khojaly with its 7000 population. On the 
contrary, let’s combine our efforts with the world community, so that 
Armenian vandals appear in court of international law for all their 
forcible actions and violence used. Otherwise, Armenians that have 
symptoms of terror which run in their blood will continue committing 
such crimes. Appealing to respected world community we say that if 
such unity isn’t formed the Armenian terror’s new target could be your 
nation.
7
Today, on 26 February 2012, on 20th anniversary of this tragedy 
we with deep sorrow pray for Khojaly shahids (613 killed including 
corpses of those whom Armenians maimed so that it’s impossible to 
identify them and more than 1000 persons who are missed and also 
considered as killed). We pray Allah for them and once again want to 
try to persuade all their nearest and dearest and also all Azerbaijani 
people that truth will triumph over and ideas that Khojaly shahids 
fought for will live for ever in free and independent Azerbaijan 
Republic.
8
Victims o f the Armenian terrorism in Khojaly
9
Azerbaijanis exposed to chemical weapon in Khojaly
10
Captive Azerbaijani child in the amputation ward of the Armenian
terrorists
11
KHOJALY: a fam ily  subjected to the Armenian terror
12
An Azerbaijani beheaded by the Armenian terrorists
13
An Azerbaijani with a put-out eye
14
A crime committed by the Armenian terrorist organization ".ASALA ”
15
Kitab «RS Poliqraf» MMC-də çap olunmuşdur.
Çapa imzalanıb: 05.01.2015. 
Format: 60x84 1/16. Qamitur: Times. 
Həcmi: 1 ç.v. Tiraj: 100. Sifariş №01.
Bakı şəh., A. Məmmədov küç, 113 
tel.: (+99412) 437 98 20
