NATO AND AZERBAIJAN
MUTUALLY BENEFICIAL COOPERATION
President of the Republic of Azerbaijan 
Aliyev Heydar Alirza Oglu
Aiiyev Heydar Alirza Oglu was born on May 10 1923 
in the town of Nakhchivan. In 1939 after graduating from 
the pedagogical technical secondary school he entered 
the faculty of architecture at the Azerbaijan Industrial 
Institute. In 1941 due to the started war he was called to 
military service. He finished his military career in the rank 
of Major-General.
In 1967-69 he was Head of the KGB of Azerbaijan. Has higher military education, 
graduated from Historical faculty of the Azerbaijan State University.
From July of 1969 to December of 1982 he was the First Secretary of Central 
Committee of the Communist Party of Azerbaijan.
In December of 1982 he was elected as Member of the Politburo of the Central 
Committee of the CPSU and was appointed First Deputy Chairman of the Council of 
Ministers of the USSR. He was elected a Deputy of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR 
of many convocations.
in 1990 he was elected a deputy of the Supreme Soviet of Azerbaijan.
In 1991-1993 he was Chairman of the Supreme Majlis {National Assembly) of 
Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic.
On 15 June 1993 he was elected Chairman of the Supreme Soviet of the Republic 
of Azerbaijan.
On 3 October 1993 by a nation-wide vote he was elected President of the Republic 
of Azerbaijan.
On 11 October 1998 by a nation-wide vote he was re-elected President of the 
Republic of Azerbaijan for the next five years.
He is two times Hero of Socialist Labour, many times state-prize winner, was 
awarded highest decorations of the USSR and other countries, is an honourable doc­
tor of a number of universities, author of a series of works in political science.
Married with two children and six grandchildren. Spouse of the president - Zarifa 
Azizovna - renowned scientist-ophthalmologist. Full Member of the Academy of 
Sciences of the Republic of Azerbaijan, died in 1985.
3
/949 -
May 1994
The parties were satisfied with the results of the talks. President of Azerbaijan empha­
sized his special content with the meeting.
Then the parties proceeded to the signing ceremony at the NATO HQ of the document 
within the Partnership for Peace Program. Deputy Secretary-General of NATO 
Mr.Sergio Ballanzino made a short speech before the signing ceremony started.
Address by the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan Heydar Aliyev at the 
Meeting of the NATO Council in Brussels
Dear Mr.Deputy Secretary-General,
Distinguished Members 
of the NATO Council,
Distinguished ambassadors.
Ladies and gentlemen!
I thank you for the warm reception 
accorded to me and the delegation of 
Azerbaijan. I am pleased to have the 
opportunity to be among you and con­
sider this as an important event for the 
Republic of Azerbaijan. I thank you 
very much for warm welcoming 
remarks and good wishes, which you 
addressed to the Republic of 
Azerbaijan. The people of Azerbaijan 
having covered a long historical path of 
its development through many difficul­
ties and obstacles, achieved its 
national independence in 1991. Independent Azerbaijani state emerged which is 
nowadays a member of the United Nations, CSCE and many other international orga­
nizations. And I feei proud with the fact that today the delegation of Azerbaijan is in 
the headquarters of the North-Atlantic Alliance.
5
^ & / 9 4 9  -
May 1994
The Republic of Azerbaijan is advancing on its way towards strengthening ils 
independence. In its internal policy it goes along the path of building democratic law- 
governed state, creates conditions for the freedom of person and protection of human 
rights, multiparty system, political pluralism, making use of democratic values 
nourished by the human mankind. In the economic field the Republic has embarked 
on the road of implementation of economic reform and establishment of markel 
economy, free entrepreneurship and freedom of initiative. We believe that all this is a 
good prerequisite for close integration of Azerbaijan into the world community.
In its foreign policy the Republic of Azerbaijan proceeds from the interdependence of 
the world, wages peaceloving policy and aspires to maintain good relations with all 
countries on the basis of principles of respect for sovereignty, non-interference into 
interna! affairs of each other, territorial integrity and inviolability of borders.
The Republic of Azerbaijan is living nowadays through the difficult economic crisis. On 
the one hand, it has been provoked by the dissolution of the Soviet Union, which 
Azerbaijan has been for seventy years a part of, disruption of close integration links 
with all the other republics of the Soviet Union, transition from one economic system 
to another. On the other hand, this economic crisis is aggravated and worsened 
because of the continuing state of war with neighbouring Republic of Armenia, 
Azerbaijan is exposed to military aggression. But we think that all these difficulties 
could be overcome, taking into account that Azerbaijan has firmly embarked upon the 
route of independent development. Independence of Azerbaijani state - is irreversible 
factor and we are sure that the way which we took in building a state, carrying our eco­
nomic and democratic reforms will allow us to surmount these difficulties and join 
Azerbaijan possessing rich intellectual and economic potential to world economy and 
world community.
As I already mentioned the difficult situation of Azerbaijan may be to a great extent 
explained by the fact that the Republic has been subjected to the military aggression 
on the part of the neighbouring Armenia for already six years. This aggression 
launched by the nationalistic circles of Armenia caused innumerable hardships both to 
Azerbaijani and Armenian people and today is a very difficult problem for us.
6
May 1994
You are very well aware that as a result of the armed aggression on the part of 
Armenia aimed at annexation of the part of the territory of Azerbaijan attaching 
Nagorno Karabakh to Armenia a considerable part of the territory of Azerbaijan has 
been occupied. A six year war resulted in the death of more than twenty thousand peo­
ple in that about four thousand people have been taken prisoner or hostage, thou­
sands ancf thousands of houses, hospitals and schools, public facilities, industrial and 
agricultural ventures have been destroyed on the territory of Azerbaijan.
But most terrible is that almost twenty percent of the territory of Azerbaijan has been 
occupied by the Armenian armed forces and people of these areas - this is more than 
one million people - lost their homes and are in a very hard socio-economic situation 
having become refugees in their own country. All persons of Azerbaijanian origin have 
been forcibly expelled from the territory of Nagorno Karabakh. Nagorno Karabakh and 
surrounding seven districts of Azerbaijan are, as I have said, under occupation of the 
Armenian armed forces.
We have been always committed and continue to be committed to the peaceful set' 
tlement of the conflict. We are striving to make an active use of the capabilities of the 
international organizations such as United Nations, OSCE and its Minsk Group. In the 
course of 1993 the UN Security Council adopted four resolutions that categorically 
demand the withdrawal of Armenian occupying forces from the territory of Azerbaijan. 
But no one of the resolutions has been ever implemented by Armenia by now.
The efforts by the OSCE Minsk Group have not brought about positive results either. 
Military activities continue and today armed forces of Armenia having occupied, as I 
already said a considerable part of the territory of Azerbaijan, are launching an offen­
sive on the defensive positions of the armed forces of Azerbaijan. Every day blood is 
shed, people are killed.
One could hardly bear that further. That is why today availing myself of my presence 
here at the NATO Headquarters, I state once again the position of Azerbaijan. We are 
for the peaceful resolution of this problem, for immediate cease-fire and all combat 
activities, for negotiations which must condition an immediate withdrawal of the occu-
7
May 1994
pying forces from the territory of Azerbaijan and ensure its territorial integrity and invi­
olability of its borders.
It is on these conditions that we are ready to consider an issue of autonomous status 
for Nagorno Karabakh.
Making an address on April 12 on the Azerbaijani TV and radio I appealed to the 
Armenian people to the leadership of Armenia, to the inhabitants of Nagorno- 
Karabakh of Armenian origin who are citizens of Azerbaijan with a call to stop this 
bloodshed. The Azerbaijani and Armenian peoples have been destined to live together 
and they have done so for centuries. We Ьеііѳѵе that the resolution of the problem by 
military means has no prospects, as does this war, and it is necessary to put an end 
to the bloodshed and to establish peace in our region as soon as possible.
Today we again expressed our confidence that international organisations first of all 
CSCE and its Minsk Group would undertake additional measures to implement our 
peaceful initiatives. Today I being in the NATO Headquarters would like to express my 
deep respect to the North Atlantic Alliance which in the course of its existence made 
enormous contribution to the establishment of stability in Europe and in the whole 
world as well as to strenghtening peace and co-operation. We have deep respect 
towards NATO and attach big importance to its activities nowadays. The creation of 
the North Atlantic Cooperation Council has become an important stage in NATO's 
activities which enables other states to come into the NATO orbit.
We welcomed the decision of NATO to announce on January 10, 1994 the adoption 
of the Partnership for Peace Document and consider it as an important step in NATO 
activities toward further development of co-operation between our countries. We 
attach big importance to the fact that in its decision of January 10, 1994 NATO 
expressed its special concern with the situation that had been created in our region in 
the Southern Caucasus and expressed its conviction in the necessity of stopping the 
conflict in our region, in particular in Azerbaijan, Armenia and Georgia.
8
May 1994
All this attracts us and is very interesting. Proceeding from ail this we accepted with 
big satisfaction NATO's invitation to the countries of Eastern Europe and newly inde­
pendent that in the past were a part of the Soviet Union to join the Partnership for 
Peace. We decided to sign it and pin big hopes to co-operation with NATO. This is 
'important to us from the point of view of integrating Azerbaijan into Western democ­
racy as well as searching, through co-operation with NATO, additional ways to stabil­
isation of the situation in the region, stopping the war, establishing peace and good 
neighbourliness between Azerbaijan and Armenia.
With these thoughts and hopes we came here and ready today to sign Partnership for 
Peace. I would like to once again express my hope that this step of the Republic of 
Azerbaijan will be assessed by its merit by NATO, will be of mutual benefit and what 
is most important will promote the stabilisation of the situation in our region. I wish your 
organisation further success. I thank you for your attention and I am ready to sign 
Framework Document of the Partnership for Peace.
9
May 1994
Partnership for Peace: Framework Document
1. Further to the invitation extended by the NATO Heads of State and Government at 
their meeting on 10th-11th January, 1994, the member states of the North Atlantic 
Alliance and the other states subscribing to this document, resolved to deepen their 
political and military ties and to contribute further to the strengthening of security 
within the Euro-Atlantic area, hereby establish, within the framework of the North 
Atlantic Cooperation Council, this Partnership for Peace.
2. This Partnership is established as an expression of a joint conviction that stability 
and security in the Euro-Atlantic area can be achieved only through cooperation 
and common action. Protection and promotion of fundamental freedoms and 
human rights, and safeguarding of freedom, justice, and peace through democracy 
are shared values fundamental to the Partnership. In joining the Partnership, the 
member States of the North Atlantic Alliance and the other States subscribing to this 
Document recall that they are committed to the preservation of democratic soci­
eties, their freedom from coercion and intimidation, and the maintenance of the prin­
ciples of international law. They reaffirm their commitment to fulfil in good faith the 
obligations of the Charter of the United Nations and the principles of the Universal 
Declaration on Human Rights; specifically, to refrain from the threat or use of force 
against the territorial integrity or poiitical independence of any State, to respect 
existing borders and to settle disputes by peaceful means. They also reaffirm their 
commitment to the Helsinki Final Act and ail subsequent CSCE documents and to 
the fulfilment of the commitments and obligations they have undertaken in the field 
of disarmament and arms control.
3. The other states subscribing to this document will cooperate with the North Atlantic 
Treaty Organization in pursuing the following objectives:
(a) facilitation of transparency in national defence planning and budgeting processes;
(b) ensuring democratic control of defence forces;
(c) maintenance of the capability and readiness to contribute, subject to constitutional 
considerations, to operations under the authority of the UN and/or the responsibil­
ity of the CSCE;
(d) the development of cooperative military relations with NATO for the purpose of 
joint planning, training, and exercises in order to strengthen their ability to under-
10
May 1994
take missions in the fields of peacekeeping, search and rescue, humanitarian 
operations, and others as may subsequently be agreed;
(e) the development, over the longer term, of forces that are better abie to operate with 
those of the members of the North Atlantic Alliance.
4. The other subscribing states will provide to the NATO Authorities Presentation 
Documents identifying the steps they will take to achieve the political goals of the 
Partnership and the military and other assets that might be used for Partnership 
activities. NATO will propose a programme of partnership exercises and other activ­
ities consistent with the Partnership' sobjectives. Based on this programme and its 
Presentation Document, each subscribing state will develop with NATO an individ­
ual Partnership Programme.
5. In preparing and implementing their individual Partnership Programmes, other sub­
scribing states may, at their own expense and in agreement with the Alliance and, 
as necessary, relevant Belgian authorities, establish their own liaison office with 
NATO Headquarters in Brussels. This will facilitate their participation in 
NACC/Partnership meetings and activities, as well as certain others by invitation. 
They will also make available personnel, assets, facilities and capabilities neces­
sary and appropriate for carrying out the agreed Partnership Programme. NATO will 
assist them, as appropriate, in formulating and executing their individual Partner­
ship Programmes.
6. The other subscribing states accept the following understandings:
-hose who envisage participation in missions referred to in paragraph 3(d) will, where 
appropriate, take part in related NATO exercises;
-they will fund their own participation in Partnership activities, and will endeavour oth­
erwise to share the burdens of mounting exercises in which they take part;
-they may send, after appropriate agreement, permanent liaison officers to a sepa­
rate Partnership Coordination Cell at Mons (Belgium) that would, under the author­
ity of the North Atlantic Council, carry out the military planning necessary to imple­
ment the Partnership programmes;
-those participating in planning and military exercises will have access to certain 
NATO technical data relevant to interoperability;
-building upon the CSCE measures on defence planning, the other subscribing 
states and NATO countries will exchange information on the steps that have been
11
/949 - W
May 1994
taken or are being taken to promote transparency in defence planning and budget­
ing and to ensure the democratic control of armed forces;
-  they may participate in a reciprocal exchange of information on defence planning 
and budgeting which will be developed within the framework of the NACC/Part­
nership for Peace.
7. In keeping with their commitment to the objectives of this Partnership for Peace, the 
members of the North Atlantic Alliance will:
-  develop with the other subscribing states a planning and review process to provide 
a basis for identifying and evaluating forces and capabilities that might be made 
available by them for multinational training, exercises, and operations in conjunction 
with Alliance forces;
-  promote military and poiitical coordination at NATO Headquarters in order to provide 
direction and guidance relevant to Partnership activities with the other subscribing 
states, including planning, training, exercises and the development of doctrine.
8. NATO will consult with any active participant in the Partnership if that Partner per­
ceives a direct threat to its territorial integrity, political independence, or security.
12
г
May 1994
In response to the P artnersh ip  tor Peace Invitation 
issued  and signed 
by the H eads of State and  G overnm ent of the M em ber States of 
the N orth  A tlantic  Treaty O rgan ization  
participating in the m eeting of the N orth  A tlantic Council held at 
NATO H eadquarters, Brussels, on 10th and  11th January, 1994,
I, the undersigned ,
H ead of State of A zerbaijan, 
hereby  accept the inv itation  to 
the  P artnersh ip  for Peace 
and subscribe to the P artnersh ip  for Peace F ram ew ork  D ocum ent.
Signed in Brussels, 
th is 4th day of M ay 1994,
G eidar Aliyev
13
May 1994
Statement by His Excellency President of the Republic 
of Azerbaijan Mr. Heydar Aliyev During the Signature of the Framework 
Document of the Partnership for Peace
The Republic of Azerbaijan with its 
rich, ancient history having covered the 
long way of development three years 
ago restored its national independence 
as the result of the collapse of the 
Soviet totalitarian regime and today is 
facing NATO as a full-fledged member 
of the international community repre­
sented in the United Nations, CSCE 
and other international organisations.
At present stage conforming to the
laws of nature and world development f l  ■ ■
Azerbaijan aspiring to take its worthy I  j j -
place in the world community is deter- : :
mined to create a democratic society
committed to those fundamental principles and values that were worked out by the 
human civilisation in the course of all stages of its development.
At the core of Azerbaijan’s state policy there lies pacifism, political pluralism, recogni 
tion and ensurance of fundamental human rights. We adopted and carry out norma­
tive documents on political parties, freedom of religion, protection of the rights a 
national minorities, etc.
Azerbaijan is building its foreign policy on the basis of deep cognizance of interde­
pendence and interlocking nature of world, proceeding from the common global aims 
facing all of us. We are deeply convinced that mutual respect for sovereignty and ter­
ritorial integrity and inviolability of borders of states lie in the core of security in mod­
ern stage of challenges and threats.
14
у ^Щ Ш Е  - 5
May 1994
Azerbaijan embarked on the road of implementation of the economic reforms in order 
to create market economy which is open to the outer world and which will enable us 
to fully realise the enormous potential of the country. With this aim in view we under­
take measures to attract foreign investment to the economy and establish co-opera­
tion with largest companies in the world. The process of legislative back-up of the 
reforms is underway.
Today Azerbaijan is living through a deep crisis that has embraced the whole territory 
of the former USSR and which is the resuit of the collapse of the Soviet system. 
Nevertheless, we are determined to overcome the difficulties of present stage and to 
reach the creation a prosperous sovereign state by means of smooth implementation 
of reforms.
In September of 1993, Azerbaijan joined the Commonwealth of Independent States 
considering this step as a necessary of political and economic co-operation with coun­
tries that emerged after the collapse of the Soviet Union and signed the Treaty on 
Collective Security.
The situation of my country is aggravated by the aggression on the part of the neigh­
bouring Republic of Armenia which has territorial claims to Azerbaijan. Armenia as an 
aggressor state is using ethnic Armenians inhabiting the territory of Nagorno- 
Karabakh region of Azerbaijan as a tool of separatism to annex my territory. Armenia 
makes use of its territory and its armed forces to wage war in the territory of Azerbaijan 
and it's already unable to conceal these facts.
In the course of aggression carried out against the Republic of Azerbaijan the 
Republic of Armenia has occupied more than twenty percent of Azerbaijani territories. 
As a result of the ethnic cleansing policy conducted by the Armenian armed forces 
more that twenty thousand people were killed, about sixty thousand wounded or 
maimed, four thousand were captured prisoner or hostage, about one million of 
Azerbaijanis became refugees in their own country.
15
May 1ЭЭ4
Under the threat of extermination all the Azerbaijanis were driven out from the occupied 
territories. Occupants resort to the scorched-earth policy. About ninety thousand 
dwelling houses, more than one thousand economic facilities, two hundred fifty schools 
and training facilities, two hundred medical facilities, were burned down, plundered and 
destroyed. The damage inflicted on Azerbaijan is worth billions of US dollars.
The Armenian nationalism ignited a torch of war and confronted two peoples which are 
destined to live in peace and good-neighbourliness. I am deeply convinced that the 
conflict between Azerbaijan and Armenia cannot be solved militarily. Continuation of 
hostilities brings about innumerable hardships to both peoples. It prevents them from 
standing firm on their feet, from consolidating their independence, from implementing 
economic reforms in full scale, from creating democratic states.
Azerbaijan has always had a constructive position in the issues of the settlement of 
the conflict. The territorial integrity and inviolability of borders of our state are the basic 
principles for us. We will strive to liberate all our occupied territories, return all 
refugees to their lands, including fifty thousand of Karabakhi Azerbaijanis. In the 
meantime, we pledge to ensure security and all civic rights of the Karabakhi 
Armenians and to grant them a relevant status of autonomy in the framework of 
Azerbaijani state.
On April 12 1994 I appealed to the citizens of Armenia and inhabitants of Nagorno 
Karabakh of Armenian nationality to stop and halt combat activities. The Azerbaijani 
state has guaranteed personal safety to all inhabitants of the zone of conflict that are 
involved in combat activities, an opportunity to live peacefully and freely in their native 
land. Today we reiterate our principle position on that issue.
During the armed aggression against Azerbaijan that has been already going on for 
about six years many steps aimed at the peaceful settlement of the conflict which, 
regrettably, have not achieved any desired results due to the hard aggressive position 
of Armenia, have been undertaken.
16
The fact of occupation of the Azerbaijani territories and the demand for an immediate, 
full and unconditional withdrawal of the occupying Armenian armed forces from those
May 1994
territories, have been properly reflected in the four resolutions of the United Nations 
Security Council - 822. 853, 874 and 884. However, under the various pretexts Arme­
nia refuses to implement these resolutions.
Armenia openly challenges the world community with its behaviour undermining all 
attempts of the peaceful political settlement of the conflict and not recognizing the ter­
ritorial integrity of Azerbaijan and refusing to evacuate occupied Azerbaijani territories.
The Republic of Azerbaijan reaffirms its readiness to solve all the problems through 
peaceful negotiations in the framework of the CSCE Minsk Group, on the basis of the 
UN Charter and the CSCE principles.
The Republic of Azerbaijan does its best to support activities of the Minsk Group and cre­
ates all She necessary conditions for the latter. However, I would like to emphasize that 
each time when the Minsk Group gathers the world witnesses further escalation of hos­
tilities on the part of Armenia and new seizures of Azerbaijani territories as it took place 
during the visit to the region of the CSCE Chairman-in-Office in October 1993 or in April 
of this year when the meeting of the Minsk Group was taking place in Prague, etc.
From April 26 to May 2, 1994 the delegation of the Minsk Group which we rendered 
all the necessary assistance was in the region. If all the countries represented in the 
Minsk Group demonstrate their solid determination and will to put an end as soon as 
possible to the bloody war and commence restoring peace and stability in our bleed­
ing region.
The Republic of Azerbaijan has a deep respect to the North Atlantic Alliance and 
highly appreciates its activities that have ensured over the recent decade peace, sta­
bility and sustainable development in Europe. At present, NATO as an acting structure 
of collective security in the world that ensures protection of democratic values and 
their extension to the newly independent states emerged in the Eastern Europe as 
well as in the territory of the former USSR.
17
We deem NATO to be an organization which can assist fledgling Azerbaijani state to 
establish close multilateral relations with the western world and get an access to its 
richest experience. Strengthening of independence of Azerbaijan as wefl as other 
independent countries will serve as a real confirmation of the everlasting values of the 
principles which the activities of NATO are built upon.
We appreciate NATO's expressed concern with the situation in the Transcaucasus 
and reaffirmation of the respect for territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence 
of the states of this region, and, in particular, Azerbaijan that has been reflected in the 
Declaration of the NATO Council adopted in January 1994.
The principles of NATO on the basis of which its members regulate yjeir relations 
resolve all emerging disputes among them by peaceful means, develop individual and 
collective capabilities on rebuffing aggression against one of several members of this 
organisation, prove their reievance during many years and could become the ground 
for building a new system of European security in the post-confrontation period.
Young Republic of Azerbaijan which has chosen the road of building independent 
democratic state with market economy looks with a big hope at those states that has 
achieved great success on this way and awaits from them assistance and help. That 
is why we, as many other countries, received with big enthusiasm the NATO's 
Partnership for Peace initiative. North Atlantic Alliance is a guide for us thanks to the 
security that it guarantees to its members as was mentioned by the NATO Secretary 
general Manfred Worner on January 10th, 1994 during the meeting of the NATO 
Heads of State and Government because its the most effective organisation in the 
field of collective security.
We as a state which is in the state of war subjected to aggression on the part of neigh­
bouring Armenia hope that our participation in the NATO Partnership for Peace pro­
gramme will allow us to achieve in the future the just peaceful settlement of the 
Armenian-Azerbaijan conflict, liberate occupied Azerbaijani territories and liquidate all 
the consequences of war. The high authority of NATO may become an important fac­
tor in seizing this bloody war.
/949 -
May 1994
We һорө that joining by Azerbaijan to the Partnership for Peace Programme will give 
us an opportunity to invigorate our participation in the creation of the reliable system 
of the collective security in Europe.
] think that democratic principles tying in foundation of the North Atlantic Alliance will 
promote our successful co-operation, practical elimination of those obstacles that are 
on the way of the peace and stability in Transcaucasian and other regions as well as 
will promote progress and prosperity of all peoples.
Press-Conference by the President of Azerbaijan Heydar Aliyev at the 
International Press-Center in Brussels on May 4, 1994
Dear ladies and gentlemen!
This morning I met with the Prime-Minister of Belgium with whom de discussed issues 
linked to the further development of co-operation between Azerbaijan and Belgium. 
Some time ago we presented drafts of a number of agreements to the Government of 
Belgium. They are presently studied by the Belgian side and the prime-Minister of 
Belgium stated that after these agreements are agreed upon with the relevant regions 
of this country the Government will be ready to sign a Memorandum on co-operation 
between our countries, agreement on trade and economic co-operation, on co-opera­
tion in the sphere of tourism and some others.
The main part of my programme today had to do with the visit to the NATO 
Headquarters. As you are aware back in 1992 NATO adopted a decision on estab­
lishing the North Atlantic Cooperation Council which was joined among others by the 
Republics of the former Soviet Union including Azerbaijan.
In January of that year Heads of State -members of NATO adopted a decision on the 
Partnership for Peace Programme and announced this Programme having invited the 
east European countries and newly independent states that emerged on the territory 
of the former Soviet Union to join it We in Azerbaijan have studied carefully this doc-
19
May 1994
/949 ■ W
ument and found a lot of interesting and attracting elements in it for the Republic of 
Azerbaijan. And proceeding from our principle attitude toward NATO as one of the 
biggest international organisations and proceeding from our respect to NATO which 
throughout its existence was able to accomplish quite a lot in order to stabilise the sit­
uation in Europe and in the whole world, we deemed it possible and necessary to join 
the Partnership for Peace Programme.
Today I met with the NATO Deputy Secretary General, because Secretary General 
Manfred Worner is absent. We had a very interesting conversation. Then I took part in 
the NATO Council meeting and signed the Framework Document of the Partnership for 
Peace Programme. Signing this document we proceed from the fact that young inde­
pendent Azerbaijani state following the way of strengthening its independence, democ­
racy, market economy and further integration with world community, in particular with 
Europe and the West, through co-operation with NATO on the basis of the Partnership 
for Peace Programme will have wider opportunities to implement tasks it faces.
As you are aware, Azerbaijan has been in the state of war with Armenia, already for 
6 years it has been subjected to the military aggression on the part of Armenia. This 
war has inflicted heavy damage to the economy of Azerbaijan and its territorial 
integrity, claimed many lives. More than twenty thousand people perished, twenty per­
cent of the territory of Azerbaijan are currently under occupation of the Armenian 
armed forces. Despite our peaceloving initiatives participation in the settlement of this 
conflict of international organizations including the UN Security Council, CSCE and its 
Minsk Group, the war has not stopped, That is why we, while entering co-operation 
with NATO and signing the document of Partnership for Peace Programme proceed 
from the fact that we will have new opportunities to achieve our goals and our goals 
are - peaceful settlement of the conflict, including cease-fire and halt of military activ­
ities, withdrawal of Armenian armed forces from the occupied Azerbaijani territories, 
promotion of the territorial integrity of Azerbaijan and inviolability of its borders. In this 
process guarantees of security and protection for the Armenian minority in Nagorno 
Karabakh as well as the possibility of considering the autonomous status for Nagorno 
Karabakh are, of course, provided for.
20
May 1994
Proceeding from all these considerations we have taken a decision and today, on 
behalf of the Republic of Azerbaijan I signed the document Partnership for Peace. I 
am satisfied with the meetings and negotiations I had in the NATO Headquarters in an 
amicable atmosphere which surrounded us, with mutual understanding which we 
noted during our meetings and conversations.
[ am satisfied that this document has been signed by Azerbaijan. As Deputy Secre­
tary-General pointed out, Azerbaijan became the fifteenth country which acceded to 
this Programme and among the republics of the former Soviet Union Azerbaijan is the 
fourth country that signed the document. We pin big hopes on the co-operation with 
NATO and I am sure that they will come true. I am ready to take your questions.
Question: I have two questions to you, Mr. President. The first one is that I could hardly 
imagine and did not fully understand what special initiatives may be expected from 
NATO to solve the conflict in Nagorno Karabakh. In this regard I would like to ask you 
if some diplomatic or any other efforts have been discussed during your meetings at 
NATO which NATO could undertake to settle this problem?
And my second question is as follows. Some months ago there were reports in the 
press that the Russian Federation extended unofficial support and assistance to the 
Republic of Armenia in its conflict with your country to exert pressure on you so that 
your country would re-establish union with the Russian Federation on some issues, in 
particular, those pertaining to oil. How real this information could be?
Answer: First, in order to imagine what opportunities our co-operation with NATO will 
open in the settlement of the conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan I would request 
you to get acquainted with the document itself adopted on January 10, 1994 by the 
Heads of NATO Member-States. There are very definite provisions which allow us to 
hope that our participation in the Partnership for Peace Programme will create condi­
tions for NATO's involvement in considering issues related to the conflict between 
Armenia and Azerbaijan. I would not like to elaborate on this topic. I would simply 
request you to take and read all that is very definitely laid down in that document.
21
May 1994
By the way, a half an hour ago when the Deputy Secretary-General of N/ 
answered the journalists1 questions in the NATO Headquarters the NATO De| 
Secretary-General gave a clear answer to this question by saying that NATO alre 
at this time may engage in consultations with Azerbaijan in connection with 
Nagorno-Karabakh conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan.
As far as the second question is concerned, about Russia's rendering assistant 
Armenia in its conflict with Azerbaijan, and desire to put pressure on Azerbai 
including because of the problems related to oil, I can tell you only one thing: there 
Russian forces and Russia's military bases in the territory of Armenia. There are 
Russian forces in the territory of Azerbaijan. The war is going on a daily basis. But 
territory of Armenia, by the way, is not so large, three times smaller than the territ 
of Azerbaijan. And you may come to the conclusions yourself.
Question: Mr President, in your statement you underlined that the war had inflicte 
huge damage to your country, including in terms of economy. In this regard, т г
22
/949 - W '
May 1994
wonder in what way and to what extent this war influenced the export of your oil pro­
duction? In particular, I would appreciate if you could bring any figures that reflect the 
state of affairs in this regard. And to what extent does the war influence the signature 
of any contracts with the western companies?
Answer: The war has really inflicted and continues to inflict a big damage on the econ­
omy of Azerbaijan. You may imagine what kind of damage that would be if twenty per­
cent of the country - and these are fertile lands - are under occupation. There have 
been big industrial and agricultural ventures in these territories, a million of refugees 
from those districts that were settled in other regions of the Republic are in extremely 
difficult social and economic situation. You may imagine the scale of the damage - 
these are billions of dollars. As to you question regarding the damage the war has 
inflicted to the oil industry, the ventures of our oil industry are not located in the zone 
of combat activities but, nevertheless, if a country is in a state of war this certainly influ­
ences all the branches of economy as it is the case in Azerbaijan as well.
23
As to the contracts that we are going to sign with the western companies there are г 
lot of talk and considerations. Naturally, these oil resources of Azerbaijan attract ar 
interest of many countries of the world as well as big companies in the west. 
Azerbaijan thanks to its geopolitical and geographic situation attracts a big economic 
interest of many western countries. The negotiations about signing contracts with the 
oil companies are underway. A new phase of negotiations started on May 2, 1994 in 
Istanbul. The representatives of their companies and the State Oil company ot 
Azerbaijan are currently conducting negotiations there. I think that we are gradually 
approaching the end of the road and it seems to me, the day when we will be able to 
sign oil contracts is not that far away from now.
Question: Mr.President, you have a huge experience of work in the state structures 
both of Azerbaijan and those of the USSR. You were the leader of the Communist 
Party of Azerbaijan and before that headed the Committee on State security of 
Azerbaijan, and later you became a member of the Political Bureau of the CPSU in the 
former USSR. How could you describe the present level of statehood in Azerbaijan? 
And the second question. There has recently been information in the press about the 
fact that according to the President of the Russian Federation Russia intends to 
deploy about thirty military bases beyond its territory in the territory of countries that 
are members of the CIS, and in this regard I would like to learn your opinion whether 
similar development of events with regard to Azerbaijan is acceptable to you?
Answer: I thank you for that you remember, have not forgotten me from my previous 
work. I have really been the leader of the Communist Party of Azerbaijan and one of 
the leaders of the Soviet Union as a member of Politburo and first Vice-Prime Minister 
of the former Soviet Union.
But your question is related to the state system of Azerbaijan of today. Azerbaijan has 
embarked on the way of independent state development and as a president of the 
country I state that independence of Azerbaijan is irreversible and the Republic will go 
further in strengthening its state independence. As an independent state Azerbaijan 
follows and must follow the way of building a law-governed, democratic society which 
means freedom of human being, freedom of conscience, protection of human rights, 
multi-party system, political pluralism, market economy, freedom of entrepreneurshp
May 1994
and' integration to the common human values. I am confident that Azerbaijan will fol­
low this path, anyway as the President of Azerbaijan I will try to achieve this. I am sure 
that the whole Azerbaijani people is of the same opinion.
As to the information indicating that Russia is planning to deploy thirty military bases 
on the territory on the Republics of the former Soviet Union which today are indepen­
dent states t would like to note that these bases have already been deployed in many 
Republics of the former Soviet Union. If we speak about our Transcaucasian region or 
as you call it South Caucasus which include Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijan, I will 
tell that Russian military bases are present both in Georgia and Armenia. Borders 
between Georgia and turkey, between Armenia, Turkey and Iran are guarded by 
Russian border troops. There are no Russian troops in Azerbaijan. I do not know what 
are the plans of Russia. Of course, can have its plans. But Azerbaijan is also an inde­
pendent states and has its own plans.
Question: Mr. President, can you tell me whether Azerbaijan is going to apply for an 
observer status in the OPEC? And do you think it would be possible for you to get the 
status of full member in this international organisation?
Answer: We study this question. As I have already said we are holding negotiations in 
order to conclude a big contract with the consortium of Western oil companies. Results 
of our negotiations on conclusion of these contracts will undoubtedly define the future 
of the development of oil industry in Azerbaijan. Depending on the results we will 
define our further steps.
Question: Mr. President, do not you think that the forthcoming membership of Armenia 
in the Partnership for Peace Programme will lead to the very same situation of help­
lessness in which the CSCE, its Minsk Group, Collective Security Treaty and media­
tory efforts on the settlement of the Armenian-Azerbaijan conflcit have ended? Second 
question: the Partnership for Peace Programme besides consultations including polit­
ical ones envisages also some other elements that is joint exercise, military planning 
and military building. Will Azerbaijan make use of this elements? And another ques­
tion what would be the action by the President of Azerbaijan if a situation occurs when
25
May 1994
the interests of countries-Parties to the CIS Collective Security Treaty and the states 
that joined the Partnership for Peace Programme do not coincide?
Answer: We don't have any information that Armenia is going to accede to the 
Partnership for Peace Programme and even if it accedes to it I think that our co­
operation with NATO will not suffer from that. Moreover, in my opinion, one should not 
make a parallel between NATO and CIS. This is first point, and the second, I do no! 
consider that the capabilities of the CIS are exhausted to solve the conflict between 
Armenia and Azerbaijan in the framework of the Collective Security Treaty. As for the 
co-operation between NATO and Azerbaijan, its principles and fields will be defined in 
the document which we are going to sign after we signed the Partnership for Peace 
Programme. Everything will be envisioned there. In particular, I am not concerned with 
the possibility of some kind of negative results of our co-operation with NATO. On the 
contrary, I am sure it will be very positive.
Question: The Partnership for Peace Programme envisages a provision which gives 
to a country that has acceded to it, in case of threat to its territorial integrity, the right 
to request political consultations in the framework of NATO. Do you intend to make 
use of this right in the near future? And the second question, if you permit. What will 
the future of the Russian- Azerbaijani relations in the economic be?
Answer: Responding to the first question, I will say that having signed the framework 
document of the Partnership for Peace Programme we are not going to stop half way. 
Moreover, we are full of desire to use to the maximum extent possible this co-opera­
tion. I am speaking also, naturally, about consultations.
As far as the relations between Russia and Azerbaijan are concerned I must say that 
very active steps have been recently undertaken to improve our good-neighbourly 
relations and they are really considerably improving, compared to those that existed 
in the recent past. Our meetings with the leaders of Russia - President Boris Yeltsin, 
Prime Minister Victor Chernomyrdin, minister of foreign affairs, minister of defence and 
other officials clearly testify to the fact that we are following the way of further devel­
opment of our economic, cultural, technical and other ties with Russia. Moreover, as
26
May 1994
you are aware, last September we joined-the CIS and cooperate with Russia within 
the framework of the Commonwealth. Prospects of our co-operation are very 
favourable.
Question: As it is known, Azerbaijan plays a role of leader with regard to the Central 
Asian republics. Are your visit and signing documents in the NATO Headquarters a 
preparation for joining the republics of that region to the said documents? And have 
you had consultations with the leadership of the Central Asian republics?
Answer: I have never claimed to be the leader in any region and I am not doing so 
now. We have very good friendly relations with the republic of Central Asia and 
Kazakhstan. However, when we were taking a decision on signing the document of 
the Partnership for Peace Programme we did not consult with anybody, including 
those countries. We have taken this decision absolutely independently and did not 
consider it to be necessary to consult anybody. The position of those countries in rela­
tion to the Partnership for Peace Programme is unknown to me.
Question: It happened so that Azerbaijan has three big neighbours: Russia, Turkey 
and Iran. Along with Russia Azerbaijan is a member of the Collective Security Treaty, 
with Turkey from today after the signature of the framework document of the 
Partnership for Peace Programme we are somehow in the same alliance, and there is 
also Iran. We know that Iran assists Azerbaijan, extends help to Azerbaijani refugees. 
Is it envisaged to conclude a treaty on mutual security with Iran because Iran remains 
left aside in this regard?
Answer: Iran is a very big neighbouring country for Azerbaijan. We have very good, 
friendly relations. In October of last year the President of Iran Mr.Hashemi-Rafsanjani 
was in Azerbaijan on an official visit. We signed then a number of documents which 
would open prospects for the development of interstate relations. There are big 
prospects for co-operation between Azerbaijan and Iran in the field of economy as well 
as in other spheres. If signing of any new documents is needed then, I think, this issue 
will be considered on a case-by-case basis. Iran is really rendering big humanitarian 
assistance to the refugees in azerbaijan. We are thankful to the Iranian Government
27
. ME -
/949 - W
May 1994
for this help and believe in favourable prospects for the development of friendship and 
co-operation between Azerbaijan and Iran.
Question: Speaking about your forthcoming visit to Ankara I wonder if it is related to 
any new directions of co-operation between Azerbaijan and Turkey? And as a follow- 
up to that my second question: who are going to meet with in Turkey?
Answer: Tomorrow, early in the morning I will leave Brussels. On fhe way from 
Brussels to Baky cur plane has to land due to technical reasons in Ankara. I intend to 
use this opportunity and if the leaders of Turkey so desire I will meet them and 
exchange opinions. As this meeting has not been planned in advance, it is very hard 
to say something about it now. as it is known, very close and friendly relations link 
Turkey and Azerbaijan and every meeting of the leaders of our countries, including the 
one which may take place tomorrow, will undoubtedly serve to their strengthening. We 
will get to know tomorrow what will happen tomorow. I am not going to speak about 
that now. Thank you for your attention.
28
^  1949 -
April 1996
MEETING OF THE PRESIDENT OF AZERBAIJAN HEYDAR ALIYEV WITH THE 
NATO SECRETARY-GENERAL JAVIER SOLANA
On April 23, 1996 the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan Heydar Aliyev who was 
on a business visit in Belgium met the Secretary-General of NATO Javier Solana at 
NATO headquarters in Brussels.
Mr.Solana having sincerely welcomed the President of Azerbaijan said that he was 
happy to meet him at the NATO HQ. The Secretary-General stated that the agreement 
signed between the Republic of Azerbaijan and the European Union on partnership and 
co-operation is a very important document in terms of integration of Azerbaijan in 
Europe and on that occasion congratulated the head of our state. The NATO Secretary- 
General informed that he was closely following the events taking piace in the 
Transcaucasus and highly appreciated courageous and brave policy aimed at preserv­
ing and maintaining state independence and sovereignty of Azerbaijan run by President 
Heydar Aliyev, especially emphasizing his great interest and deep respect to the per­
sonality of Heydar Aliyev in NATO. Mr.Solana outlining the essence of the Partnership 
for Peace program underlined that it's main purpose, along with preserving and main­
taining peace and stability in the world, was to render assistance and to strengthen 
independence and sovereignty of states. Cooperation in the framework of this program 
serves only peace. The Secretary-General stressed that preservation and maintenance 
of the independence of Azerbaijan located in a very important geopolitical space had a 
great significance to NATO and emphasized importance of co-operation in restoring 
peace, security and stability in the region for the sake of wealth of the peoples and 
states of the region. The Secretary-General further on spoke about specific ways of co­
operation between Azerbaijan and NATO in the framework of the said program.
President Heydar Aliyev expressed gratitude for kind words as well as his satisfaction 
with visiting NATO HQ once again. He qualified the signing of the Agreement on part­
nership and co-operation between the European Union and Azerbaijan as a huge his­
toric event in the life of our state that opted for close co-operation with international 
organizations after restoration of its independence.
29
/949  -
April 199 6
President of Azerbaijan said that the Republic among the first responded to the appeal 
by NATO in January 1994 to join the Partnership for peace (PFP) program by acced­
ing to it in May of 1994. He stated that he was a supporter of further development of 
that co-operation for the sake of peace and security. It was noted that Azerbaijan 
regarding its state independence to be one of the biggest historic achievements 
attached specific importance to co-operation with NATO.
In the course of the meeting a detailed exchange of views occurred on the issues of 
development of relations between Azerbaijan and NATO, elimination of the armed 
aggression by Armenia against Azerbaijan, restoration of peace and stability in the 
Caucasus
President Heydar Aliyev provided a detailed information to the Secretary General on 
the violation of territorial integrity of Azerbaijan as result of continuing for more than 
eight years aggression by Armenia, occupation of 20 percent of our lands, existence 
of more than 1 million refugees, and stated that Azerbaijan proceeds from a con­
structive position in the peaceful settlement of the conflict and is ready to make cer­
tain concessions.
The head of our state emphasized that non-recognition of Armenia of the territorial 
integrity and inviolability of borders of Azerbaijan, ignoring of demands on evacuation 
of the occupied territories, as well as non-constructive stands at the peaceful negoti­
ations favouring the position of force and military superiority are the main obstacles on 
the way achieve peace.
President Heydar Aliyev briefed Mr. Solana on the difficulties Azerbaijan has been 
phasing while defending its state independence. He shared the view of the Secretary 
General that the restoration of peace stability and security in the Caucasus will lead to 
regional co-operation and promote the welfare of the peoples inhabiting this region,
The exchange of opinions also dwelt on the steps taken by Azerbaijan to build a demo­
cratic, law-governed and secular state, to restore political pluralism multi-party system, 
freedom of expressions press and conscience.
30
г
April 1996
The Head of State Heydar Aliyev handed over to the Secretary general of NATO the 
Presentation Document of the Republic of Azerbaijan within the framework of the 
Partnership for Peace Programme.
At the end the President of Azerbaijan invited Mr. Solana to visit Azerbaijan.
President of the Republic of Azerbaijan Heydar Aliyev and Secretary General of NATO 
Javier Solana appeared before the mass media representatives at the NATO after the 
conclusion of their talks.
Statement by NATO Secretary General Javier Solana
Thank you very much. For me it has been a great pleasure to greet the President of 
Azerbaijan who is not for the first time visiting us. As you may imagine we have talked 
about many things but in particular about the situation in the region. I am very pleased 
with the fact that yesterday countries in the region signed together with the European 
Union an agreement on cooperation. And I am also very pleased to see that yester-
31
/949 -
April 1996
day the Presidents of Azerbaijan and Armenia came together and signed a document 
to continue the cease-fire and they are going to work for lasting peace. But the most 
important thing I would like to tell you at this moment is how much I respect the 
President and how much I value his courage to defend the sovereignty of his country. 
Mr.President, you are welcome here.
Statement by President of the Republic of Azerbaijan 
Heydar Aliyev
Dear Mr.Secretary General!
I would like to express my satisfaction with the visit to the NATO headquarters and my 
talks with you. You have pointed out that it is not my first time here, in May of 1994 I 
visited NATO and signed the "Partnership for Peace Programme". In January 1994 we 
supported your appeal to join this Programme. Indeed, It provides for solid foundation 
to establish peace and calmness on earth. Therefore, Azerbaijan two years ago 
decided to join this Programme and I signed it.
32
/949 - W
April 1996
Mr.Secretary genera), in this connection today I handed over to you the Presentation 
Document of Azerbaijan. I am satisfied with the talks and exchange of opinion held 
with you. They are very Important for the development of our overall relations including 
for the establishment of peace and prosperity in the Caucasus and the Trans- 
caucasus. During our talk we also touched upon the issue of the peaceful settlement 
of Armenian-Azerbaijan conflict.
I would like to express the hope that NATO will do its utmost to resolve this issue by 
peaceful means. As the result of talks that I held with President of Armenia Levon Ter- 
Petrossian in Luxembourg we made a joint statement on the resolution of this issue 
by peaceful means and I provided you with detailed information on that.
The cease-fire regime has been holding for already two years and we together with 
President Ter-Petrossian expressed our commitment to respect it further. Incidentally, 
we continue peaceful negotiations and want to fully resolve the conflict by peaceful 
means. Today I made myself clear to you that in order to achieve that the Armenian 
armed forces must leave the occupied territories of Azerbaijan, more than one million 
of Azerbaijani citizens who became refugees from the occupied territories must return 
to their homes, and the territorial integrity of Azerbaijan must be fully restored. Only in 
that case Nagorno-Karabakh could be granted a high status of autonomy within 
Azerbaijani state.
I would like to reiterate my hope that NATO will exert its efforts to settle the Armenian- 
Azerbaijan conflict on these conditions by peaceful means. We consider the activities 
of NATO to be of peacemaking nature. I wish NATO and its member-states in this 
regard.
Mr.Secretary General, I invited you to come to Azerbaijan on an official visit. You 
accepted this invitation and I would like to express my hope that you will carry out your 
visit in the near future.
You have entered this high post relatively recently and I wish you success at this job.
33
April 1996
Azerbaijan will defend and preserve its state independence. I express to your my 
gratitude for your high evaluation of the policy pursued by me, as well as the practical 
steps in this field. I thank you for our today's talk and your attention to me. I wish you 
once again a new success.
Answering the question of the reporters on whether the Presentation Document could 
be considered as a step taken by Azerbaijan on its way towards full-fledged co-oper­
ation with NATO in the future Mr. Solana responded that this document is a document 
within the framework of the "Partnership for Peace Programme".
34
/949 -
February 1997
SECRETARY-GENERAL OF NATO JAVIER SOLANA ARRIVED IN BAKY
On February 13, 1997 the Secretary-General of NATO Javier Solana arrived in Baky 
on a two-day visit. The head of the North Atlantic Alliance informed the mass-media 
representatives at the Bina Airport that the purpose of his visit to Baky is to discuss a 
wide range of issues pertaining to the relationship between NATO and Azerbaijan, as 
well as problems of regional security.
Responding to a question on the settlement of the Armenian-Azerbaijan conflict the 
NATO Secretary-General said that its settlement would be possible in the framework 
of the OSCE Minsk Group on the basis of the principles adopted in December 1996 at 
the Lisbon Summit. The same day the meeting between Javier Solana and the 
Minister of Defence of Azerbaijan Safar Abiyev took place.
Meeting and Negotiations Between the President of Azerbaijan 
Heydar Aliyev and NATO Secretary-General Javier Solana
On February 13, 1997 a tete-a-tete meeting between the President of the Republic of 
Azerbaijan Heydar Aliyev and NATO Secretary-General Javier Solana took place in 
the Presidential Palace.
Immediately after the tete-a-tete meeting between the President of the Republic of 
Azerbaijan Heydar Aliyev and NATO Secretary-General Javier Solana the negotia­
tions in a wider format were started.
The head of state warmly welcoming Mr.Solana and members of his team expressed 
confidence that the visit by a distinguished guest and the negotiations that take place 
would create a wider understanding about Azerbaijan with the Secretary-General.
President Heydar Aliyev recalling that Azerbaijan in 1994 subscribed to the NATO 
Partnership for Peace Program and further in April 1996 in Brussels handed over its 
Presentation Document stresses as follows: "Thus we accepted NATO Program 
Partnership for Peace and started our co-operation with NATO".
35
February 1997
The head of the Republic evaluating the Partnership for Peace program as a very 
important document emphasized that it is because of that rea son that Azerbaijan 
joined the Program and he considers the co-operation of our country in that field to be 
very substantial.
President Heydar Aliyev recollecting his talks with Mr.Solana on this topic at the NATO 
Headquarters in Brussels in April 1996 as well as the invitation to visit our country, 
expressed his satisfaction with the visit by the Secretary-General to Azerbaijan and 
the Tanscaucasus.
The Head of State speaking about the objectives assigned to Azerbaijan in accor­
dance with the Presentation Document, expressed confidence that the Secretary- 
General will find an opportunity to familiarize himself with the status of their imple­
mentation. The Head of Azerbaijan underlined that there would be a lot of work in that 
field and said as follows: "Dear Secretary-General, I think that the negotiations we 
have had with you will provide for the acceleration of that work".
Then President Heydar Aliyev stressed the particularities of our region and empha­
sized as follows: "Azerbaijan for five years have been a member of the international 
community as an independent state. The main task that my country faces is to 
strengthen and develop its state independence. We are building a democratic, law- 
governed, secular state in Azerbaijan. In November 1995 the first Constitution of our 
independent Republic was adopted. At the same time, for the first time the Parliament 
was elected on democratic principles. Political and economic reforms are imple­
mented in Azerbaijan. We think that democratic principles are solidified and developed 
in Azerbaijan. Political pluralism and protection of human rights have been assured in 
Azerbaijan, many political parties are freely acting, and their majority are in the oppo­
sition. Freedom of press is ensured in the country.
President Heydar Aliyev touching upon serious steps made by Azerbaijan in the field 
of democratic development dwelt in detail upon the work carried out in implementation 
of economic reforms and positive results achieved in this field. The Head of the State 
speaking on realization of the privatisation programme and the adoption of the law "On
36
February 1997
land reform" said that the 
question of giving the land into 
private property had been 
resolved and that in the course 
next two or three years condi- 
I tions will be created for the 
development of free economy.
Speaking on big opportunities 
created for foreign investors in 
order to ensure close co-oper­
ation between the economy of 
Azerbaijan and the world 
economy, as well as the 
results achieved in this sphere 
President Heydar Aliyev spoke 
I in detail on the contracts on 
joint exploitation of oil and gas 
fields of Azerbaijan signed 
with a number of the biggest 
oil companies in the world.
The Head of state noted that Azerbaijan like all the other Republics of the former 
Soviet Union lives through a transitional period and is facing difficulties and big prob­
lems peculiar to this period. He expressed his hope that economic and political 
I reforms underway in the country will remove this difficulties and that Azerbaijan fol- 
j lowing the path of free market economy will achieve positive results.
Emphasizing that the military aggression of Armenia and occupation of 20 percent of 
the territories of Azerbaijan as She result of this aggression hinder the successful 
achievement of these goals, President Heydar Aliyev emphasized that more than 1 
million of our citizens were forcibly ousted from their homes and that the majority of 
them live in difficult conditions in tents.
February 1997
The Head of Republic touching upon the Agreement on the cessation of military oper­
ations reached in May 1994 between Armenia and Azerbaijan and emphasizing that 
this agreement on the cease-fire regime holds for 2 years and 9 months evaluated this 
fact as a positive phenomenon and stated during this period we tried to settle the issue 
by peaceful means.
Speaking about the special document adopted last December at the Lisbon summit by 
the Heads of State and Government of the OSCE member states, pertaining to the 
peaceful settlement of the Armenian-Azerbaijan conflict and containing basic princi­
ples for resolution of this issue President Heydar Aliyev said as follows: "Dear Mr. 
Secretary general, these principles are well-known to you. They are about ensuring 
territorial integrity of Armenia and Azerbaijan, conferring upon Nagorno-Karabakh a 
high status of the self-rule within the Republic of Azerbaijan and ensuring the security 
of the whole population of Nagorno-Karabakh."
The Head of the Republic speaking on the negotiations held on the basis of these prin­
ciples and reminding that OSCE Minsk Group is entrusted with the settlement of the 
Armenian-Azerbaijan conflict also touched upon the changes that took place in the 
Chairmanship of this Group. Underlining that the final decision on this issue will be 
adopted in the near future President Heydar Aliyev said that Russia, France and the 
United States will become the Co-Chairmen of the Minsk Group. He said he is confi­
dent that this issue will be settled soon and the Minsk Group will continue its work 
expeditiously.
The Head of State Heydar Aliyev talking about peace initiatives of our country said as 
follows: "Today I once again declare that Azerbaijan supports the resolution of this mil­
itary conflict by peaceful means. We will try to conduct negotiations on the basis of the 
principles adopted at the Lisbon Summit in order to reach the resolution of the prob­
lem. We wish that Armenia would also arrive at a constructive position in dealing with 
this issue and in such a way we will be able to put an end to the conflict."
President Heydar Aliyev went on to continue: "Mr.Secretary General, the organisation 
headed by you is dealing with the issues related to the European security. Azerbaijan
38
(Z7 .
February 1997
is a part of Europe being a country situated at the south-eastern boundary of the con­
tinent. I hope that you also will display your efforts to ensure the security of our 
Republic, settlement of Armenian-Azerbaijan conflict arid establishment of the stabil­
ity in the region. I hope our meetings and talks and your personal acquaintance with 
Azerbaijan and Trancaucasus wil! attract you even more to the resolution of this 
issue".
The Head of State Heydar Aliyev assured Mr. Solana that his talks in our Republic will 
take place in an atmosphere of hospitality and that he will leave Azerbaijan with good 
impression.
Mr. boiana expressing his gratitude to President Heydar Aliyev for the rendered hos­
pitality and noting that he has hot excellent impressions on our Republic emphasized 
that he is very pleased to have had the opportunity of getting close acquaintance with 
Azerbaijan.
39
February 1997
The Secretary General underlining that he very well remembered the visit of President 
Heydar Aliyev in Brussels last April as well as friendly meetings held during that visit 
characterized today's negotiations as a follow-up to those meetings.
Mr. Solana assessing all his meetings in Baky as very useful and substantial said he 
was pleased to have a new meeting with President Heydar Aliyev. Secretary general 
noting that during this visit he collected broad information on our region which will be 
extremely for his future work said as follows: "Mr. President positive changes under­
way in Azerbaijan are worth of high appraisal and are very important for the future of 
your country".
The Secretary General noting that the theme of today's security related negotiation is 
very important both for NATO and Azerbaijan said that 1997 will be a very important 
year from this standpoint. Mr. Solana said that the security in Europe and in the whole 
world is extremely significant and that no efforts will be spared to achieve it.
Secretary General positively evaluating the partnership between NATO and 
Azerbaijan noted with pleasure the positive results of this co-operation. Mr. Solana 
underlining the co-operation is moving in right direction expressed satisfaction with his 
visit to Baky and promised that he will once again come to Azerbaijan. Mr. Solana 
noted that he would be very pleased to see President Heydar Aliyev in Brussels.
Secretary General once again expressed his thankfulness to the Head of State for the 
hospitality accorded to him in Azerbaijan.
Statements for the Press by President of Azerbaijan 
Heydar Aliyev and NATO Secretary-General Javier Solana
After conclusion of negotiations between President of Azerbaijan Heydar Aliyev and 
NATO Secretary-General Javier Solana in the Presidential palace they made state­
ments for the press.
40
February 1997
to all the Transcaucasian countries - Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijan. I hope that our 
distinguished guest after having personally acquainted himself with the situation in the 
region during his visit, will assist in putting even more efforts for achieving security, 
tranquillity and peace in the region.
We have had a very detailed exchange of views on implementation of the Partnership 
for Peace Program and have come to the conclusion that Azerbaijan has fulfilled the 
tasks attributed to him so far. In the meantime, it is necessary to solve also a number 
of other issues. We deem this co-operation important, we will continue it and provide 
implementation of necessary measures to carry forward this co-operation in the frame­
work of the program agreed upon after this meeting and negotiations.
We consider significant the work done by NATO in order to ensure security in Europe 
We think that even more attention should be paid to the provision of security in the 
Caucasus, in the Transcaucasus, including Azerbaijan and around it, which are a part 
of Europe. After this meeting and conducted negotiations the ties between Azerbaijan 
and NATO are even more expanding. All this has one particular goal - to provide secu­
rity in the region.
Dear Secretary-General,
I express my appreciation to you for your visit to Azerbaijan. I hope that tomorrow you 
will be abie to get acquainted with the capital of Azerbaijan - Baky, the Caspian Sea, 
as well as to see historical monuments in Azerbaijan, meet with the citizens of 
Azerbaijan. I wish to underline again that everywhere in this country you will feel warm 
attitude and hospitality. I wish you all the best in you work and all the success. Thank 
you.
NATO Secretary-General Javier Solana Addressed 
the Session of Milli Majlis (Parliament) of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
The session was opened by Chairman of Milli Mejlis Murtuz Aleskerov who gave the 
floor to the distinguished guest.
42
February 1997
The Statement by the NATO Secretary-General Follows:
Mr.President, Members of the Parliament,
It is a great pleasure to be here today and address this distinguished audience. As you 
know, it is my first visit to your country and I think that it is also the first time that the 
NATO Secretary-General visits your country. I think it is a historic event that shows 
how much the world has changed in the last years. Probabiy, a few years ago this 
image would have been impossible. Let me first of ail say that I am very much 
impressed with the hospitality of your country and I am very much impressed with the 
evolution of your country politically and economically. I had the opportunity in this short 
time to have a very long, interesting and productive conversations with your President 
and also with the Minister of Foreign Affairs and the Minister of Defense on issues of 
common interest. Your country has been participating in the Program «Partnership for 
Peace» of NATO and I am sure that after this trip you will be contributing to the 
Partnership for Peace in a more profound manner. I would like to share with you that 
we have with the President and two Ministers set up a program of work together on PfP 
that would strengthen our bilateral relationship. As you probably know in the coming 
months and in the coming years we are going to take important decisions related to the
43
'/949  - \ 4 V ı
February 1997
security in Europe. Your country has shown interest in getting closer relations with the 
European institutions and also with the Euro-Atlantic institutions and without any doubl 
this visit and these meetings are going to contribute to fostering these relations.
Mr.President, Members of the Parliament,
I do not want to take your time much longer. I want to insist once again that this visit 
has been very fruitful. I have been able to see fantastic and splendid features of this 
country and without any doubt we have created more profound links between NATO 
and your country. Once again let me thank you very very much as representatives oi 
your country for your hospitality and your warm welcome. This is the first visit of the 
Secretary-General of NATO to your country but he can guarantee you that this will not 
be the last.
Mr.President, Members of Parliament, thank you very much.
44
'  /949 - W
February 1997
The Speaker of the Parliament expressed his conviction that the visit by the NATO 
Secretary-General to Azerbaijan and the Transcaucasus would play a big role in cre­
ating lasting peace in our region, and on behalf of the Members of Parliament as well 
as on his own behalf expressed thankfulness to Mr.Javier Solana for his substantive 
and interesting statement at the present session of Milli Mejlis. Speaker of the 
Parliament Murtuz Aleskerov presented Mr.Solana with an information handbook 
about the Republic of Azerbaijan.
The NATO Secretary-General Javier Solana left Baky
On February 14, 1997 the NATO Secretary-General Javier Solana made a sightsee­
ing tour of the city, including the fortress - Ichery Sheher (Inner Town} - histirical site 
of the capita! of Azerbaijan - Baky. Distinguished guest visited the carpet workshop, 
got acquainted with the works of the People's Artist of Azerbaijan Kami! Aliyev. In 
memory of his visit to our Republic Javier Solana was presented with a hand-made 
carpet by Azerbaijani craftswomen.
45
July 1997
MEETING OF HEYDAR ALIYEV,
PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF AZERBAIJAN,
WITH JAVIER SOLANA, THE SECRETARY GENERAL OF NATO
On July 27, 1997 Heydar Aliyev, President of the Republic of Azerbaijan met with 
Javier Solana, the Secretary General of NATO. The leader of our country was pleased 
to meet the Secretary General of NATO.
Mr. Solana praised every meeting with the outstanding politician Heydar Aliyev. He 
noted that he had arrived to New York from Washington today. As soon as he was 
informed that our leader was there, he decided to meet with him.
Mr. Solana, talking about his meeting with the President Clinton in Washington, noted 
that people were anxious to see President Aliyev there.
Mr. Solana praised the first official visit of the President Heydar Aliyev to America as 
a historical event. He emphasized that the visit would be important in the development 
and strengthening of the relations between Azerbaijan and the United States.
The Secretary General talked highly about the close cooperation between NATO and 
Azerbaijan, which joined the Partnership for Peace program of NATO and became a 
member of the European-Atlantic Council. He expressed his assurance that these 
relations would be further developed and strengthened, thanks to farsighted policies 
of President Aliyev.
Mr. Solana positively praised the protection of independence in Azerbaijan, its suc­
cessful implementation of democratic processes, and economic reforms under the 
leadership of Heydar Aliyev. He expressed the support of all international organiza­
tions, including NATO, in all these processes.
The leader of our Republic praised the Secretary General for his sincere words, and 
he praised the visit of Mr. Solana to Azerbaijan as an important event for our country. 
President Aliyev expressed his pleasure on relations between NATO and Azerbaijan
46
'  /949 -
July 1997
The leader of Azerbaijan expressed his pleasure on the agreement signed by Co­
chairmen of the Minsk Group from three big powers, Presidents Bill Clinton (U.S.), 
Boris Yeltsin (Russia) and Jacque Chirac (France). Based on this agreement, the con­
flict should be solved peacefully. President Aliyev expressed great hope that the mili­
tary aggression would be stopped in 1997, He also expressed his intention to discuss 
this issue with President Clinton in the White House.
Mr. Solana expressed his deep respect for the President Heyaar Aliyev one more 
time. He noted he had good memories of his trip to Azerbaijan. He expressed his 
assurance that the first official visit of our leader to the U.S. would be successful and, 
thanks to the farsighted strategy of Heydar Aliyev, the problems facing Azerbaijan 
would be solved in the near future.
The leader of Azerbaijan invited the Secretary General of NATO to Azerbaijan. 
Mr.Solana thanked for the invitation.
48
/ 949 - W
November 1997
EXECUTIVE ORDER No. 692 OF 14 NOVEMBER 1997 
OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF AZERBAIJAN
On measures to further strengthen the cooperation 
between the Republic of Azerbaijan and NATO
The Republic of Azerbaijan is actively participating in the process of pan-European 
security and cooperation founded on the respect for the principles of common and 
indivisible security, the rule of law, sovereignty of states and their territorial integrity.
The Republic of Azerbaijan is actively contributing to the development of international 
cooperation assuming as the basis its sovereign right of independently choosing the 
ways and methods of guaranteeing its national interests and security and aims at the 
integration to Europe as well as Trans-Atlantic security and cooperation structures.
in this connection the Republic of Azerbaijan highly values the role of NATO in the 
development of the pan-European process and guaranteeing peace, security and sta­
bility in Europe. Azerbaijan fully shares the conviction of the North Atlantic Alliance 
countries that cooperation and joint decisions, common values and principles are the 
only way of guaranteeing security and stability in the region. Therefore, as its first step, 
Azerbaijan joined the activities of the North Atlantic Cooperation Council and NATO 
Partnership for Peace Program. On the basis of the already achieved results the 
Republic of Azerbaijan intends to elevate political and military cooperation with NATO 
to a qualitatively new level and to actively use the mechanisms and possibilities that 
are newly created for cooperation in the framework of the Euro-Atlantic Partnership 
Council and the enhanced NATO Partnership for Peace Program.
The Republic of Azerbaijan positively views the decision adopted at the Summit of 
Heads of State of NATO Member-States and Partnership for Peace Member States 
on giving the Partner Countries a right of opening their diplomatic missions in Brussels 
at the NATO Headquarters.
49
November 1997
Therefore, in the near future the Republic of Azerbaijan is going to use the opportu­
nity of strengthening its political and military representation in NATO and will open its 
diplomatic mission at NATO Headquarters in Brussels.
Proceeding from the abovesaid and taking into account the special importance of the 
participation by Azerbaijan in the work of the Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council and the 
NATO Partnership for Peace Program as well as taking into consideration the 
Presentation Document submitted by Azerbaijan to NATO and Executive order No302 
by the President of Azerbaijan dated 19 Aprif 1996 "On Presentation Document of the 
Republic of Azerbaijan in the framework of the PfP Program" and taking note of the 
results of the Summit of Heads of State of NATO Member-States and Partnership for 
Peace Member States held in Madrid on 8-9 July 1998, I hereby decide:
1. To establish a Commission near the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan with 
the following composition:
Najmaddin Sadykhov First Deputy Minister of Defense of the
Republic of Azerbaijan, Head of the General Staff
Artur Rasizade
Chairman of the Commission
Prime Minister of the Republic of Azerbaijan
Hassan Hassanov 
Namig Abbasov 
Safar Abiyev
Members of the Commission
Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Azerbaijan 
Minister of National Security of the Republic of Azerbaijan 
Minister of Defense of the Republic of Azerbaijan
Nadir Akhmedov 
Vafa Guluzade
Minister of Communications of the Republic of Azerbaijan 
State Advisor on Foreign Policy of the Republic 
of Azerbaijan
President of the Academy of Sciences of the Republic 
of Azerbaijan
President of the State Oil Company of the Republic 
of Azerbaijan
Director General of the Azerbaijan Airlines Company
Faramaz Magsudov
Natig Aliyev
Jahangir Askerov
50
November 1997
2. To instruct the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Azerbaijan:
■ to assist Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan to establish relations with the North 
Atlantic Assembly;
- to  elaborate within 15 days the Regulations of the Commission mentioned in para­
graph 1 of present executive order and to present it to the President:
- to undertake necessary measures in order to prepare for signature by Azerbaijan, as 
appropriate, of the Brussels Agreement on the status of forces of NATO Member 
States and Partnership for Peace States of 19 July 1995 as well as the Additional 
Protocol to this Agreement;
■ to hold a meeting of the Atlantic Policy Advisory Group in Baky in the course of 1999, 
in accordance with the agreement reached as a the result of the visit to Baky on 13­
14 February 1996 of the NATO Secretary-General, in cooperation with the relevant 
ministries and governmental institutions;
3. To instruct the Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of Azerbaijan to undertake within 
30 days necessary measures in order to ensure the exchange of the classified infor­
mation with NATO and to purchase and to install necessary equipment required for 
secure communications between the Republic of Azerbaijan and NATO;
4. To instruct the Ministry of Defense of the Republic of Azerbaijan :
- to undertake necessary measures to ensure the participation of the Republic of 
Azerbaijan in the Planning and Review Process of the NATO Partnership for Peace 
Program
- to undertake necessary measures in order to establish and to equip a special unit- 
company to participate in the international military exercises in the framework of the 
NATO Partnership for Peace Program and the peacekeeping activities;
- to provide necessary conditions at the military training institutions of the Republic of 
Azerbaijan to educate military personnel in compliance with the international stan­
dards and relevant NATO requirements;
-to  complete within 15 days the establishment of a "NATO/Partnership for Peace" 
Department at the Baky High Joint Command Military School;
- to provide for, in cooperation with relevant ministries and institutions, the holding of 
preparatory workshop for "Cooperative Demand" exercise, which is in the framework
- 5В* ј /
^ & /Р 4 9  -
November 1997
of the Partnership for Peace Program as well as to ensure the participation, as 
appropriate, of the Republic of Azerbaijan in the "Cooperative Demand" exercise to 
be held in the Turkish Republic in December of 1997;
- to undertake in the immediate future necessary measures to ensure the participation 
of Azerbaijan in the work being done in the Partnership Coordination cell in Mons 
(Belgium);
- to send within 7 days and upon agreeing with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs an offi­
cial from the Ministry of Defense to the Embassy of the Republic of Azerbaijan in 
Vienna (Austria) to provide military expertise at the negotiations held within the 
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the Joint 
Consultative Group (JCG) of the Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) Treaty;
5. To instruct the State Oil Company of the Republic of Azerbaijan:
- In cooperation with the relevant ministries and institutions to set up within 15 days an 
inter-agency working group for joint activities with the NATO experts on pipeline 
security issues;
- In the dates to be agreed upon in the course of 1999 in Baky to hold first working 
session with the NATO experts on pipeline security issues;
6. To instruct the Cabinet of Ministers of.the Republic of Azerbaijan, the "Azerbaijan 
Airlines" State Company and the Academy of Sciences of Azerbaijan to submit pro­
posals on cooperation with the NATO Committee on European Airspace 
Coordination, the NATO Science Committee and the NATO Civil Emergency 
Planning Committee,
Heydar Aliyev 
President of the Republic of Azerbaijan 
The City of Baky 14 November 1997
52
September 1998
SECRETARY-GENERAL OF NATO JAVIER SOLANA ARRIVED IN BAKY
On September 30, 1998 a tete-a-tete meeting of the President of Azerbaijan Mr. 
Heydar Aliyev with NATO Secretary-General Mr. Javier Solana, who was on a visit to 
Azerbaijan, took place in Presidential Palace.
Having warmly welcomed the distinguished guest the Head of State expressed his 
satisfaction on the new visit by NATO Secretary-General to Baky,
Mr.Solana said that he is pleased to come to Azerbaijan once again and delighted with 
the opportunity to meet and have an exchange of views with the Head of our State - 
prominent politician Heydar Aliyev. The two sides recalled with satisfaction their pre­
vious meetings that took place in Lisbon. Madrid and Baky, as well as in the United 
States during the official visit by President Heydar Aliyev to the United States. They 
stressed big importance of these meetings in the establishment and development of 
co-operation between the independent Azerbaijani state and the North Atlantic 
Alliance.
Recalling his visits in May 1994 and in 1996 to Brussels, President Heydar Aliyev said 
as follows: "During my first visit to the NATO Headquarters I subscribed to the 
Partnership for Peace Program that was followed by Presentation Document of 
Azerbaijan that I handed over to you. Since that time our ties have been expanding on 
a permanent basis. Azerbaijan takes active part in the Partnership for Peace 
Program". In the opinion of the Head of State who underlined that Azerbaijan highly 
valued that co-operation and intended to develop it further the present visit by 
Mr.Solana will contribute to discussing some of the issues in that field.
Sharing the ideas expressed by the Head of State of Azerbaijan Javier Solana 
assessed negotiations taken place in the course of the present visit to the capital of 
our country as a continuation and follow-up of the previous meetings. Dwelling on the 
events that occurred in the world at the end of this century he said that "nowadays 
these events are intensively developing becoming those of a global nature, in parti­
cular, security issues are on the agenda. From this point of view one could learn a lot
/949 ■ W
September 1998
during an exchange of views with such an experienced politician as President Heydar 
Aliyev is.
Speaking about the situation that evolved in the Republic, including about large-scale 
reforms that are presently underway, Head of State said that "all this is aimed at build­
ing a law-governed, democratic and secular state which is in transition to market econ­
omy, as well as broadly integrating itself into world economy".
President Heydar Aliyev stressed that it is very important for all at the end of the cen­
tury to achieve security and tranquillity in the world. "This has special relevance and 
importance to Azerbaijan. The Armenian-Azerbaijan conflict, which is the most acute 
problem of our people, has not been put an end to. This not only creates obstacles to 
the security of our independent state but also impedes more intensive development of 
creative processes in our country. Though this conflict inflicted heavy losses and dam­
age on Azerbaijan and more than a million of our citizens have been expelled from 
their native places and became refugees, we are trying to settle this problem by 
peaceful means. More than four years ago we achieved the cease-fire regime which 
has been holding by now".
During the conversation the necessity to solve the Armenian-Azerbaijan conflict on the 
basis of three principles adopted at the Lisbon Summit of the OSCE has been 
stressed. President Heydar Aliyev spoke about the activities of the OSCE Minsk 
Group in this regard as well as about the proposals put forward in order to solve the 
conflict by the Co-Chairmen - Russia, the United States and France. The Head of 
State expressed the hope that this problem may be solved through negotiations by 
peaceful means.
At the meeting an exchange of views related to an event which has been recently in 
the center of attention of the whole world - successfully conducted international con­
ference on the restoration of the Historic Silk Route held in Baky - took place. In the 
opinion of Mr.Solana who underlined that he had followed with great attention this 
event, the conference implemented a new valuable initiative which is not only of 
regional, but also of international significance. The guest highly valued the achieve-
54
September 1998
ment by President Heydar Aliyev who was initiator of convening this conference and 
who provided all the necessary opportunities for its successful work. Further on 
Mr.Solana said that this conference being "a worthy event in which the high-ranking 
representatives of more than thirty countries and international organizations partici­
pated, testifies to the fact that these countries finding themselves in close economic 
co-operation are full of willingness and desire to move into the future together. This is 
not only purely economic issue but also a desire to achieve stability and security". The 
Secretary-Generaly made a special emphasis on the fact that as a result of a wise, far­
sighted policy of President Heydar Aliyev the ties between Asia and Europe are being 
established, the bridge of co-operation is being set up. Implementation of this project 
will open huge opportunities, in particular for Azerbaijan which will become the most 
important and major hub along the Silk Route, even more deepen merger of its econ­
omy with the world economy, enhance its authority and image at the international level.
Expressing thankfulness to Mr.Solana for his kind words, as welt as for his high eval­
uation of the international conference in Baky, President Heydar Aliyev said as fol­
lows: "through restoring ancient Silk Route we are really opening a new page in his­
tory on the eve of the third millennium. For the first time representatives of thirty-two 
countries, including nine heads of state, representatives of thirteen international orga­
nizations gathered in Baky. All of them took a similar stand on this issue". The Head 
of our State reminded that a detailed exchange of views on very important economic 
issues took place, important documents on assistance for the sake of providing peace 
and security on a vast territory which a restored historic Silk Route will go along were 
adopted.
President Heydar Aliyev underlined that Azerbaijan undertakes important steps in this 
field. He believes that co-operation between countries must serve the aims of ensur­
ing security for all peoples of the world, including the security of Azerbaijani people.
Emphasizing his solidarity with the ideas expressed by President of Azerbaijan Javier 
Solana expressed his satisfaction with the fruitful negotiations that were held during 
the day and expressed his wish to once again meet the President of Azerbaijan in the 
future.
/949  - W
September 1998
Ortce again thanking the distinguished guest the President Heydar Aliyev expressed 
his confidence that the next visit of the NATO Secretary General to Azerbaijan and the 
negotiations during that visit will be beneficial to both sides.
Talks Between the Delegations 
of the Republic of Azerbaijan and NATO
On September 30, 1998 talks between the delegations of the Republic of Azerbaijan 
and NATO headed by the President of Azerbaijan Heydar Aliyev and the NATO 
Secretary General Javier Solana were held in the Presidential Palace.
Warmly greeting the distinguished guests President Heydar Aliyev welcomed the del­
egation and expressed his great pleasure to meet Secretary General once again. He 
said: "In May 1994 four years ago I made my first visit to NATO Headquarters in 
Brussels and subscribed to the NATO Partnership for Peace Programme. In April 
1996 I paid my second visit to Brussels and I met you, Mr. Secretary General and I 
submitted to you the Presentation Document on Azerba ijan 's joining the NATO for 
Peace Programme. We have joined this Programme and cooperate with you."
Recalling the first visit to Baky by Secretary General Javier Solana in February of 1997 
as well as the meeting and interesting substantial conversations in Madrid and New 
York the Head of State said: "Now You are again in Azerbaijan. I can say that in the 
course of the last four years the links between Azerbaijan and NATO, as well as 
Azerbaijan's participation in this "Partnership for Peace" Programme have well devel­
oped. We appreciate this and we would like to continue our co-operation. We hope 
that during your visit to Baky we will be able to discuss many pertinent issues in detail."
Thanking President Heydar Aliyev said that it's always a great pleasure for him to 
speak to the Head of Azerbaijani state whom he met three times in the course of last 
year. "The main thing is that we have gathered to review not only our common work 
in accordance with the "Partnership for Peace" Program but to discuss other issues 
related to the security in the world", the Head of NATO emphasized, considering that 
speaking to Heydar Aliyev on the widest range of issues one always can learn a lot. 
"On the eve of the twenty-first century the number of security issues is growing as the
56
September 1998
world changes rapidly. Everything in it becomes global, the initiatives at regional level 
are permanently launched', Javier Solana thinks. According to the head of the North 
Atlantic Alliance a vivid example to that is the international conference on restoration 
of the historical Silk Route which has recently taken place in Baky on the initiative by 
Azerbaijan. Javier Solana stressed:"This conference testifies on the one hand, to the 
globalization and on the other hand, to the regional co-operation, as well as to that 
more than thirty countries gathered at that conference wish to move forward together. 
It was noted that this is an excellent example of interaction for the sake of stability and 
security carried out through economic cooperation, trade, joint initiatives.
The NATO Secretary general believes that on the eve of the next century the issue of 
stabilisation and security should be addressed in a broader context, "Sure, there is a 
practica! meaning of the world stability but there are also other aspects of that word 
which are dealing with the economic development, trade and every thing which will 
make our world safer and more stable in the next cen tu ry", he said.
/949 - \ ^ Ѵ
September 1998
Javier Soiana congratulated President Heydar Aliyev with the proposed initiatives. 
Regarding the NATO-Azerbaijan bilateral relations he said that they are developing 
very well and that he is very pleased with th a t:" We would like NATO and Azerbaijan 
to deepen their bilateral interaction". The Head of NATO thanked President Heydar 
Aliyev for the warm hospitality emphasizing that he is very pleased to be in Baky.
Expressing gratitude to the NATO Secretary general and underlining his full agree­
ment with his statement President Heydar Aliyev said: "Indeed, the world at the end of 
this century is rapidly changing and we moving the 21st century must achieve greater 
security in the world. Stability and security are needed by every country, the whole 
world. But for us, Azerbaijan this has special significance." Speaking about the very 
advantageous geostrategic location of Azerbaijan as well as the desire that it be used 
not only by our Republic but also by all countries with which we cooperate the Head 
of State dwelt upon the problems of Azerbaijan. He said: "You are very well aware that 
the armenian-azerbaijan conflict has not yet been eliminated. As the result of this con­
flict Armenian armed forces occupied twenty percent of Azerbaijan's territory more 
than one million Azerbaijanis have been forcibly expelled from the occupied territories. 
Now they live in tenets in difficult conditions. Four Years ago we stopped the fire. An 
agreement on cease-fire was signed between Armenia and Azerbaijan. But the ques­
tion is not solved. We want to solve by peaceful means. The OSCE Minsk Group and 
its Co-chairmen - Russia, United states and France - are dealing with this issue. We 
hope that we will achieve the solution by peaceful means. But in such a situation we 
are confronted with factors that are of concern to us.
For instance, Despite the existing regime of the cease-fire between Armenia and 
Azerbaijan one billion US dollars worth heavy weaponry, arms and ammunition have been 
secretly and illegally transferred during the past three years from Russia to Armenia. We 
protested against that. But no positive result has been achieved. Or else, location of the 
Armenian military base in Armenia and the presence of its troops on the territory of Georgia 
all this worries us. We aspire to establish peace in the Caucasus. Countries situated in the 
Caucasus are independent states. There is no ground or a need to keep army units or a 
military base of another country on the territory of Armenia and Georgia. No doubt that 
these are factors hindering the ensurance of security in our region - in the Caucasus.
58
September 1998
Expressing gratitude to the Secretary 
General of NATO for his high appraisal 
of the International Conference devo­
ted to the restoration of Great Silk 
route that was held in Baky on 7-8 
September, 1998, President Heydar 
Aliyev said: "Indeed, moving towards 
21st century we tun over a big page in 
history. The participation of the repre­
sentatives of 32 states, including 9 
Presidents and representatives of 13 
international organisations in such 
international conference speaks for the 
fact that all of them have one thing in 
mind. This conference discussed large 
economic issues, at the same time the 
adopted decisions, statements are 
aimed at ensuring peace tranquillity 
and security in the region and in the 
whole along the Silk R ou te ." .
Informing the distinguished guest that 
this morning another international con­
ference - the 10th Congress of the 
Moslems of Caucasus started its work 
in Baky Head of state Heydar Afiyev said: "Representatives from the Caucasian 
states, Islamic states and religious figures participate in the Conference. The main gist 
is the ensurance of peace, tranquillity and security. I am saying this to show that we 
are taking a lot of positive steps in this direction. At the same time a lot of obstacles 
emerge on the road of ensuring peace and security. Our dream and desire are to 
direct all our co-operation toward ensuring security everywhere including in our region. 
I believe that your visit to our region and our today 's  talks also serve that goal. I thank 
your for that."
59
September 1998
Thanking President Heydar Aliyev Mr, Javier Solana said that his visit to Baky will be 
fruitful, effective and successful,
Information of the Press-Service of the Ministry of Defence
On September 30,1998 the Minister of Defence of the Republic of Azerbaijan Colonel- 
General Safar Abiyev received the Secretary-General of NATO Mr.Javier Solana in 
Baky High Joint Command Military School named after the two times Hero of the 
Soviet Union General Azi Aslanov. After the Minister of Defence welcomed the guest 
and had a short meeting with him Javier Solana met with the personnel of the peace­
keeping unit of the armed forces of Azerbaijan and congratulated them on their skil­
fulness demonstrated during "Central Asian Batallion-98" exercise to finish these 
days.
Further on, the guest visited the NATO Partnership for Peace Department in the 
Military School, met with its instructors and made a cordial inscription in the visitors' 
book. The exchange of views between the Minister of Defence Colonel-General Safar 
Abiyev and the guest concerning close co-operation between NATO and Azerbaijan 
as well as military-political situation in the Caucasus region took place.
Joint Press-Conference of President of Azerbaijan Heydar Aliyev 
and the NATO Secretary-General Javier Solana
After the conclusion of negotiations between the delegations of Azerbaijan and NATO 
in the Presidential Palace the President of Azerbaijan Heydar Aliyev and the 
Secretary-General of NATO Javier Solana held a joint press-conference for the rep­
resentatives of the local and foreign mass media.
President Heydar Aliyev and the NATO Secretary-General Javier Solana held a joint 
press-conference for the representatives of local and foreign mass media.
President Heydar Aliyev and the NATO Secretary-General Javier Solana made short 
statements for the journalists. Then they answered to the questions of journalists.
60
September 1998
Statement by the President of Azerbaijan Heydar Aliyev
Dear Mass Media representatives,
You have been present at our negotiations and perhaps there was no need to hold an 
additional meeting. But due to the fact that this has been a part of our plan we thought 
that it was necessary to come to see you.
Further to what you have heard I can say that our negotiations with the Secretary- 
General of NATO Mr.Javier Solana were held in the atmosphere of very good under­
standing and warmth, and we very positively assessed our co-operation between 
Azerbaijan and NATO in the framework of the Partnership for Peace Program. We 
also noted our readiness to continue in the future this co-operation.
Our today's meeting has been very significant. On the eve of that meeting our guest 
Mr.Javier Solana met with the Prime Minister of Azerbaijan, Minister of Defence and 
they held very fruitful negotiations. I think that we will intensify our ties and co-operation.
The Government of Azerbaijan values this co-operation and deems it important. 
Today's meetings and negotiations created a very good basis for the rapid develop­
ment of this co-operation. And now I give the floor to Mr.Secretary-General.
Statement by the Secretary-General of NATO Mr.Javier Solana
I don’t have very much to add to what Mr.President said. Let me tell you that I am very, 
very pleased to be in this country once again and to have the opportunity to meet with 
the President, Prime-Minister, Minister of Defense and to assess how much we have 
done together working through the Partnership for Peace and through the Euro- 
Atlantic Partnership Council (EAPC) since last time I visited this country about a year 
and eight months ago.
There are many things we have done during this period of time but I would like to 
underline two. I would like to thank the Government and people of this country for par­
ticipating in the troops exercises and secondly for participating in the exercises in
/949 -
Septemüer 1998
Central Asia where the allied troops and partner troops were exercising together. And 
that is a symbol of what we are doing together to in order to help guarantee stability 
and peace in the region. And I would like to tell you that we will continue to work in this 
direction in the years to come. And I would like to thank once again the President and 
the Government for the hospitality today and the hours that I will be here tomorrow.
Thank you very much.
This was followed by a questions and answers period.
Question: Mr.Solana, I have a question to you, Sir. NATO today said that the Serbian 
pullout from Kosovo is not adequate and far too slow and expressed its doubts about 
the Serbian intentions there. Does NATO, Sir, have the will to take military action in 
Kosovo. Is it serious about this?
Answer: Let me start by saying that the behavior of Mr.Milosevic will be judged by his 
deeds and not by his words. Too many words had been heard until now from 
Mr.Milosevic, so we have to see how things evolve around. Let me say also that in the 
past few days two very important decisions were taken. One is the resolution of the 
UN Security Council in which it demands the engagement of the President Milosevic. 
Let me remind you that that decision, that resolution was adopted unanimously by the 
Security Council with only one abstention -  by China.
Second - a decision of the North Atlantic Council to start summarize what assets dif­
ferent allied countries could put at the disposal of the military authorities in case action 
would be necessary. This is very important decision. But before that happens the UN 
Security Council has to take a look at the resolution.
Question: During your talks in Baky you stated that NATO is interested in deepening 
its cooperation with Azerbaijan. Do you mean by that development of relations within 
the framework of the Partnership for Peace and the Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council 
or the parties are considering new forms of interaction?
Answer: We were talking about broadening our cooperation within the PfP and EAPC
-  these are two instruments that are used for cooperation by many countries, your 
country is one of them, and that has latitude for deepening our cooperation within PfP 
and EAPC.
62
September 1998
Question: Is there a possibility of NATO signing a Transcaucasus Charter in the future, 
similar to the Baltic Charter?
Answer: We don’t have any Baltic Charter, I am sorry.
Question: But Ukraine and Russia, and also Baltic states...
Answer: We don’t have any Baltic Charter.
Question: When we, a group of Azerbaijani journalists were in Brussels at NATO 
Headquarters at your invitation, you said with regard to the Nagorno Karabakh issue, 
which is the biggest problem of Azerbaijan, that main responsibility in dealing with it 
lies with the OSCE. Today I would like to ask you here in Azerbaijan, in case Armenia 
does not sign the big peace agreement and if then Azerbaijan appeals to NATO what 
would be the reaction of the Alliance?
Answer: I will repeat what I said on this over and over again. I think that this problem 
has the framework in which it should be solved -  the Minsk Group and the agreements 
that were taken at the Lisbon summit of OSCE in 1996 and we don’t have responsi- 
Dility there at this point.
September 1998
Question: Is there a possibility of NATO signing a Transcaucasus Charter in the future, 
similar to the Baltic Charter?
Answer: We don't have any Baltic Charter, I am sorry.
Question: But Ukraine and Russia, and also Baltic states...
Answer: We don’t have any Baltic Charter.
Question: When we, a group of Azerbaijani journalists were in Brussels at NATO 
Headquarters at your invitation, you said with regard to the Nagorno Karabakh issue, 
which is the biggest problem of Azerbaijan, that main responsibility in dealing with it 
lies with the OSCE. Today I would like to ask you here in Azerbaijan, in case Armenia 
does not sign the big peace agreement and if then Azerbaijan appeals to NATO what 
would be the reaction of the Alliance?
Answer: I will repeat what I said on this over and over again I think that this problem 
has the framework in which it should be solved -  the Minsk Group and the agreements 
that were taken at the Lisbon summit of OSCE in 1996 and we don’t have responsi­
bility there at this point.
^ 0 /9 4 9  -
Partnership for Peace
PARTICIPATION OF THE REPUBLIC OF AZERBAIJAN IN THE ACTIVITIES 
WITHIN THE FRAMEWORK OF THE "PARTNERSHIP FOR PEACE" 
PROGRAMME AND PROSPECTS FOR DEVELOPMENT 
OF CO-OPERATION WITH NATO
Taking note of the important role that NATO plays in maintaining security and stability 
in Europe, the Republic of Azerbaijan on May 4, 1994 joined the NATO "Partnership 
for Peace" Programme, in April 1996 the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan sub­
mitted the Presentation Document of the Republic to the NATO Secretary Genera).
After the Presentation Document was handed over the Republic of Azerbaijan takes 
an active part in the activities that are carried out in this field. The following activities 
have been implemented by Azerbaijan in the framework of the PfP programme so far:
- The Individual Partnership Programme is worked out and approved annually;
- In order to achieve closer co-ordination with the NATO structures a Liaison Officer of 
Azerbaijan has been sent to the Partnership Co-ordination Cell in Mons (Belgium);
- In accordance with the Individual Partnership Programme the military servicemen of 
the Republic of Azerbaijan participate in various courses on peacekeeping, 
European security and co-operation, arms control, crisis management, environmen­
tal protection, development of integration and in others that are run in military 
schools, colleges and other NATO institutions;
- Officers of the Armed Forces of Azerbaijan take part in planning, preparation and 
conduct of various multinational exercises devoted to training for peacekeeping, 
humanitarian and other operations
• a peacekeeping unit of the Armed Forces of Azerbaijan participated in "Co-operative 
Banners" exercise in the Kingdom of Norway;
• three officers of the Ministry of Defence were sent to exercise "Co-operative Nugget" 
and "Co-operative Osprey" held in the United States;
• two officers of the Ministry of Defence participated in the preparation and planning of 
"Co-operative Determination" exercise in Romania.
• the Republic of Azerbaijan actively participated in all stages of planning and prepa­
ration of multinational exercise "Co-operative Demand" held in Istanbul between
64
/P49 -
Partnership for Peace
December 1-5, 1997 hosted one of planning workshops and despatched 12 officers 
to participate in this staff exercise.
- a peacekeeping company has been established in the Armed Forces of Azerbaijan 
which undergoes intensive training and is designed for participating in peacekeep­
ing, humanitarian and other operations, as well as multinational exercise;
■ a special NATO/PfP Department has been set up in Armed Forces of Azerbaijan, 
where, in order to achieve compatibility with the NATO standards in the field of 
training of military personnel, the future officers are undergoing courses for further 
full-scale participation in the international military activities. First year cadets started 
to learn English in accordance with a new enhanced programme;
- In close co-ordination with the United States and Germany the officers of the Ministry 
of Defence of the Republic of Azerbaijan are given the regular opportunity to study 
in the Institute of strategic studies of the US Marshall Centre in Garmish-
65
/949  ■ W
Partnership for Peace
Panterkirhen (Germany). In order to familiarise themselves with the Republic of 
Azerbaijan and to exchange experience, official delegations of that institution and the 
US National War College visited Azerbaijan;
- in order to exchange experience, holding lectures and meeting with the military ser­
vicemen of the Armed Forces of the Republic of Azerbaijan the military delegations 
of the Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe (SHAPE) Allied Forces in South 
Eastern Europe (LANDSOUTHEAST) and Partnership Co-ordination Cell (PCC) v r  
ited the country;
- in 1998 the military servicemen of the Armed Forces as observers participated in the 
multinational exercise on crisis management SEMEX at the NATO Headquarters, in 
multinational exercises COOPERATIVE ZENITH in the United States (State of 
Arizona) CO-OPERATIVE TIDE (Halifax, Canada), CO-OPERATIVE BEST EFFORT 
(MACEDONIA), CO-OPERATIVE OLYMPIA (Greece), CO-OPERATIVE KEY 
(Turkey), CENTRAZBAT-98 (Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan) CO-OPERATIVE BEAR
66
Partnership for Peace
(United Kingdom), as well as took part in Initial and Main Planning Conferences for 
CO-OPERATIVE OSPREY, CO-OPERATIVE DETERMINATION and PEACEFUL 
BRIDGE. It is planned to send officers and troops at a squad and a platoon levels to 
enhance participation n such activities;
In the framework of the "in the spirit of PfP" bilateral activities with the Turkish Republic 
a Seminar "Ateshgakh-99': will be held in Baky in November. 1999.
In 1999 the participation of the representatives of the Armed Forces of the Republic of 
Azerbaijan is planned in the following exercises:
SEMEX-99 (Norway), CO-OPERATIVE NUGGET (USA), CO-OPERATIVE DETER­
MINATION (ROMANIA) (one of the preparatory phases will be held in Baky), CO­
OPERATIVE KEY (Turkey), CO-OPERATIVE GUARD, CO-OPERATIVE ZENITH 
(Canada), COOPERATIVE BEAR (United Kingdom), CO-OPERATIVE OSPREY 
(USA), CO-OPERATIVE PARTNER (Bulgaria).
Partnership for Peace
Active participation in the activities for 1999 in accordance with the Individual 
Partnership Programme is planned.
- Taking note of the importance of removing language problems efforts are put in that 
direction.
Given that the Partnership for Peace programme opens wide opportunities for the 
Republic of Azerbaijan on the way of further development of political, economic, cul­
tural, military and military-technical ties with the leading world countries, integration 
within the Euro-Atlantic structures, Azerbaijan actively makes use of its potential in 
implementation of its Individual Partnership Programme.
The co-operation is strengthening and developing in the following areas:
- achieving interoperability;
-defence planning and armed forces building;
- training of personnel;
- combat training and participation in the multinational exercises to implement peace­
keeping and humanitarian tasks:
- democratic control of the armed forces;
- training of peacekeeping and support units (medical or logistic) to participate in 
peacekeeping, humanitarian and other operations;
- provision of training facilities (training centres, fire ranges, airports) to participate in 
the activities on the territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
Azerbaijan supports NATO plans on further enhancement of "Partnership for Peace" 
Programme and on shortening distances between partnership and membership, as 
well as it deems all-side co-operation as a guarantor of its external security.
68
The Republic of Azerbaijan
APPENDICES
THE REPUBLIC OF AZERBAIJAN
Azerbaijan occupies south-eastern part of the Caucasian isthmus which stretches 825 
kilometres along th e Caspian Sea. Almost half of its territory are mountains: in the 
north there is Great Caucasus with the highest peak of the country - mountain 
Bazarduzu (4480 m). In between the mountains there lies the largest Kura-Araks low­
land. Being situated at the junction of Europe and Asia the Republic has a unique 
geopolitical location and since ancient times has maintained its importance in terms of 
world economic and cultural links. The total area of Azerbaijan, which includes also 
Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic is 86,6 thousand square kilometres. In the north 
it borders on the Russian Federation (390 km), in the west - on Armenia (1009 km), 
on Georgia (480 km), in the south-west - on Turkey (12 km) and in the south - on Iran 
(750 km).
The Republic is rich and unique in its natural resources: landscapes vary from hot low­
lands of the dry subtropics to eternal snow and glaciers of highlands. Azerbaijan has 
nine climatic zones out of existing on our planet, ranging from dry and humid sub­
tropical to climate of mountainous tundra with the temperature amplitude of minus 45 
degrees Centigrade to pius 45 degrees in the plains.
The Republic is rich in various minerals. The oil-fields of Apsheron peninsula and the 
Caspian shelf are mostly well-known including a unique sort of oil-cure oil called 
Naftalan. Azerbaijan has considerable reserves of iron-ore and alunites, and the lat­
ter's fields near Ganja are of world significance. Northern slopes of the Small 
Caucasus are known for the variety of other sorts of ores (molybdenum, cobalt and 
arsenic). Here marble is extracted which is no worse than the karrar marble as well as 
tuff, beautiful and solid.
Azerbaijan is famous for its numerous mineral sources - Istisu, Turshsu and Badamly. 
The longest river - Kura (length inside the Republic - 900 km) has substantial reserves 
of hydro-energy (estimated worth of 16 bln kWt per year). There are about 250 lakes
The Republic of Azerbaijan
in the Republic among which there is a unique Binagadi lake which survived through 
nowadays as a place of mass burials of ancient fossil animais
The Caspian Sea - the largest salty lake on Earth, influencing nature and economy of 
Azerbaijan - plays a specific role in the life of the Republic. The layer of the soil vary 
from mountainous meadows of Alpine highlands to sulphuric soil of haif-deserts and 
yellow soil of subtropics. Unique are many types of flora (more than 4 000 kinds) and 
fauna (more than 12 000 species) of the Republic. Eldar pine-trees, Caspian lotus and 
others are included in the Red Book. There are more than a dozen of natural and his­
torical and architectural natural reserves. Kyzylagaj reserve where each year more 
than a million of birds spend winter is of world significance.
Among the Republics of South Caucasus Azerbaijan is the most populated - there are 
more than 7.5 mln people who live there. It holds the leading position in terms of 
increase of population. Every year approximately more than 180 000 children are 
born. There is a relatively high life expectancy in Azerbaijan. There are more than 80
The Republic of Azerbaijan
people at the age of 100 years and more for every 100 000 inhabitants. Longevity is 
a typical phenomenon mostly in Karabakh and Talysh. In the meantime Azerbaijan is 
a youth country. More than one-third of the total population are children (up to 14 years 
old), whereas the able-bodied part of the population constitutes about 60 percent.
Azerbaijan is a multinational Republic. The representatives of more than 90 national­
ities - Azerbaijanis (85%), Russians, Ukrainians, Belarussians, Georgians, Armenians, 
Lezghins, Tatars, Talyshs, Kurds, Tats and other nationalities live there.
The population whose aggregate density is 86 persons per 1 sq.km. is scattered dis­
proportionately. In lowlands and plains where mostly bid industrial and agricultural 
centres are located 80% of the Republic's population are concentrated. The mostly 
densely populated is the Apsheron peninsula (300 persons per 1 sq.km.).
At present, the urban population make up 54% of the whole population of the 
Republic. Along with Baky urban area (2.5 mln inhabitants) the largest cities are Ganja 
(290 000), Sumgait (270 000), Mingechaur (96 000), Ali Bayramli (65 000), Khankendi, 
Lenkoran, Yevlakh, Sheki, Shusha and others. Intensive increase in urban population 
over the recent years is first of all connected with the continuing occupation of 20% of 
the Republic's territory and forcible displacement of people from the places of their 
permanent residence.
Azerbaijan is one of the most ancient homes of the civilization, a country with rich and 
ancient history. For many milennia unique cultural heritage had been created on its 
territory making part treasury of world culture.
Discovery of Azikh cave - one of earliest sites of human being on the Earth as well as 
the discovery of a number of other sites of Stone Age testify to the fact that Azerbaijan 
is a part of the zone of anthropogenesis and is one birthplaces of the human mankind. 
Here one can trace major milestones of the development of the civilization. First politi­
cal institutions emerged in the third millennium B.C. Ninth century B.C. witnessed the 
development of Azerbaijani statehood: Manney Kingdom with economic and cultural 
level of development emerges. Pantheons of deities are created - Manneys believed
71
The Republic of Azerbaijan
in natural phenomena, the Sun and the Moon. In early sixth century B.C. Manney was 
conquered by the power of Midia. The official religion in that period was Zoroastrizm 
the dissemination of which was motivated with self igniting sources of oil and gas.
Substantial role in the development of the independent statehood on the territoru of 
Azerbaijan in ancient times belongs to the states of Atropatena and Albania. The 
name of the ruler - Atropat {translated as "guarded by the god of fire") explains the 
name of the country which had been later transformed into Azerbaijan. The process of 
formation of the Azerbaijani nationality has begun in Atropatena.
In the third fifth century AD. Azerbaijani statehood is strengthened. Christianity arrives 
in Azerbaijan, one of the first apostolic independent Christian churches is created, 
spiritual and secular cultures are developed. Invention of the Albanian alphabet in the 
beginning of the fifth century promoted the development of education.
The Republic of Azerbaijan
Unique monuments of material culture and literature, architectural traditions of that 
period had been preserved till nowadays.
At the beginning of eighth century Azerbaijan was conquered by Arabs and was 
included in the Arab caliphate as a vilayet (province) of Arran. Islam became the dom­
inant religion in Azerbaijan. New traditions and cultures evolved. Azerbaijanis like the 
other peoples who accepted the religion of Islam participated under the common 
name of "Moslems" in the development of the Islamic culture. Azerbaijan presented 
the world with the row of brilliant scientists, poets and architects. Continuity of state­
hood is preserved on the territory of Azerbaijan in the Middle Ages. The states of 
Garagoyunlu and Aggoyunlu as well as the state of Sefevides emerge and find their 
development.
Competition of a number of states in bringing Azerbaijan into the sphere of their influ­
ence resulted in an abrupt internal destabilisation in the 19 th century: a number of ide- 
pendent and half-independent stately entities emerged that were called khanates. At 
the threshold of 18th and 19th centuries contradiction deepens between Iran, Turkey 
and Russia, wars are waged for Azerbaijan.
Turkmenchay Treaty of 1828 concluded between Russia and Iran divided Azerbaijan 
and separated its people: the northern part of Azerbaijan was conquered by Russia 
whereas its southern part fell within the Iranian state.
The 20th century has entered the history of Azerbaijan as a period of radical transfor­
mations in the social economic, public and political as well as cultural spheres of life. 
Intensive development of mining and processing industries has started. Baky became 
the world center of developing and processing of oil, delivering at the beginning of the 
century more than a half of the global and 95 percent of Russian oil. Cultural life 
livened up. Different fields of science started to develop, newspapers and magazines 
are published. Creation of political societies organisations and parties, dissemination 
of progressive democratic ideas promoted the evolution of national self-conscience, 
facilitated the growth of liberation struggle of the people.
73
The Republic of Azerbaijan
February of 1917, collapse 
of monarchy in Russia cre­
ated favorable conditions 
for the further development 
of the national movement 
in its outskirts.
On 28 May 1918 Azer­
baijan resored its state self­
rule, the independent Azer­
baijani Democratic Repub­
lic was proclaimed. Having 
existed for twenty three 
months that Republic on 28 
April 1920 fell down. The 
units of the Red Army 
marched in Baky. Since 
December 1922 Azerbaijan 
had been a part of the 
USSR, having as a union 
republic all attributes of 
statehood: Constitution.
flag, hymn and coat-of-arms. In 1991 the state independence was restored, the 
Constitutional Act on national independence was adopted. On 12 November 1995 the 
Constitution of independent Republic of Azerbaijan enjoying the nation wide support 
was adopted. This event marked a new phase in the history of the Azerbaijani people
- an epoch of struggle for democracy and progress.
In accordance with the Constitution adopted by the nation wide referendum on 12 
November 1995 Azerbaijan is a democratic, law-governed, secular and unitary 
Republic. The state rule is built on the principle of division of powers: legislative, exec­
utive and judicial. The President is the head of the state and he exercises the execu­
tive power and is elected by direct vote for the term of five years. The current
The Republic of Azerbaijan
President of the Republic of Azerbaijan Heydar Aliyev was elected on October 3, 
1993. The legislative power belongs to the Milli Mejlis - a one-chamber Parliament 
which consists of 125 members elected on the basis of majoritative and proportional 
electoral systems for the term of five years. The representatives of eight political par­
ties have obtained deputy mandates at the latest elections to Milli Mejlis that took 
place on 12 November 1995. In total, there are more than thirty political parties and 
movements in the Republic. The largest among them are "New Azerbaijan Party", 
"National Independence of Azerbaijan Party", "Musavat" party, Popular Front of 
Azerbaijan Party, Azerbaijani Social Democratic Party, etc.
The highest body of executive power is the Cabinet of Ministers headed by the Prime 
Minister. The judicial power is exercised by independent courts - Constitutional Court, 
Supreme Court and Highest Economic Court. The official language is Azerbaijani 
which belongs to south-western, Oghuz branch of the Turkic languages. The state 
bodies promote the free use and development of all the languages of various ethnic 
groups, which are taught in schools and used as languages of publications without any 
restrictions. The religion of the majority of the population is Islam. There are also five 
Orthodox Russian, four Armenian-Gregorian, three Jewish, one Orthodox Georgian, 
thirteen Molocan, one protestant, one Krishnaite and one Ba haite communities.
75
The Chronicle of the Armenian Aggression
KARABAKH: THE CHRONICLE OF THE ARMENIAN AGGRESSION
Karabakh is an ancient Azerbaijan land, one of the first centres of human civilization, 
testified by the archaeological excavations in the caves of Azikh, Khanlar and some 
others. Originally Karabakh was a part of the Caucasian Albania - an ancient 
Azerbaijan state, ethnically consisting of the Turkish and the tribes speaking in the 
Caucasian language. And in the Middle Ages Karabakh was a part of the Azerbaijan 
states formations like Atabeys, Eldaghizes, Gara-Goyunlu, Ag-Goyunlu, Safavids. 
With the start of disunity of feudalism some khanates were formed in the Azerbaijan 
territory, among them the Karabakh khanate, the first governor of which was Panah 
Ali-khan. Governor's new residence - Panahabad, a fortress, later called Shusha 
became the capitale of the Karabakh khanate. The Karabakh khanate rapidly devel­
oped during the years of Ibrahim-Khalil khan's reign, establishing diplomatic and com­
mercial relations with other Azerbaijan khanates, as well as with Turkey, Iran, Georgia. 
As a result of the Russian-lran and Russian-Turkey wars in the first third of the XIX 
century the Northern Azerbaijan, including the Karabakh khanate, was made a part of 
Russia. According to the post-war peaceful treaties the migration of the Armenian pop­
ulation from the territory of the neighbouring Moslem states to the territory of former 
Azerbaijan khanates began. More than 1.000.000 Armenian migrants were settled in 
the new lands, including Karabakh. In that way the Russian tsarism tried "to dilute" the 
population of its new Moslem outskirts with Christians. That was the time when the first 
territorial conflicts between the Armenian migrants and local Azerbaijani population 
began.
History testifies: Ш авров Н.И. "Новая угроза русскому делу" (Санкт-Петербург, 1911 
стр. 59-61): "From 1828 to 1830 we settled to Transcaucasus more than 40000 
Persian and 84600 Turkish Armenians and installed them in the best government 
lands of Elizavetopol and Erivan provinces, where the number of the Armenian popu­
lation was very small. Happily ended Turkish war of 1877-79 endowed us with a 
stream of new Asiatic settlers: about 50 thousands Armenians and about 40 thou­
sands Greeks were settled in the Kars region... By the time of the arrival of the re­
appointed governor of the region G.S.Golitsin in 1897 there already were not 100 
thousand of the Armenian settlers as in 1894, but about 900 thousand. The greatest
76
The Chronicle o1 the Armenian Aggression
number of the settlers are of the Armenian origin, from 1 mLn 300 thousand persons 
living in Transcaucasus nowadays, more than 1 mLn don't belong to the native popu­
lation of the region and have been settled here by us.
...Using false testimony, the Armenians, who were landless migrants, seized vast 
areas of lands" belonging to the state.
History testifies: A.C.Грибоедов "Записка о переселении армян из персии в наши 
области" (соч. в 2-х томах. Правда, М. 1971, с. 339 - 341): "The Armenians mostly 
have been settled in lands of the Moslem Landowners.
...The settlers live in crowds and make the Moslem grumble at the lack of space.
... Besides we discussed a great deal of those instilling which should be done to the 
Moslems so as to reconcile them with their burden, which is not going to be long, and 
to eradicate their fears that the Armenians will have the lands for ever which they were 
first allowed to settle.”
Ethnic “Cleansing” and Seizure of Territories
Inspired by the support of the tsarist colonial authorities the Armenian leaders put for­
ward the idea of creation of a buffer "Armenian state1' - The Great Armenia "from sea 
to sea". Their territorial claims cover huge territories of Azerbaijan (Nakhichevan, Zan- 
gezur, Karabakh) and Georgia. Armenian terrorist organizations repeatedly arranged 
bloody massacres of Azerbaijanis in Zangezur, Baku, Karabakh and other places (in 
1895, 1904-1905, 1918 etc.), and thousands of peaceful population turned victims of 
these massacres.
With the decay of the Russian Empire and formation of three independent 
Transcaucasian states (1918-1920) the territorial claims of Armenia led to the begin­
ning of the Armenian Georgian and Armenian-Azerbaijan wars. Hundreds thousand of 
Azerbaijanis were driven out of their native lands, the province of Zangezur was cap­
tured as a result and Nakhchivan was cut off the main land of Azerbaijan. Under the 
pressure of Bolsheviks, who occupied the mountainous part of Karabakh, where the 
Armenian migrants formed the majority as a result of the migration policy of the tsarist
77
The Chronicle of the Armenian Aggression
authorities and ... attacks of the Armenian bandits, Karabakh was declared an 
Armenian autonomy within the territory of Azerbaijan.
Then in 1946, 1961, 1965, 1976 the Armenian leaders again tried to tear away the 
mountainous part of Karabakh from Azerbaijan with the help of the leadership of the 
former USSR.
Attempts of violent seizure of other territories of Azerbaijan included in the mythical 
"Great Armenia", did not cease. 1984 -1.700 hectare of lands were seized in the dis­
trict of Gazakh; 1985 - 40 hectare of lands in the district of Lachin; 1986 - the Armenian 
side tried to capture lands in the district of Gadabey and Gazakh.
Then come the events of February of 1988. The armed Armenian separatists sup­
ported and directed from Armenia began a new large-scale territorial expansion. 
During 1988-93 the Armenian armed formations, using considerable military, political 
and financial support from abroad, carried out mass deportation of the Azerbaijanians 
from Armenia, seized the mountainous part of Karabakh and other seven bordering 
districts - about 20 per cent of the Azerbaijan territory. In December of 1993 - February 
of 1994 - the national army of Azerbaijan repulsed the attacks of the Armenian troops 
in the directions of Beylagan and Tartar and launched a counter attack liberating 25 
populated areas. Dispite of the resolutions of the UN Security Council No 822, 853, 
874, 884 which demand the unconditional evacuation of the occupied Azerbaijani ter­
ritories, the Republic of Armenia violates the UN Charter, the OSCE principles, the 
Paris Charter and continues her aggression against Azerbaijan. The basic norms of 
international law - respect for the territorial integrity and sovereignty of states, inviola­
bility of borders, non-interference into one’s internal affairs, right to live and security of 
millions of Azerbaijanian’s have been violated by Armenia.
Potitical and Legal Aggression
On December 1, 1989, the Armenian parliament together with the National Assembly 
of the Nagorno Karabakh adopted a joint resolution "On the reunification of the 
Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic and the Nagorno Karabakh".
78
The Chronicle of the Armenian Aggression
On January 9,1990 the Supreme Soviet of Armenia adopted the state plan of economic 
development of the Republic for 1990 which also included the Nagorno Karabakh.
In May of 1990 the Parliamentary elections were held in Armenia. 12 electoral districts 
were organized in the Nagorno Karabakh. At present 12 deputies of the Armenian 
Parliament are from the Nagorno Karabakh including Robert Kocharyan, the chairman 
of the so-called Defence Council of the Nagorno Karabakh .
In August of 1990, the Armenian Parliament adopted the "Declaration on the 
sovereignty of Armenia" which again confirmed the joint resolution on the reunification 
of Armenia and the Nagorno Karabakh . In June of 1992, the Armenian Parliament 
passed a resolution in which the following was said in particular:
1. In order to guarantee the security of the Republic of the Nagorno Karabakh and its 
population the Republic of Armenia is to ensure their defence.
2. To consider any document stating that Nagorno Karabakh is an integral part of 
Azerbaijan as unacceptable for the Republic of Armenia.
3. To carry out a purposeful military mobilization in the Republic of Armenia, in con­
nection with the situation to create necessary conditions for observing law and 
order, and take measures for preserving military secrets.
Strictly following the second item of the above mentioned resolution Armenia is the 
only state among the participants of many conferences that rejected the final docu­
ment on the Karabakh conflict, not accepting the part of the document where the ter­
ritorial integrity of Azerbaijan was mentioned:
- the annual conference of the foreign ministers of CSCE countries in 1993 in Rome; 
-o n  April 15, 1994, in Moscow, Armenia again rejected another similiar document -
"Declaration on observance of the sovereignity, territorial integrity and inviolability of 
borders of states" - signed by all the presidents of member states of the Common­
wealth of independent States;
- the summit OSCE countries in 1996 in Lissbon;
79
The Chronicle of the Armenian Aggression
- in September of 1994 a resolution on the unification of monetary systems of Armenia 
and the Nagorno Karabakh was adopted.
We stress these facts because Armenia is a member state of the United Nations, 
OSCE and CIS, the Charters of which recognize the territorial integrity of all member 
states, including Azerbaijan.
Genocide
The policy of ethnic cleansing pursued by the Armenian Nazis in the territory of 
Armenia has been crowned with an absolute result - today not a single Azerbaijani is 
living in the territory of Armenia. They were forcibly driven out by means of extremely 
brutal methods. Out of the 216 killed 57 were women, 5 infants and 18 children. They 
were killed by the doctors in hospitals, tortured, beheaded, burnt alive. The 
Azerbaidjanis were also burnt in the territory of thus, during the Armenian attack to 
Baganis Ayrum, a bordering village with Armenia, 7 Azerbaijanis were driven into the 
shed, were thrown petrol and burnt. The youngest of the victims was several months 
old, and the oldest was 70. The Armenian monsters of cruelty repeated the same ter­
rible act in a farm in the same Karabakh , They burned there 6 people alive. And an 
absolute result was achieved in Karabakh , not a single Azerbaijani remained there. 
But one day the Karabakh tragedy shook the whole world. At night of the 26th of 
February 1992 the Armenian terrorists, supported by division 366 of the joint military 
forces of the Commonwealth of Independent States, seized the Azerbaijani town of 
Khojali. In order to imagine how they were killed, and generally to understand what is 
the meaning of primordial Armenian antiturkism and anti-islamism, we quote a docu­
ment, prepared by the independent authoritative lawyers from Moscow. It is called: 
"Report of the lawyers centre "Memorial" on mass violation of human rights, con­
nected with the seizure of Khojali settlement by the armed formations at night between 
the 25th ■ 26th of February 1992". Let us quote only one example: "The corpses taken 
off to Agdam had the traces of gibing. The doctors of hospital train of Agdam fixed 
more than 4 scalped bodies, one beheaded body. The cases of alive persons being 
scalped were also stated.'
80
The Chronicle of the Armenian Aggression
The Consequences of the Armenian Agression
As a result of "ethnic cleansing", followed by summary massacres, executions and tor­
ture of peaceful inhabitants in Yerevan, Gugark, Masis, Gafan, Spitak and other set­
tlements of the Republic of Armenia, 216 Azerbaijanis including 57 women, 5 infants, 
18 children have been killed. Over 200 thousand Azerbaijanis have been forcibly dri­
ven out from 172 burnt Azerbaijani villages in the Armenian Republic. Today Armenia 
has become the only monoethnic state among the 15 former USSR republics. And in 
Azerbaijan itself, as a result of Armenian aggression, over 800.000 Azerbaijanis from 
the upper part of Karabakh and regions adjoining to it have become refugees. About 
600000 refugees out of 1 million are children, women and old people. More than 
18000 Azerbaijanis, mainly women, old people and children , have been killed by the 
Armenian butchers.
Over 50000 people have been wounded or have been taken hostage, including 320 
women, 173 old people and 71 children. 17000 km of land (about 20% of the territory 
of the whole republic), have been occupied by the Armenian armed forces. The 
Armenian troops control over 100 km of the Azerbaijan frontier with Iran. The total sum 
of damage inflicted by the Armenian aggressors is estimated at over 1 billion dollars. 
More than 6000 industrial, agricultural and construction enterprises, more than 
107000 residential buildings, 741 secondary schools, 219 kindergartens, 250 medical 
centres have been destroyed. More than 300 cultural-historical monuments of 
Azerbaijan, including the Mausoleum of Molla Panah Vagif, U.Hajibeyov's and Bul­
Bul's museums and others have been pillaged and destroyed, thousands of 
Azerbaijani cemeteries have been ruined. Decade long tragedy is still continuing.
81
The Chronicle of the Armenian Aggression
RESULTLESS ACTIVITY 
Resolution No 822 of the UN Security Council
"Reaffirming the respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity of all states in the region, 
reaffirming also the inviolability of international borders and the inadmissibility of the use 
of force for the acquisition of territory, the Security Council... 1. demands ...immediate 
withdrawal of all occupying forces from the Kalbajar district and the other recently occu­
pied areas of Azerbaijan; 2. decides to remain actively seized of the matter."
Resolution No 853 of the UN Security Council
’ Reaffirming the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the the Republic of Azerbaijan 
reaffirming also the inviolability of international borders and the inadmissibility of 
the use of force for acquisition of territory, the Security Council:
1. condemns the seizure of the district of Agdam and of all other recently occupied 
areas of the Azerbaijan Republic;
2. demands ... the immediate, complete and unconditional withdrawal of the occupy­
ing forces involved from the district of Agdam and all other recently occupied areas 
of the Azerbaijan Republic; M .decides to remain activety seized of the matter.”
Resolution No 874 of the UN Security Council
"Reaffirming the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the the Republic of Azerbaijan 
and of all other states in the region, reaffirming also the inviolability of international 
borders and the inadmissibility of the use of force for the acquisition of territoriy, the 
Security Council: - 5. calls for the immediate implementation of the reciprocal and 
urgent steps... including the withdrawal of forces from recently occupied territories..., 
13. decides to remain actively.”
82
Statement of the OSCE
Resolution No 884 of the UN Security Council
"Reaffirming the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the the Republic of Azerbaijan 
and of all other states in the region ... reaffirming also the inviolability of international 
borders and the inadmissibility of the use of force for the acquisition of territory, the 
Security Council: - 1. condemns the occupation of Zangelan district and the city of 
Horadiz...; 4. demands ... unilateral withdrawal of the occupying forces from Zangelan 
district and the city of Horadiz and the withdrawal of the occupying forces from other 
recently occupied areas of the Azerbaijan Republic...: 9. decides to remain actively 
seized of the matter."
Statement of the OSCE Chairman-in-Office
You all know that no progress has been achieved in the last two years to resolve the 
Nagorno-Karabakh conflict and the issue of the territorial integrity of the Republic of 
Azerbaijan, I regret that the efforts of the Co-Chairman of the Minsk Conference to rec­
oncile the views of the parties on the principles for a settlement have been unsuc­
cessful.
Three principles which should from part of the settlement of the Nagorno-Karabakh 
conflict were recommended by the Co-Chairman of the Minsk Conference. These prin­
ciples are supported by all member States of the Minsk Group. They are:
- territorial integrity of the Republic of Armenia and the Azerbaijan Republic;
- legal status of Nagorno-Karabakh defined in an agreement based on self determi­
nation which confers on Nagorno-Karabakh the highest degree of self rule within 
Azerbaijan;
- guaranteed security for Nagorno-Karabakh and its whole population, including 
mutual obligations to ensure compliance by all the Parties with the provisions of the 
settlement.
I regret that one participating State could not accept this. These principles have the 
support of all other participating States.
This statement will be included in the Lisbon Summit documents.
A Z E R B A I J A N
TBILISI
RUSSIA /GEORGIA
К НАС HM AS
/ ~ А  GAKH
CUBAA GSTAfA DAVACHI
П к  OGUZ
ISMAYRXIyşTO vuZ Sa m i  
GANJASKÖJKJfi I  A
KHVZr
ГЖEWLAH AG DASH/2А  П \
SUMGAIT
.TERTER
BAKU
L.&
BtYlAGANTURKEY SAATU
JHL
XiH ARUfi
f t f U L I
DJACTAVH. &LASUVAR
J*illA e»D
The occupied territory of the Nagorno Karabakh region of Azerbaijan 
(former NKAO) -  4388 sq km. -  population of which, according to the 
1989 census, formed «86.1 thousand. 138.6 thousand Armenians 
(73,5%): 47.5 thousand Azerbaijanis -  (25,3%).
As result of ethnic cleansing conducted by the armed forces of the 
republic of Armenia, at! Azerbaijani population of this region was 
ousted.
70ÜDQ0 persons were forced lo leave the homes from |he occupied 
territories of Azerbaijan, which are situated outside the administrative 
ixsrders of the former NKAO.
As result of the aggression of the Republic of Armenia against :he 
Republic of Azerbaijan: - more then 300 settlements, nearly 6000 
industrial, agriculture and other enterprises, more than 150 thousand 
dwellings with total area of 9 roln. sq. m. <1366 sociakullural objects. 
690 secondaries schools. 855 per schools. 490 hospitals and other 
medical facilities, Ю mosques and etc. are burned, looted and ru ned
- 368 clubs, 972 libraries, 85 musical schools, 22 museums. 4 picture 
galleries. 6 state theatres and concert halls are ruined.
- 4Д temples, 31 mosques, 9 historical places, 300 km oi car roads, 1 
min. hectares of agricultural lots, more than 280 thousand hectares 
of forests: more than 200 paleontological, fauna and geological 
monuments ol nature remain of the occupied territories
The damage inflicted upon Azerbaijan as a result of war is estimated 
as exceeding 22 billion US dollars
Lachin region -  1835 sq km. population - 61763 persons: 
occupied -  18 May 1992;
Kelbadjar region -3054 sq km; population - 60698 oersons: 
occupied -  3 April 1993:
Agdam region - 1154 sq km: population -  158000 persons: 
occupied-2 3  July 1993.
Fizuli region -  1386 sq km population -  98958 persons: 
occupied -  23 August 1993:
Jebrail region -  1050 sq km; population -  57125 persons;
occupied -  26 Sep!emben993;
Gubadii region 802 sq km: population -  30678 persons: 
occupied -3 1  Seplember 1993 
Zengilan region - 707 sq km- population -  34924 persons: 
occupied -  28 October 1993;
The territory of Shusha district of the Nagorno Karabakh region pop­
ulated by Azerbaijanis, where a full ethnic cleansing was conducted.
Shusha distric -  289 sq km population -  23156 persons: occupied 
- 8  May 1992:
Refugee camps and settlements
Teni camps
Statement by the Ministry ot Foreign Affairs
Statement by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Azerbaijan
In February 1997, international public opinion got wind of massive deliveries of 
Russian weapons made between 1994 and 1996, unknown to the President and 
Government of the Russian Federation, to the Armenian Republic which had embar­
ked on military aggression against the Republic of Azerbaijan.
The Azerbaijani party was more particularly concerned by the fact that, as we have 
learnt, these deliveries of weapons, particularly heavy armoured vehicles and tactical 
Scud missiles, had assumed exceptional proportions following the conclusion, on 12 
May 1994, of a cease-fire agreement between Azerbaijan and the Republic of 
Armenia, which Azerbaijan respects scrupulously, notwithstanding the fact that the 
Republic of Armenia continues to occupy Azerbaijan's territory.
In the statement it issued on that subject on 21 February 1997, the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs of the Republic of Azerbaijan drew the attention of the international community 
and the leaders of the Russian Federation to the fact that these illegal actions were in 
violation of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations Security Council and of the 
decisions of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe regarding the 
conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan, all of which banned deliveries of weapons 
to the States involved in the dispute, for those deliveries of weapons encouraged the 
escalation and continuation of the occupation of Azerbaijani territory. Furthermore, it 
was indicated that deliveries of Russian military materiel to Armenia were contrary to 
the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe. They undermine the authority of 
the Russian Federation in its capacity as mediator of the settlement of the dispute 
between Armenia and Azerbaijan.
Since the deliveries of Russian weapons to Armenia came to light, the Russian 
Federation has tried to conduct investigations into the matter. In particular, the State 
Duma of the Russian Federation, after having devoted a special debate to the issue, 
asked its Committees on Defence, Security, and Commonwealth of Independent 
States and ties with fellow citizens to conduct a thorough investigation into the facts 
surrounding the illegal deliveries. In its statement of 14 March 1997, the Ministry of
85
Statement by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Azerbaijan expressed the hope that the investigation 
would lead to (he disclosure of the identity of those officials who had been involved in the 
illegal activity regarding the deliveries of Russian weapons to Armenia, that these activi­
ties would be dealt with appropriately at the legal and political level and that the neces­
sary steps would be taken to have the weapons withdrawn from the Republic of Armenia.
On 11 April 1997, the State Duma of the Russian Federation, having heard the report 
of the Chairman of the Defence Committee, Mr, L.Rokhlin, on the illegal deliveries of 
weapons and military materiel valued at one billion United States dollars to Armenia, 
adopted a resolution entitled "Measures to enforce the legislation of the Russian 
Federation concerning deliveries of weapons and military materiel to foreign States".
In this resolution, the State Duma requested the President of the Russian Federation, 
Mr. Boris Yeltsin, to take the necessary political and diplomatic steps to forestall the 
complications which might arise between States on the occasion of illegal deliveries of 
weapons and military materiel to Armenia, and to take detailed measures to prohibit 
similar violations of the legislation concerning deliveries of weapons involving other 
countries and to hold individuals who permitted such violations personally responsible. 
The State Duma of the Russian Federation also asked the Attorney-General of Russia 
to verify the violations of the legislation on deliveries by Russia of weapons and military 
materiel to Armenia and the cases where members of the armed forces of the Russian 
Federation might have used their official functions for reprehensible purposes
In September 1997, Mr.E.Primakov who was then Minister for Foreign Affairs of the 
Russian Federation, acting on instructions from President Boris Yeltsin made a state­
ment in which he set forth the official position of the Russian Federation regarding the 
conclusion, in 1997, between the Russian Federation and Armenia of a treaty on 
friendship, co-operation and mutual assistance which contained, inter alia, an article 
on military co-operation and mutual assistance between the two States. He indicated 
in that statement that "the Russian-Armentan treaty was not directed against 
Azerbaijan and would never be used to benefit those who are hostile to the territorial 
integrity of Azerbaijan” .
/949 -
Statement by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
It also indicated that the leaders of the Russian Federation were concerned with the 
fact that "calls are being made at the present time, especially in Nagorny Karabakh, 
for a settlement of the conflict that has been going on for many years between 
Armenia and Azerbaijan by military means".
In its statement of 19 September 1997, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic 
of Azerbaijan deemed the statement by Mr. Primakov to be positive. However, it was 
again pointed out that during the preparation of the Russian-Armenian treaty no 
account had been taken of the possible negative consequences of the implementation 
of the Treaty both on the process of the peaceful political settlement of the conflict 
between Armenia and Azerbaijan and on bilateral relations between Azerbaijan and 
the Russian Federation. In its statement the Azerbaijani Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
expressed the hope that all the obligations stemming from the Russian-Armenian 
treaty would not enter fully into effect until an overall settlement had been reached to 
the armed conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan, which presupposed the liberation 
of all the occupied territories of the Republic of Azerbaijan, the return of refugees and 
displaced persons to the places of their permanent residence and the normalization of 
relations between Azerbaijan and Armenia.
Unfortunately, as it turns out, not one of the initiatives taken in the Russian Federation 
to look into the facts concerning the massive illegal deliveries of Russian weapons to 
Armenia has been completed and therefore not one has had any result whatsoever. 
What is more, the deliveries of weapons to Armenia are continuing, this time openly and 
legally. Subsequently, the statements by officials of the Russian Federation claiming 
that military cooperation between Russia and Armenia was not directed against 
Azerbaijan have quite simply not been confirmed. That is the conclusion to be drawn 
from the articles of the treaty concluded between the Russian Federation and the 
Republic of Armenia which have been supplemented by more than 20 agreements on 
cooperation in the political and military fields as well as military-technical cooperation.
These conclusions are also borne out by the visit made to Armenia on 14 and 15 July 
1998 by the Minister of Defence of the Russian Federation, Mr. I. Sergeyev during 
which the results of the co-ordination of the future co-operation plans regarding
87
Statement by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
military facilities were officially announced and the timing and budgets were 
determined; also determined were the further development of the Russian military 
base in Armenia and its co-operation with the armed forces of that country including 
the improvement of a system of unified air defence system based, inter alia, on the 
deployment of S-300 surface-to-air missile systems; the plans for delivering modern 
weapons to Armenia, which provided, inter alia, for the modernization of the 
equipment of the 102nd Russian military base, joint military exercises in the presence 
of the Ministers of Defence Russia and Armenia on a traning ground not far from 
Yerevan and plans for the reinforcement of Russian military troops in Armenia by 
reducing Russian forces in Georgia.
In its statement of 18 July 1998, adopted following the visit to Armenia by the Russian 
Minister of Defence, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Azerbaijan indi­
cated that Azerbaijan was concerned, and not without cause, about plans to 
strengthen the strategic military alliance between the Russian Federation and 
Armenia, which cause a serious threat to the process to find a settlement as soon as 
possible and by peaceful means to the conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan and, 
more generally, to the security of the Republic of Azerbaijan, and cast a shadow on 
the role of Russia as a mediator in the settlement.
On 29 July 1998, the Director of the Department of International Military Cooperation 
of the Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation, general L.lvashov, made a state­
ment in which he confirmed the plans of Russian military leaders to replenish the mil­
itary materiel of the 102nd Russian military base established on the territory of 
Armenia and, particularly, to strengthen operational coordination of the military 
machinery of the two countries.
In the statement it Issued on the occasion of General Ivashov's statement, the Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Azerbaijan indicated that the frank and unam­
biguous statements by the above-mentioned military official of the Russian Federation 
strengthened Azerbaijan's apprehension regarding the purpose of this new phase of 
political and military co-operation between Russia and Armenia, which had thus been 
lifted to a qualitatively different strategic level.
88
Statement by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
The statement indicated that for the first time it had been acknowledged in Russia at 
so high an official level that all past and present deliveries of military weapons to 
Armenia had but a single purpose, namely, to strengthen that country's military poten­
tial and to enable it to obtain strategic military superiority over Azerbaijan. The quali­
tative replenishment and expansion of the military capacities of the Russian base, the 
strengthening of operational coordination between Russian military forces and the 
Ministry of Defence of Armenia and the continued deliveries of weapons to Armenia 
left no doubt as to the true intentions of the leaders at the Ministry of Defence of 
Russia regarding shifting the military-strategic balance in the zone of the conflict 
between Armenia and Azerbaijan and throughout the region in favour of Armenia.
On 15 and 16 December 1998, the Commandenn-Chief of the Atr Force of the 
Russian Federation. General A. Kornukov, paid a visit to Armenia during which further 
agreements were concluded in the area of military co-operation between the Russian 
Federation and Armenia. The visit was an occasion for examining specific technical 
questions raised by the considerable strengthening of the 102nd military base estab­
lished in Armenia, the new aircraft unit to be supplied to that base, the improvement 
of the operation of the unified air defence system which was to be equipped with mod­
ern armaments, including S-300 surface-to-air missile systems, and questions con­
cerning of the permanent deployment in the territory of Armenia of Russian MiG-29 
aircraft. In Baku, the frank statements by General Kornukov did not pass unnoticed; it 
was clear that the Russian-Armenian military units might be used against both Turkey 
and Azerbaijan.
In the statement it issued on 19 December 1998 on the occasion of the visit of General 
Kornukov to Yerevan and the further military agreements concluded between Russia 
and Armenia, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Azerbaijan pointed out 
that Azerbaijan was following with concern the expansion of the Russian military pres­
ence in Armenia and in the entire southern Caucasus region and saw it as a factor in 
the tension which not only was not contributing to but was hampering the establish­
ment of peace, stability and security throughout the political area stretching from the 
Caspian Sea to the Black Sea.
Statement by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Azerbaijan considers the military co-operation between Russia and Armenia and the 
Russian military presence in Armenia as a threat to its security particularly since the 
Russian military base is being used to strengthen the military capability of the 
Armenian armed forces and since the military personnel of that base is being used in 
the context of the armed aggression waged by the Republic of Armenia against the 
Republic of Azerbaijan. Azerbaijan believes that the strengthening of Russia's military 
presence in Armenia may have unpredictable consequences for the region and beyond.
Numerous statements issued by officials of the Russian Federation to the effect that 
the Russian military base in Armenia is not directed against Azerbaijan are not credi­
ble. Accordingly, the following question must be asked: Why is Russia maitaining a 
military base in Armenia , a country with which it does not even have a common bor­
der? In order to ward off a possible threat from Iran? But Russia's relations with that 
country are very good. To ward off a threat from Turkey? But if Russian officials are 
to be believed, these two countries have good-neighbourly and friendly relations.
We sometimes hear it said in the Russian Federation, including at the official level, that 
the Russian military base in Armenia is a means of checking the shadow that NATO 
casts on Russia. But everyone knows that the Alliance is expanding to the west of the 
Russian Federation, that is to say thousands of kilometres away from Armenia.
The strengthening of the military and strategic co-operation between Russia and 
Armenia, the continued deliveries of military materiel to Armenia, which merely serve 
to strengthen the latter's military potential, and the inaction, not to say the paralysis, of 
the trilateral committee for the settlement of the problem of weapons deliveries point to 
a different conclusion: these facts demonstrate that there are certain forces in the 
Russian Federation which are plotting in the corridors of power and which are manag­
ing to systematically carry out plans to reduce to zero the efforts made to put an end to 
the arming of Armenia, to settle the conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan by peace­
ful means, to improve relations between the Russian Federation and Azerbaijan and to 
strengthen the role of Russia as a mediator with a view to the settlement of the conflict.
**Ф Т р49
nform ation of the P re s s -S e ^ re  of t^e  j- ’ -flent
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Azerbaijan is authorized to state that 
all the foregoing considerations are cause for deep concern to the Azerbaijani public 
opinion and are forcing the Azerbaijani leaders to consider measures that would guar­
antee the country's security and defend its independence and sovereignty.
Information of the Press-Service of the President 
of the Republic of Azerbaijan
President of the Republic of Azerbaijan Sent a Letter to the President of the Russian 
Federation Boris Yeltsin.
Heydar Aliyev, continuing his dialog with the leadership of the Russian Federation with 
regard to the illegal arms transfers to Armenia deemed it necessary to once again 
draw the attention of President of Russia to this issue.
The letter notes with regret that despite the numerous promises of the Russian side 
the investigation into the arms transfers to Armenia worth 1 billion of US dollars has 
not yielded any results. The office of the Prosecutor-General, the Ministry of Defence 
and other federal executive bodies of Russia have not implemented instructions of the 
President of Russia Boris Yeltsin, the officials involved in that case have not been 
identified and punished, the necessary political and legal assessment of the illegal 
activities on arms transfers has not been made. In the meantime, the work of the tri­
lateral interstate commission set up in connection with this problem was qualified in 
the letter as complete non-action that yielded no result so far.
President Heydar Aliyev outlined that the arming of Armenia by Russia causes dam­
age to friendly ties existing between the Russian Federation and Azerbaijan and fully 
contradicts the spirit and contents of the Treaty on friendship, co-operation and mutual 
security signed between our states.
A special concern in the letter has been expressed over the deployment by Russia in 
Armenia of offensive weapons, the most sophisticated weaponry - S-300 air defense
91
Information of the Press-Service of the President
missile systems and MiG-29 aircraft as well as over the increased military co-opera­
tion between Russia and Armenia. It has been especially emphasized that such mili­
tarization of Armenia is seriously undermining military strategic balance in the region. 
The President of the Republic of Azerbaijan underlines that the Russian Federation, 
as a Co-chairman of the OSCE Minsk Conference, must make full use of its capabili­
ties for a just settlement of the Armenian-Azerbaijan conflict and consolidation of 
peace and tranquillity in the Caucasus. And this would serve both to the enhancement 
of the international authority of Russia and to development of co-operation and friend­
ship between our countries.
Heydar Aliyev stressed that the Azerbaijani side remains committed to the settlement 
of the conflict by peaceful means, to observance of the cease-fire regime up until the 
achievement of peace and intends to develop traditionally friendly ties with Russia.
92
л л г ~ и ѵ і  1^1  \ ]  ѴЗІЛЛ I 1= АЛ I М I__'  IVI I O O I L C  I П П С М  I I I M  U M U L / M O U O
From January 1993 to 
December 1996 the battle 
engineering, arms and military 
property of about $1 billion 
was illegally delivered from 
Russia to Armenia including: 
84 T-72 tanks, 50 BMP-2 
{Armoured Personnel Carrier), 
32 R-17 (SCUD-B) missiles 
and 8 associated launchers. 
27 'KRUG1' surface-to-air sys­
tems with 349 missiles for 
them. 40 missiles for the 
''OSA" surface-to-air systems 
and etc.
There are 2 oil-refinery parts in Baku. 
Five contracts have been signed by: 
Amoco. Agip, BP, Delta, Elf, Exxon, 
Itochu, Lukoil, McDermott, Pennzoil, 
Ramco, SOCAR, Statoil, Total, Turk.
