 1 
Hamlet Isaxanli 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ON  EDUCATION  SYSTEM 
IN  TRANSITION  ECONOMY 
 
A  view  from  Azerbaijan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Khazar University Press  
Baku 
 
 2 
© Khazar University Press, 2006 
All rights reserved 
 
 
 
 
 
Щамлет Исаханлы 
Кечид игтисадиййатында тящсил системи.  
Азярбайъандан бахыш 
 
Китаб мцяллифин бязи бейнялхалг конфрансларда етдийи 
мярузяляр, онунла апарылмыш мцсащибяляр, дяръ 
олунмуш мягаляляр вя щесабатларын мятниндян ибарятдир 
вя инэилисъя илкин материаллардан тяртиб олунмушдур. 
Мцзакиря олунан мясяляляр арасында Азярбайъанын 
Авропа тящсил мяканына доьру щярякяти, юзял вя дювлят 
али мяктябляринин эцълц вя зяиф тяряфляри, щюкумятин тящсил 
сийасяти, тялябяляря хидмят системи, азлыгда галан 
халгларын тящсили, али тящсил оъаьынын мониторинги, али 
мяктяб-сянайе мцнасибятляри йер алмышдыр. 
 
 
 
 
 
Isaxanli, H. A. 
 On education system in transition economy:  
a view from Azerbaijan / H.A. Isaxanli 
ISBN10 9952-20-037-4 
ISBN13 978-9952-20-037-9 
1.  Education-History-Azerbaijan. 2. Higher 
education-Azerbaijan. 3.  Education policy. 
370.94754-dc22 
 
 
 3 
CONTENTS 
 
Capacity Development Strategies in Knowledge and Learning in a 
Country with Transition Economy: The Azerbaijani Case 
(UNDP Global Event: “Capacity Development Strategies: Let the 
Evidence Speak”. Madrid, Spain, 27-29 November 2006) 
 
4 
Higher Education in Azerbaijan  
(UNESCO Conference "Reform of Education System of Azerbaijan for 
Sustainable Future", Paris, France, July 6, 2005  and  
18th International Conference on Higher Education.  Ankara, Turkey, 
August 26-28, 2005) 
 
28 
Student Support System  in Higher Education Institutions 
(UNESCO Conference "Reform of Education System of Azerbaijan", Baku, 
August 24, 2005) 
 
50 
Azerbaijan Moving Towards European Higher Education  Area – 2005  
(Report delivered at the seminar organized by 
Council of Europe and the Ministry of Education of the Republic of 
Azerbaijan, April 20, 2005, Baku) 
 
60 
 
E-Interview with prof. Hamlet Isaxanli  
(The Caspian Crossroads, volume 6, Issue 2, summer 2002,  
The US-Azerbaijan Council, Washington D.C.) 
 
78 
Current Trends in Education in Azerbaijan  
(Caspian Studies Program, Harvard University. A discussion with 
Professor Hamlet Isaxanli, April 25, 2001, Summary by Emily Van Buskirk) 
 
92 
 
Our Education at the Cross Roads  
(The Conference "The Education Reforms in the Republic of Azerbaijan", 
Baku, January 27-28, 1995) 
 
100 
Minority Education Policy in Azerbaijan and Iran  
(IREX supported research project carried out jointly with other co-
authors) 
 
106 
Appendix 1.  Visiting Advisors Program  
(Summary Report of the visit to Khazar University, Baku, 
Azerbaijan, April 25–30, 2006) 
 
214 
 
Appendix 2.  Using Distance Learning Methods For Petroleum  
Industry Technical Training In Baku, Azerbaijan  
by David Maggiori 
 
256 
 
 4 
 
Capacity Development Strategies  
in Knowledge and Learning  
in a Country with Transition Economy:  
The Azerbaijani Case 
 
UNDP Global Event:  
“Capacity Development Strategies: Let the Evidence Speak” 
Madrid, Spain, 27-29 November 2006 
 
 
Hamlet Isaxanli 
(Khazar University, Baku, Azerbaijan) 
 
 
Sustainable development of individuals, institutions and the 
society at large is based on lifelong education and training. In 
particular, an institution’s success in its own field of study directly 
depends on its high-level organizational and institutional culture, 
which is basically a result of education and training. Low-level 
education is also a big obstacle on poverty reduction, because it 
leads to low income level. Poverty of parents, in its turn, makes 
quality education of their children problematic. In other words, 
poverty and poor or incomplete education feed and necessitate 
each other.  
Primary, and then basic (between primary and high, that is 
incomplete middle school according to old Soviet terminology) and 
secondary education are directly aimed at overcoming or reducing 
 5 
illiteracy in the society and receiving general knowledge, which 
constitutes the basis for gaining life and professional skills. That’s 
why, in most countries and societies utmost attention is paid to 
primary, basic and secondary education, which comes before 
higher or vocational-technical education, and states as well as 
international institutions carry out serious works and spend huge 
amounts of money on this issue. Here, difficulties are also related 
with the fact that primary, basic and secondary education 
constitute the largest sector of education (and in general, largest 
sector of human activity!?). 
In the process of rendering education and training an effective tool 
for sustainable development state policy and government’s 
attitude play an important role. It is also crucial that domestic and 
international institutions become actively involved in preparing 
reform programs and providing financial aid. International 
organizations can also play the role of mediator and conciliator 
between the parties by considering international experience as well 
as local culture, and approaching with respect ideas of both the 
state and other interested parties. While saying “interested parties” 
or shareholders here, we mean private and public education 
institutions, relevant government agencies and non-governmental 
organizations, the industry, and business world, etc. 
Modernity in education (as in all other fields of human activity) 
means thinking about today and future in an interrelated manner, 
 6 
and this requires being open to new ideas. A decision can be made 
behind closed doors, but everybody – the state, education centers, 
other institutions and individuals – would benefit if the most 
correct way is found out through open discussions. It is more 
expedient if the truth is found out through exchange of ideas 
between the relevant officials and experts. It is not easy for one 
side to see all delicate details of an issue. Flexibility and 
changeability of rules and ideas are important elements of 
development. At the same time, some instant, unconsidered and 
impulsive changes and innovations do not serve the reform 
process and on the contrary, can even fetter those who are on the 
right way. 
*** 
The world is colorful. There are differences between countries and 
regions in terms of economic-political development and these 
differences can be very big sometimes. There is also variety in 
terms of literacy rate as well as level of educational, scientific and 
cultural development. Whereas in places with high rate of illiteracy 
the main attention is paid to primary, basic and secondary 
education, in economically, politically and culturally developed 
countries and regions of the world all levels of education become a 
topic of hard debate, where focus of issues change from time to 
time, this or that issue is covered more broadly and analyzed more 
deeply, re-distribution of financial resources is debated, etc. In 
 7 
former socialist bloc countries as well as East European and former 
Soviet countries, which are now called transition economies, the 
society used to have a broad and improved network of 
educational, scientific and cultural centers. Positive impact of this 
can be still widely felt. People are literate and go for education. But 
the society now is concerned more with the fundamental problems 
which emerged in the process of collapse of Socialism and 
restoration of Capitalism. Although the period of big crisis is 
behind, ways of development are being sought, and international 
cooperation and integration programs also serve this purpose. Of 
course, political will, effectively working government, struggle 
against corruption and monopolies, and development of 
democracy lead to speedy solution of the problems step by step 
and increasing living standards and moral environment.  
In majority of transition economy countries school education (with 
duration of 11 years – from age of 6 till 17) used to be compulsory 
and free (from tuition and other fees), and at present in most of 
these countries at least basic and secondary education, which 
together last for some 9 years, is compulsory and free. This is one 
of the reasons why in most of these countries primary, basic and 
secondary education as parts of the school education have not been 
separated from each other. That is, they are located in the same 
building and have a single administrative structure. Let us look at 
the main problems existing in this field: 1. Development of 
 8 
infrastructure (constructing building, repairing existing building, 
modernizing laboratories, etc);  
2. Installation or strengthening of ICT (note that only 4.4% of 
schools in Azerbaijan use the Internet); 3. Update of the curriculum 
and textbooks; 4. Re-training of teachers; and 5. Increasing salaries 
(currently, average salary of school teachers is about 110 US 
dollars). 
The first problem is gradually being resolved, but is still very far 
from full solution. This problem is apparent in the fact that number 
of students at schools is too high and they have to come to school 
in two, sometimes three shifts. Moreover, as a result of Armenian-
Azerbaijani conflict over Nagorno Karabakh, a lot of families 
became refugees and this makes the problem even harder and 
necessitates speedy development of infrastructure. One difference 
from the Socialist-Soviet times must be noted here: Part of the 
students in Azerbaijan (the available statistical data on this issue 
does not seem credible) leave school after 9-year education and 
either go for earning money to support their families or go to 
vocational-technical schools. According to some sources, students 
who leave schools at the age of 15-16 constitute 4.3% of the total; 
among students at the age of 16-17 this percentage is much higher 
– 18.8%.  
*** 
 9 
At this point let us briefly touch upon the issue of preschool 
education too. According to statistics, in 2005 only 20% (according 
to an alternative source, only 12%) of children at the age of 3 to 6 
went to kindergarten. Refugees inhabited majority of kindergarten 
buildings. At present, a large part of kindergarten buildings are 
opened for privatization with the condition of not changing their 
educational-teaching profile. If this privatization process is carried 
out successfully, kindergartens may improve and increase their 
quality as a result of the development of private sector in this field. 
However, the possibility is not low that the principle of keeping 
their educational-teaching profile intact will be violated. 
Flourishing construction sector is eager to use territories of 
kindergartens for constructing living and office buildings, and 
keep only a small symbolic part of them as kindergarten. High 
level of initial privatization prices as if reveals this threat.  
Vocational-technical schools are in big crisis. Their number is 
becoming smaller and smaller, and even those who survive cannot 
analyze changing demands and adapt to them. Although transition 
from planned economy to market economy demands sharp change 
of this sector in terms of its form and content, this change has not 
yet happened. In my opinion, this sector can get the opportunity to 
revive itself and become feasible well functioning only as part of 
the private or non-governmental sectors. Instructor/student ratio 
here is very big (around 1/6) and curricula are totally useless. This 
sector could also contribute to the struggle against unemployment 
 10 
and poverty. As a very bright example, we can see two vocational - 
technical schools founded by ADRA in two regions of Azerbaijan 
(Ganja and Aghcabadi). Adapting to the market demands, 
establishing relevant physical plant and functional equipment, 
selecting good teacher and masters, and effective administration 
does not make one wait too long for good results. 
*** 
Access to higher education has become one of the most serious 
problems. There is a gap between general (secondary, high) and 
higher education. Low quality of teaching at secondary schools as 
well as material and especially, moral erosion of schools renders it 
inevitable for students and parents to use service of private tutors. 
Private tutorship has become a spreading shadow industry. 
Preliminary researches show that at least 45% of teachers and 55% 
of secondary school students are involved in this industry. Decline 
of vocational-technical schools and non-attractiveness of technical 
colleges giving sub-Bachelor degree increases problems after 
school education. The fact that vocational-technical two year (after 
high school) colleges could not establish a system similar to the 
American system of Community Colleges, in other words, lack of 
possibility to get accepted to a higher education institution after 
completion of two-year college education minimizes development 
opportunities both for these colleges as well as their students. Of 
course, the state bears the main responsibility in this issue. In other 
 11 
words, here, determination of correct state policy becomes a crucial 
issue.  
Unfortunately, in this field, that is, in the state policy concerning 
access to higher education, there are certain aspects that are 
difficult to understand with rational mind. In terms of the 
proportion of students in higher education from the relevant age 
group (17-21 or 18-22) Azerbaijan is far behind not only advanced 
countries, but also its former Soviet neighbors and from year to 
year this gap is becoming even bigger and bigger.  
Let us give some statistics for the year 2004. OECD, the group of 
countries leading in terms of economic, scientific and technological 
power, is also leading in terms of the rate of participation in 
education. Gross enrollment rate in tertiary education in OECD is 
71.2% on the average. The group of Eastern Europe and Central 
Asia is in the second place with an average of 49.8%. Leaders of 
this group have achieved results comparable to OECD countries in 
this field. Some good examples are Belarus – 60.5%, Estonia – 
65.1%, Hungary – 59.6, Latvia – 74.3%, Lithuania – 73.2%, Poland – 
61%, Russia – 68.2%, Ukraine – 65.5%. In a significant part of 
countries in this group (for example, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, 
Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Romania) the participation rate 
is around 40-50%. Among countries lagging behind are Armenia – 
26.2%, Tajikistan – 16.4%, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan (although 
concrete statistical data on these countries are not available, the 
 12 
rate of participation in these two countries are estimated at 
approximately 20-21% and 15-16% respectively). The participation 
rate in Azerbaijan is 14.8%. 
According to the reports of the State Commission for Student 
Admission, beginning from 2002 number of individuals applying 
for admission has been rising, but the admission plan has been 
decreasing. Here, by saying “admission plan”, we mean the high-
rank state officials’ decision which determines the yearly 
maximum number of students to be admitted to each major for 
each higher education institution. It must be noted that in 
Azerbaijan these officials every year determine appropriate majors 
and the number of students to be admitted to these departments 
not only for public but also for private universities. Sometimes, the 
government can, without any rational explanation, even prohibit 
admission of students to a field of study, for which a university has 
spent a lot of funds and where high quality of education has been 
attained (!?).  
So the ratios between high school graduates, admission plan and 
those who were admitted to higher education institutions 
immediately after graduation from the school for 2002-2006 are as 
follows: 
Admission 
Years Number of graduates 
Admission 
plan Number As percentage 
of graduates 
2002 57.258 27.577 8.145 14.2 
 13 
2003 100.968 27.462 19.527 16 
2004 126.427 28.475 20.278 16 
2005 123.108 28.785 22.282 18.1 
2006 115.414 25.629 18.384 15.9 
The situation with regard to student admission to private 
universities is even worse: 
Admission 
Years Number of applications 
Admission 
plan Number As persentage of applicants 
2002 7.984 3.119 793 9.9 
2003 13.642 4.025 2.448 18.1 
2004 18.742 4.820 3.187 18.7 
2005 18.967 5.200 4.906 25.9 
2006 19.194 3.150 2.713 14.1 
 
Even this admission plan is not completely fulfilled due to certain 
shortcomings in admission principles. That means higher 
education institutions, especially private ones, are not even given 
the number of students determined by the government officials. 
Thousands of applicants with higher test scores are left out and 
thousand others with lower test scores receive admission. Those 
left out despite high test scores apply to private education 
institutions for admission, but the government does not permit 
private education institutions to admit them (?) – the main reason 
of this is extreme centralization in the issue of admission.  
For the purpose of comparison, let’s see the percentage of 
admission to higher education institutions in the year of 
graduation from high school in countries with various levels of 
 14 
economic development for the year 2000: in Sweden 67% of school 
graduates entered higher education institutions, in Hungary – 65%, 
in Norway – 59%, in USA (in 2001) – 46%, Great Britain – 46%, 
South Korea – 45%, Japan – 39%, France – 37%, Slovakia – 37%, 
Germany – 30%, Mexico – 26%, Czech Republic – 25%, Turkey – 
21%. As it can bee seen in the example of these countries, the 
lowest admission to higher education institutions in the year of 
graduation from school is 21% (Turkey) and the highest rate is 
nearly 70%. It is a notable fact that, some of the former Socialist 
bloc countries do not lag behind and are even among the leaders in 
this field. However, Azerbaijan, with 15.9%, is lagging far behind 
in this field.  
*** 
What is behind the government’s clearly controversial decisions 
regarding student admission?  
1. Maybe, low number of higher education institutions? 
Absolutely, no. At present, 33 public and 14 private higher 
education institutions function in Azerbaijan. Some of these 
institutions are capable of educating more students than they 
are doing now. 
2. Maybe, the state is doing this because of the problem of 
increasing expenditures on education? It is true that funding of 
public higher education institutions is mainly up to the state. 
 15 
However, the public universities have increased quota of paid 
education, which means state funding does not necessarily 
increase in the same rate with the number of students. In some 
public universities, number of people in paid education 
constitute about half of the total number of students. On the 
other hand, the state does not provide private higher education 
institutions with any financing. This means, admitting more 
students to private higher education institutions (or to some 
best of them) does not increase expenditures of the state. On 
the contrary, it would help the state in planning its 
expenditures more effectively and optimally. 
3. Maybe, quality, content and form of education do not satisfy 
the state? True, quality of higher education in the country is 
not so high and unfortunately, the scale of corruption in 
education is not low. However, we also have certain higher 
education institutions that are absolutely free from corruption 
and are exemplary in terms of the form and substance of 
education, and with high reputation inside as well as outside 
the country. But it is one of the biggest paradoxes of our days 
that student admission is decreased exactly to these higher 
education institutions. It would be more logical, taking also 
into account the international experience, if the state appealed 
to higher education institutions providing quality education 
(and free from corruption), saying “admit more students” (and 
if the state extended certain assistance to them).  
 16 
4. Maybe, test scores in the admission exam are too low and in 
order to increase quality of education it is necessary to admit 
small number of students? Although this idea can look 
substantiated at first sight, in general, it is not correct. First of 
all, because a three-hour exam that is held only once a year 
cannot be enough to test or measure the student’s knowledge, 
skills and motivation. Secondly, as noted above, there are 
thousands of cases in which, due to shortcomings in principle 
of placement at higher education institutions, individuals who 
received lower scores were admitted to higher education 
institutions, but those with higher scores were left out (?). 
Thirdly, I would like to give an example from admission 
process of this year. In 2006, number of those who received 
“very good” and “excellent” scores in the test was 29.859 
(according to State Commission for Student Admission’s data), 
but the admission plan, as mentioned before, was 25.629 and 
even that plan was not fulfilled (23.817 were admitted). 
The State Commission for Student Admission does its work 
professionally and honestly, and I deem it necessary to 
acknowledge this. The shortcomings we discuss (as well as those 
we don’t discuss) here are caused by incompleteness and 
unsystematic nature of the education policy. Organization of 
student admission appropriately and seriously is only one part, i.e. 
technical part, of the story. The trouble is in admission, and in 
general, in education policy, and this problem is becoming more 
 17 
and more apparent. In fact, the state does not deliberately make 
things difficult – the state cannot have such an interest. It is the 
state, who bears the responsibility for providing stability in all 
spheres of life in the country. From this perspective, it is also 
natural that the state acts in a conservative way on some issues. 
But what brought us to this situation is lack of education policy 
and a serious education conception, taking care for the present and 
looking to the future. Thus, without a clear vision, we wander to 
the left and right and sometimes even go the reverse way – back. 
With minor exceptions, what we call educational reforms today are 
not so profound and consider neither the international nor our 
own, in many cases, bitter, experience.  
*** 
Let us also briefly look at the important steps and achieved 
successes in the field of education (in chronological order): 1. 
Creation and activity of private education sector, despite all the 
shortcomings peculiar to education centers (good examples of 
success stories in fighting corruption can be told only about some 
private higher education institutions!). 2. Creation and functioning 
of a centralized test system for student admission (despite all 
shortcomings created by unprecedented extreme level of 
centralization). 3. Revitalization in construction of new schools and 
rehabilitation of old ones (basically carried out through 
 18 
sponsorship of Heydar Aliyev Foundation). 4. Publication of books 
in Latin Azeri script with the funding of the state. 
*** 
And finally, let us touch upon some important issues related with 
development of higher education and their solution. 
Increasing the quality in education has always been one of the 
pivotal issues in all civilized countries. However, in transition 
economies and states which recently gained independence, overall 
conception of education is being revised and educational reform 
and reconstruction are widely discussed. During this process ideas 
may confront and usually the government keeps the situation 
under control not with a strategic vision, but through tactical steps. 
In the modern world, usually accreditation commissions function 
as the agency for evaluating quality of education. However, in 
transition countries, subordination of such commissions frequently 
changes from one institution to another (indeed, new commissions 
are formed), their aims and responsibilities are not clear, and the 
decisions they make do not live long. These commissions are not 
able to make decisions based on their evaluations and to show the 
ways and allow time to institutions for overcoming shortcomings. 
The result of accreditation does not affect decisions on funding and 
other privileges to be given to an institution; it only determines 
whether a higher education institution or a particular academic 
unit of it can function or it must be closed down. The decisions are 
 19 
not always correct and objective. Patronage from outside, 
unnecessary politicization attempts and corruption around 
accreditation – all of which are characteristic to transition countries 
– make things even more complicated. In my opinion, it would be 
possible to solve this problem if accreditation was done by 
independent public accreditation agencies, which are not 
subordinated to the government or any other higher agency, 
jointly with professional associations in various fields of arts and 
sciences.  Participation of appropriate international institutions 
and foreign experts in these accreditation commissions would also 
contribute greatly. Specialists educated abroad and their alumnae 
type of associations too can play an important role in this. On the 
other hand, it is possible to use services of regional accreditation 
institutions, based joint activities with some neighboring and other 
countries, also including European ones. Within the framework of 
the Bologna Process and creation of European Higher Education 
Area, it is envisaged to create Pan-European accreditation agencies 
and to give right to higher education institutions functioning in the 
European education area to apply to them for accreditation.  
Establishment of broad cooperation networks inside the country, 
in the region and worldwide has become a necessity for the 
education institutions for the purpose of globalization and 
capacity-building. Consultations on the education policy, 
awarding joint degrees, twinning programs, and their accreditation 
can help with increasing quality of education to some extent. This 
 20 
networking activity also plays an important role in strengthening 
autonomy of an education institution and decreasing its 
dependence on the government.  
*** 
Let us touch upon another issue with regard to financing 
education. Direct financing of public education institutions by the 
state does not serve the purpose of development of higher 
education institutions on a competitive basis. All public higher 
education institutions get their “share” regardless of the quality of 
their education. However, all interested parties would benefit if the 
state financed not higher education institutions but the students 
who received high scores in the State Admission Test and if these 
students were allowed to use these funds to study at a higher 
education institution of their own choice. In this case, the state 
would be able to distribute funds more fairly without increasing 
them and higher education institutions would strive for increasing 
quality of their education in order to attract holders of state 
scholarships. In this way of distribution, private education 
institutions too would indirectly get the chance to receive from the 
state some financial assistance they deserve. In turn, prospective 
students with low financial opportunities would not be forced to 
get free but low-quality education, and would be able to study at 
their own chosen institution. 
 21 
The ways for solution of these and many other important problems 
should be envisaged in the country’s Law on Education. 
Unfortunately, as some provisions of the Law on Education 
promulgated in 1992 have been recently frozen and some other 
provisions are outdated, education in the country is based not on 
law but on lobbying and interpersonal relations. Maybe this is not 
a tragedy. But from the perspective of formulating our education 
policy, it is important to consider broadly and deeply the changing 
world and modern tendencies in organization of scientific and 
teaching activities while drafting and promulgating the law.  
*** 
It is also important to note here the issue of strengthening research 
activities and the deep crisis that Academy of Sciences is living 
through. Functioning of higher education institutions and the 
Academy of Sciences separately from each other does not the 
demand of the time. In general, initiating very large scale research 
activities and financing numerous scientific-research institutes, 
which was a typical characteristic of the Soviet period, is not 
appropriate under current circumstances. Moreover, the level of 
research activities has become significantly lower (there are certain 
objective indicators of this such as ISI, SCI, SSCI, A&HCI 
international citation indexes). A very small part of researchers at 
the Academy of Sciences is actively involved in research activities; 
vast majority of them live at the expense of others, or more 
 22 
correctly, with the charity of the state. An correct policy of the state 
concerning finance of scientific, educational and other activities is 
not just indexed to the rising funding, but it also crucial how 
effectively the funds are utilized. It is important to carry out 
serious reforms, considering the international practice and an 
economic development strategy that is called “knowledge 
economy”. Delaying such reforms means delaying development of 
the country. First steps in this direction can be bringing together 
and uniting research institutes of the Academy of Sciences with 
higher education institutions (it can be discussed how it could be 
done) and to turn the Ministry of Education to the Ministry of 
Science (Research) and Education, as it is the case in many 
countries of the world.  
*** 
Azerbaijan is a rich oil and gas country. The endowments existing 
under the ground can provide opportunities for welfare on the 
ground. High literacy rate of the population inherited from the 
socialist times, existence of convenient climatic and agricultural 
zones in the country, as well as, the role of the country as “East of 
West”, “West of East”, “North of South” and “South of North” can 
give an impetus to the country’s rapid development. It is not 
surprising that Azerbaijan is the leading country in the world in 
terms of GDP increase (approximately 30% in 2006). At present, 
emphasizing the role of oil (that is, the “black gold”) wealth in 
 23 
human development, the government has initiated a state program 
called “Converting black gold into human gold”. The program also 
covers development of education, within the framework of which 
a scholarship program for training Azerbaijani citizens abroad and 
in the country, is underway. It is also important to prepare a loan 
or credit program for Azerbaijani citizens who want to study, 
especially, for those who strive to get quality education at paid 
education institutions in Azerbaijan. On the other hand, the 
strategy for development of education should include not only 
individual scholarships for students, but also institutional grants, 
to be given on a competitive basis, for funding cooperation and 
partnership programs between Azerbaijani and foreign education 
institutions. 
In transition countries, it is clear to everybody when the transition 
started, but it has not been broadly discussed when it will end. The 
history will have its own say on this issue, but I think, we will not 
need to wait too long. In countries with large pace of economic 
growth, like Azerbaijan, development of scientific research and 
education can help with completing the transition rapidly, 
confidently and with fewer losses. And significant international 
institutions, such as UNDP, should contribute to this process. 
Thank you for your attention! 
Questions-Answers 
 24 
Q. 1. Besides training specialist, civil education is also important. 
What can you say on this issue? 
A - In ancient primitive societies not education but training played 
the main role. Both family and community were trying to train a 
character in the child. Through training they brought up the child 
with skills and habits necessary for the community and its growing 
member – the child. When demand for education increased, there 
was left less time for training and upbringing. The child spent 
nearly all day for going to school and preparing homework. And 
the issue of upbringing (moral education) was up to the family. 
However, the family alone is powerless in educating citizens. 
Education institution is capable of playing a special role in 
harmonic development of an individual at all levels of education. 
What can we do against “cultural imperialism” – peacefully 
inculcating poor cultural elements, forms of behavior that 
challenge values of the society, and increasing ignorance to human 
brains through media? The cure against this can be a serious 
activity aimed at joining the youth with their national and world 
cultures. Of course, here, admonition can not be an effective 
means; tact, university-level mastery and attractive forms of 
presentation are needed. It is important to include in the 
curriculum subjects like mother tongue, history of homeland, 
national literature, music and fine arts, comparative literature, 
world history, cultures of the world peoples, and to demonstrate 
that they are based on and constitute a part of the universal values. 
 25 
Khazar University (Baku, Azerbaijan) has interesting and edifying 
experience in this field. 
Q. 2. What is the situation with the issue of gender in education? 
What problems do you face in education of females? 
A - The fact that first modern secular school for girls was opened in 
Azerbaijan in 1901 was a good example of the rising interest of 
Azerbaijanis during the 19th century in European-style education 
(different from traditional forms of Middle Eastern – Muslim 
education). Afterwards, during Soviet times, there was no 
discrimination in education and this tradition has not been 
violated in the contemporary period too. Although overall number 
of people leaving school after 9-year education has risen, in urban 
areas, number of girls leaving school is much less than that of boys; 
in rural areas, it is vice-versa. In primary and secondary schools, 
number of female teachers is higher than number of male teachers. 
There is a gender balance in higher education institutions. Simply, 
traditionally, there are more female students in some majors and 
more males in some others.  
Q. 3. Are there many organizations giving scholarship to students? 
What is the size of paid education? 
A - The state provides those who receive high scores in the entry 
examination administered by the State Commission for Student 
Admission with free education at public higher education 
 26 
institutions (the number of such students is determined in 
advance). All others admitted to higher education institutes have 
to pay for their education regardless of studying at a public or 
private institution. Top 100 individuals with highest scores receive 
special scholarship of the President of Azerbaijan. Khazar 
University has signed an agreement with British Petroleum 
company, according to which the latter provides most successful 
petroleum engineering students of the University with “Oil-gas 
scholarship” to cover, particularly, their tuition fees. At the 
moment, a chance to get state scholarship on a competitive base is 
emerging for those who want to study abroad. Of course, there is a 
great need to provide more opportunities for students to get 
scholarships and loans. Strengthening economy of the country can 
bring about an increase in such opportunities. Similar activities can 
be observed in other countries with transition economy. 
Q. 4. What can you say about application of distance learning? 
A - Various interesting and useful aspects of e-learning have 
started to appear. But I think, fantastic expectations in this form of 
education are not justify hopes. Nevertheless, as a result of the use 
of the Internet and distance learning, opportunities for the students 
to study actively at work or at home without an instructor have 
increased. Of course, quality assurance in distance learning, 
especially, the issue of receiving an academic degree (Bachelor, 
 27 
Master, Doctoral…) through this way, are always in the agenda as 
debatable issues.  
The problem of brain-drain and its consequences was discussed 
here. On the one hand, brain-drain is a competition between 
countries and economies, and there will be winners and losers. 
Simply, the loser side, i.e. country, should think about it and find a 
way of strengthening. There is no other way out. It is evident that 
with the development of China, more and more Chinese people 
who studied in America or other Western countries are now eager 
to go back to their countries. On the other hand, we have to agree 
with the opinion that “distance learning helps with alleviating the 
impact of the brain-drain to some extent”. Also, international 
educational programs, including partnership programs between 
universities and colleges, help with affording the impact of the 
brain-drain. We have earlier mentioned the importance of 
international network of education institutions and we can see that 
it can also help with easing other pains. 
 28 
Higher Education in Azerbaijan  
 
UNESCO Conference  
Reform of Education System of Azerbaijan  
for Sustainable Future 
Paris, France, July 6, 2005* 
 
 
Hamlet Isaxanli 
(Khazar University, Baku, Azerbaijan) 
 
 
Education in Azerbaijan before the Soviet rule 
Before the final division of Azerbaijan between the Russian and 
Persian (Iranian) empires in 1828 there was basically one Azerbai-
jan, and its educational system was similar to those in countries 
of the Middle East. Most schools were religious institutions; 
however, their curricula contained also secular subjects. Primary 
languages of instruction were Persian and Arabic; later 
Azerbaijani was introduced gradually. In the 13th century, a 
research, education and training center with an observatory was 
established in Maragha, near Tabriz. This center distinguished 
itself in non-Euclidian geometry, trigonometry, astronomy, 
physics, and ethics. However, a general decline in scientific 
research and education began in the Muslim world during the 
late Middle Ages. The number of high quality schools declined, 
                                               
* See also: Strengths and Weaknesses of Private Universities in a 
Transition Economy: A View From Azerbaijan (18th International Conference 
on Higher Education.  Ankara, Turkey, August 26-28, 2005). 
 29 
and higher learning institutions continued to exist only in 
important urban centers of the Muslim East.  
After 1828 the north of Azerbaijan became part of Russia, and 
South Azerbaijan remained with Persia (Northern Azerbaijan is 
where the modern Republic of Azerbaijan is located today). Edu-
cational development in Northern Azerbaijan from 1828 to 1918 
(The Period of the Russian Empire) was defined through combina-
tion of national religious and secular schools as well as Russian 
type of secular and bilingual schools. Academic programs and 
curricula were developed in a cooperative effort between 
Azerbaijani intellectuals and Russian educators.  These schools 
contributed to the rise of the modern Azerbaijani intelligentsia 
(intellectual elite).  For higher education, students would mainly 
go to Russia and Europe. 
Azerbaijan's two-years of independence (The Period of the First 
Republic, 1918-1920) before the country became part of the Soviet 
Union was not long enough for it to develop a national system of 
education, but at least Azerbaijan State University, Russian type 
of higher learning institute was established in Baku in 1919. 
Also, about one hundred students were sent to Europe for higher 
education. 
 30 
Higher Education in Soviet Azerbaijan 
The Soviet period brought rapid advances in literacy, which rose 
to 90% within 10-15 years. Under the Soviet Union (The Period of 
the Second Republic, 1920-1991), there were two main types of 
higher-learning institutions: 
1. Universities offering 5-year programs resulting in something 
like a master degree and higher than bachelor degree. Each 
Soviet Republic had at least one university, comparable to an 
American college of arts and sciences, in many cases with Law.  
2. Specialized higher learning institutions, such as institutes of 
Fine Arts, Economics/Finance, Technical, Civil or Petro-Chemical 
Engineering, Agriculture, Pedagogy/ Teacher Training, etc. These 
offered 4 or 5-year programs leading to something like a 
bachelor degree or higher. 
After graduating from these universities and institutes, 
graduates could continue with a 3-year graduate program 
(aspirantura), leading to the Candidate of Science degree, akin to 
the American Ph.D. and then, a few of them could continue in 
pure research for a Doctor of Science degree in certain fields. 
The language of instruction in higher learning institutions in 
Azerbaijan was mostly Azerbaijani, with Russian coming 
second. For instance, for every 100 students majoring in 
Mathematics and studying in Azerbaijani, there would be a 
 31 
group of 25 or 50 math students studying in Russian. In the five 
Central Asian republics, in contrast, the language of instruction 
in higher education was primarily Russian. 
 
Higher Education in Azerbaijan after Gaining Independence 
Post-Soviet Azerbaijan's (The Period of the Third Republic, 1991) 
education system has experienced changes, particularly in higher 
learning. There are now 32 public universities (with Soviet-mode 
structures) and 15 private universities. Public universities get 
about half their money from the state budget, and the other half 
from tuitions. Private universities, on the contrary, do not get any 
public funding. 
There were a number of factors that have had a negative impact 
on the education system, including: 
• The country’s economy is in transition and is plagued by 
corruption and bribery; 
• Government funding of reforms in education system is 
relatively limited; 
• The tax system is intricate, at least when it comes to the edu-
cation system; 
• Libraries are poor, engendering weak access to knowledge 
and information. 
On the other hand, globalization has had a positive impact on 
education.  
 32 
Attitudes of foreign countries on the Azerbaijani higher education 
institutions are not simple and differ from each other. As Russia 
is very familiar with this region and knows internal environment 
here well, it has not undertaken any initiative to influence the 
education system, neither positively nor negatively. At the same 
time Russia does support branches of Russian universities in 
Azerbaijan, which are not recognized by the Azerbaijani 
government and undoubtedly are of poor quality. Authorized 
agencies of Turkey (YÖK) and Iran (Ministry of Research and 
Education) mainly pursue controversial policies in the 
recognition of Azerbaijani higher education institutions and 
their academic programs, namely, by discriminating certain 
institutions and favoring others. Instead of taking into 
consideration quality of education, presence or absence of 
corruption and other important indicators, they act in accordance 
with their personal acquaintances and linkages and/or in line 
with the will of Azerbaijani officials. One country that evaluates 
the education system of the region relatively well by impartially 
determining who is who and acting accordingly is the United 
States of America, which also is ahead of European countries in 
this sense. 
 The current features of Azerbaijan's education system are two-
fold- inherited from the Soviet past are quality curricula in such 
fields as Natural Sciences, some Applied Sciences and 
Engineering, some fine arts and music, but more with memory 
 33 
based teaching methods than student-centered system. The main 
weaknesses, which impede the process of change, are rooted in a 
strongly centralized system, which suffers from corruption and 
the influence of kinship. 
Starting a new private research and education institution in 
Azerbaijan was, of course, a big challenge. Among the main 
goals and principles of best private universities I would mention 
attaining the following: academic freedom, strong and vigorous 
student and faculty body, quality of academic programs, no 
corruption, cooperation with North American and West 
European academic institutions, resistance to cultural 
imperialism, and an attempt to develop university-industry 
relations. 
 
European Higher Education Area  
National system of education is eroding worldwide, just like sys-
tems of “national railway” or “national mathematics.” Those 
higher education institutions that are not integrating into the 
global education system are candidates to become peripheral 
learning centers.  
The Joint Convention of the European Council and UNESCO on 
Recognition of Higher Education Qualifications and Documents 
(Lisbon, April 11, 1997) can be considered as the starting of a new 
 34 
period towards unity in the European Higher Education System. 
This convention covered such important issues as access to 
higher education, term of education, and recognition of higher 
education documents as well as creation of appropriate 
mechanism for these goals.   
After reviewing and discussing the Lisbon Convention, we 
achieved timely ratification of it by Azerbaijan. Unfortunately, 
in the following years, important steps taken towards creation of 
European Higher Education Area, excluding certain exceptions, 
were not closely observed in Azerbaijan. 
A meeting of the Ministers of Education of 29 European 
countries was held on June 19, 1999, in Bologna. In that meeting 
The Joint Declaration of European Ministers of Education was 
adopted. It aimed at creating a European Higher Education Area 
(EHEA) that would be in a leading position in the global 
competition by 2010. To achieve this, the following were 
proposed (grouping of objectives here is different from the 
original Declaration):  
1.  Implementation of easily readable and comparable degrees, 
applying Diploma Supplement for this purpose that is com-
posed of two cycles. First cycle shall last a minimum of 3 
years, and second cycle should lead to masters and/or 
doctoral degree.  
 35 
2. Providing free movement of students, faculty, researchers 
and administrative staff between countries; application of 
the European Credit Transfer System (ECTS) in the case of 
movement of students.  
3. Establishment of European dimension in higher education 
including cooperation in the field of preparing criteria and 
methodologies for the purpose of quality assurance in 
higher education.  
Approaching with respect to various national education systems, 
a lingual and cultural differences, and autonomy of universities 
(Magna Charta Universitatum), while implementing this 
program, was specifically emphasized in the document.  
After this the process of creation of the European Higher Educa-
tion Area was called the Bologna Process [in my opinion, Sor-
bonne-Bologna would be a more correct name due to preliminary 
important meeting of ministers of four big countries responsible 
for higher education, namely France, Germany, Italy and United 
Kingdom on May 25, 1998, held in Paris, Sorbonne]. It has been 
recognized by everybody that higher education institutions and 
students are not objects but the main players in the Bologna 
Process. 
In order to provide coordination in successful implementation of 
the Bologna Process and admit countries those are willing to join 
the Process, Ministers of Education decided to meet within two 
years. Through the Prague meeting of May 19, 2001 and Berlin 
 36 
meeting of September 19, 2003, a number of European countries 
joining the Bologna Process reached 40. As a result of the Bergen 
(Norway) meeting on May 19, 2005, Azerbaijan among 5 new 
countries joined the Process.    
As an advancement of the Bologna Joint Declaration, it was 
proposed to create a European Research Area in addition to the 
European Higher Education Area and to prepare joint masters 
and doctoral programs. It was accepted that doctorate degree was 
the third cycle of higher education after the two cycles indicated in 
the Bologna Process. The ministers decided to attach a Diploma 
Supplement to the graduate diplomas from 2005 onward and took 
the commitment of creating access to education for everybody, 
using all available resources and means.  
The main demand of European universities, on the other hand, 
was autonomy with responsibility. Universities demanded inde-
pendence for formulating their strategies, prioritizing fields of 
studies and programs, and choosing faculty members and students 
in accordance with their own criteria. Application of tightly centra-
lized administration hinders dynamic development of higher 
education institutions and impedes their capability to compete and 
respond rapidly to the needs of the changing environment.  
 
 37 
European Higher Education Area and Azerbaijan 
What is the situation in Azerbaijan in regard to the Bologna 
Process?  
However paradoxical it may seem, although in the period of 
collapse of the Soviet Union Azerbaijan was going through 
severe political, economic and military crises, in several areas, 
including education, new ideas were spreading and new 
discourses and models were emerging.  
The first private university in Azerbaijan, Khazar University (one 
of the first in the former Soviet Union) opened and paved a new 
way for itself and for Azerbaijan in the field of education by 
offering a new substance and adopting a new form (Khazar is the 
name of Caspian in Middle Eastern languages). Applying Ameri-
can-style credit accumulation model and offering programs 
leading to bachelor, master and PhD degrees since its establish-
ment in Mart 18, 1991, Khazar has played the role of the field for 
an experiment and clearing-house for reforms in the higher edu-
cation system of Azerbaijan. For the first time in Azerbaijan, 
Khazar University has applied a student-centered teaching model 
and credit accumulation system. That is, students study courses 
which have certain credit value and they receive a corresponding 
number of credits for each course they pass. The credit unit 
applied in Khazar University can be considered as two European 
credits (ECTS).  
 38 
Credit accumulation model is based on prioritization of individual 
study trajectories for each student. But it will not be so simple for 
higher education institutions in Azerbaijan to move towards 
application of this student-centered credit system. It is an issue of 
educational or university culture, and therefore, it is not easy to 
implement it quickly, starting it from zero. 
In 1992, Milli Məclis (the parliament) of Azerbaijan passed the 
Law on Education, which constituted a legal basis for the 
establishment of the two-cycle higher education system in 
Azerbaijan, namely the system composed of bachelor and master 
degree studies. Later on all higher education institutions and 
programs in Azerbaijan, with few exceptions (for medical studies 
and the like), adopted this system.  
However, as transformation to the two-cycle system was not 
carried out carefully and stage-by-stage, and instead was done in 
the form of a quick national-scale campaign, the purposes, context 
and differences between bachelor and master programs have not 
been grasped by many higher education institutions up until now, 
and remnants of this “incompleteness” can be observed even 
today. In addition, the contents and form of studies after masters 
degree, has not been explicitly established yet. Some people talk 
about a third cycle of higher education, that is PhD; some others 
argue for continuation of the old Soviet model of third and fourth 
 39 
cycles, which lead to the degrees of Candidate of Science and 
Doctor of Science.  
Azerbaijan becomes a member of the Bologna Process; various 
Azerbaijani universities will likely join student mobility programs 
but gradually and at different times. One of the first and foremost 
aspects of Azerbaijan’s participation in educational programs of 
European dimension can be preparation of joint degree programs, 
especially masters and PhD programs, by European and Azerbaijani 
higher education institutions, which have experience in ECTS and 
international partnership programs. The publication of University 
Catalog and fulfillment of its requirements are also important in 
student exchanges. Unfortunately, among Azerbaijani universities, 
only Khazar publishes a standardized catalog on a periodical basis. 
Of course, autonomy of higher education institutions is an 
important pre-condition for achieving success in this direction. But 
in Azerbaijan even high-reputation private universities are deprived 
of their right to issue their own diplomas. 
The Institute of Education Policy and Strategy is starting to 
function at Khazar University. The main aim of the institute is to 
study international practices in education, work on quality 
enhancement of education and problems related to its 
evaluation, find out ways of development of educational policy 
and education system in Azerbaijan, and particularly, closely 
 40 
watch the Bologna Process and assist those interested in its 
furthering.  
Current Problems of Azerbaijani Higher Education 
As mentioned above, Khazar has been implementing PhD 
programs for a long time now and is the only university in 
Azerbaijan in doing this. But in general, the country is still keeping 
the system of Candidate of Science / Doctor of Science. Not 
enacting the new bills on education keeps this issue and other 
related vital matters in a frozen condition. Inconsistency and 
contradiction between rapidly changing environment and growing 
demand, on the one hand, and old, obsolete laws on the other, play 
the role of an obstacle and hold back development. 
Unfortunately, the attempts towards promulgation of a new bill 
on education, which started in 1997, have completely failed [and 
it is to my great chagrin that that draft law under discussion 
consists predominantly of such stipulations as “under the full 
authority of relevant executive bodies”].  
As a result, governance in the field of education is regulated not 
by laws, but through personal networks and connections with 
high-ranking public officials. Furthermore, the success of an ini-
tiative mostly depends on the degree of closeness of the initiator 
to these high-ranking executives. It renders great difficulties in 
 41 
implementing the action plans and strategic development 
programs of higher education institutions.  
In Western Europe, universities are striving for greater indepen-
dence. The kind of independence they are looking for is not that 
easy to understand from the standpoint of universities in 
countries with transition economy. The present level of 
independence of European institutions, I believe, would suffice 
for Azerbaijani higher education institutions, including high-
quality private universities, for many decades ahead. 
Academic freedom in higher education institutions, including 
private universities, is at a very low level or almost absent. 
Academic freedom as well as autonomy of universities should be 
directly proportional to their quality in research and education. 
Unfortunately, only one higher education institution in 
Azerbaijan–-Khazar University–-has been able to incorporate 
academic freedom into its education policy (while struggling for 
autonomy without much success at present). 
Endemic corruption and bribery in the education system is 
another factor leading to strengthening of central administration 
and strictly diminishing the autonomy of higher education 
institutions. The role of higher education institutions themselves 
in proliferation of the problems is quite large. Moreover, the 
absence of joint struggle of universities and the Ministry of 
 42 
Education for assuring quality in education has seriously 
damaged the autonomy and reputation of both.  
The saddest point here is that some higher education institutions 
that do not ‘deserve’, so to speak, this kind of treatment are also 
subject to it. The few universities that possess exemplary moral 
environment, offer high-standard study programs, implement 
modern teaching methods, maintain broad international 
relations, and whose graduates’ skills and abilities are 
appreciated highly by the industries and businesses, have also 
become victims of the general situation prevailing in the 
Azerbaijani system of education and depend on destiny and 
fortuity.    
Even the most serious and high-standard private university has no 
autonomy in such important issues as student admission, 
selection of specialization programs, issuing diplomas to its own 
graduates, etc. The question here is what private rights does private 
university enjoy? What are the things that make it private, after 
all? Private universities pay V.A.T. (which is unacceptable for 
educational institutions not-for profit, and which is very high, 
18%) to the government, but do not receive anything from the 
state …   
Although the government does not extend any financial 
assistance to private higher education institutions, it has 
monopolized student admission to them at all levels of studies 
 43 
and tries to restrict admission to private institutions by any 
means. In terms of the access to higher education, Azerbaijan’s 
rating is one of the lowest not only in comparison to developed 
countries, but also among former-Soviet republics. Despite this 
apparent shortcoming, the government strictly prohibits 
prospective students to get admission to any university they 
want at their own expense! Starting from 1968, admission to 
higher education institutions started to rise rapidly in Europe, as 
it was the case in North America; everybody who wanted to 
study was given such an opportunity. At the moment, the 
proportion of students in higher education from relevant age 
group is highest in the world in South Korea and USA (82% and 
81% respectively), followed by Canada (59%), European Union 
(52%) and Japan (49%). In Azerbaijan, approximately 15% of 
people from the relevant age group are studying in higher 
education institutions.  
It is very important to pass into the system of financing directly 
students entering to the university in forms of scholarships and 
loans, instead of financing only higher learning institutes. 
Entering examinations through State Commission on Student 
Admission may play a role to define who is acceptable for 
scholarship and/or for loan. Taking this decisive step may create 
healthy environment in higher education system, nourish the 
competition between universities. 
 44 
There are Rectors Conferences in European countries, which act as 
main bodies uniting heads of higher education institutions. They 
actively participate in the discussion of problems in teaching, 
research, student and faculty exchange, and in general, on correct 
formulation of academic policies and development. In Azerbaijan, 
this body (Rektorlar şurası) exists only on paper. Each rector is 
trying to keep his head safe, but keeping one’s head safe is getting 
more and more difficult or more and more expensive. The main 
reasons for rectors (and universities) not undertaking joint efforts 
in this direction are differences between their aims and purposes. 
Thus, Azerbaijani higher education institutions are not able to act 
as players and are rather played with, like toys.  
Although Azerbaijan government has not yet achieved serious 
success in overall reform of the education system, but at the 
same time, functioning of some higher education institutions on 
the basis of diverse ideas and practice, existence of opportunities 
for development, and individual universities’ efforts to push 
towards higher standards are also realities of the day. The 
establishment of the Education Commission under the President 
of Azerbaijan recently may be regarded as an indicator of the 
government’s consideration of education policy.  
 
Quality Enhancement in Azerbaijani Higher Education 
 45 
As far as the issue of assuring and increasing the quality of 
education is concerned, at the moment, discussions on determi-
nation of common European criteria and rules as well as 
activities of corresponding accreditation agencies are going on, 
and a certain consensus is expected in this area. It is not excluded 
that the role of certain pan-European and regional accreditation 
agencies may be increased and new ones may be created. 
Azerbaijan will have to consider the results of these discussions. 
Quality in education is a system of values, a position, and a 
culture. Quality is changing of the existing form, and 
permanence of the evolutionary effort. Quality is a process and 
therefore, the concept of quality enhancement is something more 
important than quality assurance or quality control. 
Who measures quality in higher education institutions and why? 
There are evidently three candidates that are ready to undertake 
this responsibility – the education institution itself, the 
government and independent authorized accreditation agencies. 
Higher education institutions in Azerbaijan almost do not 
conduct any serious internal evaluation themselves; but here 
again, Khazar University is an exception. Khazar regularly 
conducts internal evaluation with active participation of students, 
and results of the evaluation are published both on paper and 
electronically.  
 46 
The main result of accreditation for a private university should be 
the right for that institution to apply for and receive credits or 
loans from the government on quite favorable conditions, and 
similar rights should be extended to that university’s students as 
well. On the other hand, state universities, funded by the 
government, either are not subject to accreditation at all or their 
accreditation is only formal?! 
The experience of the motherland of accreditation – USA shows 
that there is no need for direct participation of the state in 
accreditation; state interference, in fact, can only cause harm. In 
transition countries, like Azerbaijan, this issue is even more 
complicated. As a well-known maxim goes sometimes a child 
forgets that hammer is for hitting a nail, and starts to hit 
everything with it. The state, when it controls something, like 
accreditation, behaves like a child with a hammer. That is why 
the most expedient form of it after internal evaluation is external 
evaluation carried out by independent authorized accreditation 
agencies. 
 
University – Industry Links 
Industry can foster closer ties to the educational system, including 
funding to upgrade the quality and quantity of manpower.  
 47 
Khazar University has been a pioneer in Azerbaijan in prioritizing 
the nourishing of relations with industries as an integral part of 
its development. These help the university to uphold the quality of 
its programs, faculty, support services and students. 
The Center for Economic and Business Research and Education 
affiliated with the School of Economics and Management is inten-
ded to support Khazar University in developing relations with 
industries. The Center periodically conducts various training semi-
nars and workshops in Economics, Finance, Marketing, Small Busi-
ness and alternative disciplines, for small and medium entre-
preneurs in Baku and other regions of the country.  
In 2003, the School of Economics and Management at Khazar 
University and the Malaysian Institute of Economic Research 
(MIER) under the auspices of the Sasakawa Peace Foundation 
(Japan) launched the project “Corporate Governance in Azer-
baijan.” The project sets a wide range of goals and purposes. As a 
result of this joint research project Khazar University and MIER 
undertook to prepare recommendations on improvement of mana-
gement for midsize and large businesses and government organi-
zations in Azerbaijan. The project has contributed to the strengthe-
ning of relations between Azerbaijan, Malaysia and Japan and 
promotes development of corporate governance in Azerbaijan. Now 
Southern Korean scholars are also entering into the project. 
 48 
The international exposure set Khazar University up to be a suc-
cessful partner going forward with a program of enhanced 
learning for BP Drilling & Completions Engineers. Benefit comes 
with the link between BP, Heriot-Watt University in Edinburgh 
and Khazar University in Baku.   
According to BP, Khazar was chosen to complete this triangular 
link for several reasons mentioned below: 
 A well managed University  
 Has introduced western standard curriculum 
 Teaches all subjects in English 
 Has a Petroleum Engineering & Business undergraduate and 
M.S. and M.B.A. programs currently running. 
 Has a managed Quality Assurance Program for all University 
Administration & Curriculum Development. 
 Has a willingness to deal with industry in less bureaucratic    
manner than most. 
The ultimate goal of this triangular relationship is to utilize the 
Heriot -Watt curriculum with lectures and ongoing tutorial sup-
port provided, at a much cheaper cost, by Khazar lecturers 
Following on from the success of this trilateral relationship, BP has 
decided to utilize Khazar University in the first true Industry 
Sponsored Scholarship Program in Azerbaijan.  BP will pay for 
up to 16-20 undergraduate Petroleum Engineering Scholarships 
per annum.  Through Khazar’s proven approach to Quality 
 49 
Enhancement, a method of performance management has 
developed for all parties involved to ensure the success of this 
program going forward. 
This University – Industry link was also one of catalysts 
accelerating and directing the creation of Advisory Board of 
School of Engineering and Applied Science, first this kind of Board 
in Azerbaijan with broad governance function.  
 50 
Student Support System  
in Higher Education Institutions 
 
UNESCO Conference 
Reform of Education System of Azerbaijan 
Baku, August 24, 2005 
 
 
Hamlet Isaxanli 
(Khazar University, Baku, Azerbaijan) 
 
 
Higher education institution is a point, area, center or, to some 
extent, city, where people who learn and teach live. The existence 
and functioning of this city requires organization of appropriate 
administration, management and service sector. The main 
populace of higher education institution is the students. 
Depending on the type, country and size of higher education 
institution, number of students is usually 10-15 times more than 
the number of faculty members and those working in the 
administrative-service sector.  
Majority of students are young people with little life experience 
and therefore, besides studying and learning, they need all kinds 
of care and assistance. Together with research excellence and 
modern and quality education, a good higher education institution 
has to have a service sector for supporting and assisting students. 
This, in turn, plays an important role in seeking the necessary 
number of students at the necessary level – a very crucial issue for 
higher education institution. As a result of this support and 
 51 
service, lifestyles and behavior of students are formed; they spend 
their time more effectively and are prepared well for business life. 
On the other hand, students in paid education demand higher 
quality from the institution and from instructors teaching there, 
because they consider themselves as clients buying a service.  
Compared to the period of free education, this is a completely 
different time, environment and psychology. Moreover, contem-
porary higher education is much more colorful than the past one – 
there are more elective courses, more areas of specialization, new 
teaching models tailored to individual needs of the students, a more 
international composition of the student community, a wider use of 
information-communication technologies, etc. These and other 
characteristics make it necessary for the service in contemporary 
higher education institution to be more serious and colorful. In 
higher education institutions without a single united campus, where 
administrative and teaching facilities as well as laboratories and 
practical-internship units are dispersedly located, there are also 
specific factors that makes student support service more difficult. In 
order to solve this problem timely and appropriately, student 
support system must be established on the basis of specialized or 
specially trained group of professionals. 
Student-centered model of education requires organization of 
active interaction with students. In this model, students are not 
united as a group around a teacher (instructor-centered model); 
but interests of each one of them are satisfied individually, and the 
priority is put on active participation of students in the learning 
 52 
process; and instructors work together with students and only 
direct them. The education model that is based on credit accumu-
lation is a student-centered system, where each student has 
his/her own trajectory of progress. One of the important 
components of the European Higher Education Area, which is 
planned to be created by 2010, and the Bologna Process, which is 
the way leading to it, is the active participation of students in this 
process. Unfortunately, this participation is not at the necessary 
level in the majority of European countries. One of the crucial 
reasons of it is that among administrators and assisting agents of 
education students are not considered as a party in the process of 
higher learning, but are taken as users or customers.  
The first interaction between students or prospective students and 
higher education institution happens during the admission 
process. Generally, can the network of higher education 
institutions satisfy the desires of all individuals who want to 
become students? Satisfaction of this desire is implemented in the 
form of a government program in several, especially developed, 
countries; the issue of giving opportunity to everybody who has 
graduated from high school to get admitted to a higher education 
institution and thus, supporting them in this sense is brought up. 
In USA, 81 % of individuals from the appropriate age range study 
at higher education institutions. In this USA is second only to 
South Korea – an Asian country that supports science and 
education – where this percentage is 82 percent. This percentage is 
59 in Canada, 52 in the European, and 49 in Japan (in Azerbaijan it 
 53 
is around 15-20 %).  
As it can be observed, even in highly-developed countries, the 
number of those who desire to obtain higher education but cannot 
achieve it is not small. The main problem of these people is 
financial difficulty. For example, as there is no free education in 
USA, lower-income population can receive education only through 
long-term and low-interest (6-8% per year) loans from appropriate 
funds. In the European Union and Japan, the state pays for the 
higher education of only a part of the students; the rest either pay 
for their education themselves or do not receive any higher 
education. Of course, individuals without financial difficulties do 
not have big problems in selecting a higher education institution.  
In developing countries, the state funding to higher education is 
small (decrease in such funding is a worldwide trend, with very 
few exceptions), the government does not provide loans to 
students on favorable terms, and majority of the youth are not able 
to afford higher education because of the high level of poverty. 
Moreover, a big part of the youth whose family budget allows to 
pay for higher education become victims of the centralized system 
of admission; they are caught “unprepared” as a result of only one 
examination and are not permitted to receive higher education (in 
spite of the fact that there are higher education institutions at 
various levels, which are willing to provide education for them).  
What is the admission mechanism to higher education institutions? 
In North and Central Europe admission to higher education 
 54 
institutions take place in accordance with the average grade of 
students in high schools exams, especially, the final exams for 
graduation, and do not hold any special admission exams. Of 
course, higher education institutions everywhere (America, Japan, 
Europe…) themselves carry out student admission (except, Turkey 
and Azerbaijan; although certain degree of moderation has been 
observed in Turkey recently). 
The first important step after admission is conducting student 
orientation days; there is a need for guiding the new students 
through the higher education institution and showing them right 
directions. General familiarization with the school, rules related 
with study courses (attendance, choosing courses and credits, 
order of precedence and consistency of courses with each other, 
general education courses and majors, core and elective courses…), 
library, dormitory, sport fields, as well as existence of a student 
support system and what kind of services it provides, and creating 
in advance a correct impression in the students about 
acquaintance, norms of conduct and similar issues play a special 
role in the organization of student life. Besides visual and oral 
orientation, it is important to prepare written and electronic 
orientation materials, such as the university website, university 
catalog, various guidelines and information booklets, including, 
student’s handbook. Students should be provided with continued 
consultation on issues related with teaching; they should be 
continuously given information and consultation on important 
issues that might not have come to their minds. 
 55 
When the classes start, it is very important that students should be 
given in advance a syllabus or plan of the course on the website or 
in the first class at latest, showing contents and form of the course, 
exams and grading principles. Syllabus can also be seen as an 
agreement concluded between the student and the instructor. 
Instructor clearly and officially explains his/her rules in the 
syllabus, and these rules are officially binding for both the instructor 
and students during the semester and exams. The most effective 
way to struggle with cheating in the exams is to explain to the 
students the very severe consequences of it. In fact, instructors can 
put their rules on this too in the syllabus.  
In developed countries, it has become a usual fact of life to give 
students information and advice on funding opportunities, 
including state funding, bank system and bank credits, local and 
international funds, specific and general scholarships, etc. 
However, in transition countries such services are new and 
therefore, poorly-developed. Most of the transition countries that 
allow paid education, unfortunately have not prepared a system of 
funding and loans to support students. For example, students may 
be provided with study loans to be paid back in a certain period of 
time – let’s say, in 10 years from finishing high school. Analo-
gically, similar but shorter periods may be determined for the 
loans for higher degrees such as master’s and doctoral degrees. 
Loans may be started to be paid back two years after completion of 
the degree study in a period of 10-15 years. It is possible that in the 
countries having a state oil fund this problem can be solved 
 56 
through extending low-interest or no-interest loans from the fund; 
no doubt that preparing highly-qualified specialists is one of the 
factors determining strategic development of the country and the 
Oil Fund was established exactly for this purpose. 
Lack of possibilities for full-time students to extend grants or loans 
and inadequacy of the provided funding for living expenses bring 
about their job search and employment. This in turn makes it 
inevitable to solve several new problems in organization of 
teaching. 75% of full time students in Denmark, 68%-in Germany, 
66% in Austria and 46% in France work. In the European countries 
(with positive exception of Denmark) most of the working students 
are not employed in their own field of specialization. 
Another primary issue is psychological and legal assistance to 
students. Problems in family life, dormitory or house, among 
friends, between junior and senior, male and female students, 
financial problems, homesick, problems with getting used to big-
city life, as well as foreigners problem in coming to a new cultural 
environment can bring about depression in students. Lack of timely 
consultation, showing the way of solution and taking the necessary 
measures can be a result of the university’s negligence, and absence 
or non-functionality of such a service at the university. Giving 
consolations on health and providing first medical aid to students 
requires a special attention. Medical Center functioning at the 
higher education institution should play an important role in 
providing students with medical and psychological assistance. 
Whereas some services, such as education-related advices, can be 
 57 
provided by the relevant school or department, some other services, 
such as psychological assistance, may be provided in a more 
centralized form. Indeed, this issue, that is, localization or 
centralization of student support services, depends on the size of the 
higher education institution, whether or not it has a single campus, 
the number of available specialists and finally, the tradition. 
Besides contributing to the liveliness of student life, sports and arts 
also bring the students closer to each other and unite them. The 
role of intra-university, national and international competitions, 
events and festivities in publicizing students and higher education 
institution is not small. Sports and especially some part of the art 
activities can be incorporated to the curricula; some other part of 
them can be carried out through associations, groups, student 
societies, etc. 
Student unions functioning in higher education institutions play 
an important role in student life and in the life of the institution in 
general. In the Western world, hundreds of student unions, clubs 
and societies function within one university. Any idea can 
constitute a basis of a union – exemplary education, citizenship-
locality, politics, religion, interest in various fields of study, sports, 
culture, arts, etc. Usually common idea of three students is enough 
for creating a union. Independence of student societies is very 
important. However, in former socialist countries there are a lot of 
problems in that field. Initially, higher education institution allots 
funds and creates necessary conditions for functioning of the 
registered student organizations (by the university council or 
 58 
another higher agency), but later on they try to finance their 
activities themselves and attract sources of funding from outside. 
Student unions play a significant role in development leadership, 
self-management and other skills, including business habits. 
Functioning of international student center in higher education, i.e. 
organization of the international student service makes it easier for 
foreign students to adapt to the student life and protects them from 
the danger of getting isolated. At the same time, it enriches the 
university with different cultures, races, religions and languages, 
helps to erode existing stereotypes, and increases students’ 
understanding towards and way of approaching other peoples. This 
center or another authorized agency also studies possibilities for 
students’ earning credits from foreign universities and/or 
transferring credits to them.   
It is clear that students with physical and mental disabilities need a 
special care and service. Unfortunately, in transition countries, the 
situation in this field is also unsatisfactory. 
One of the most important agencies supporting students and gra-
duates of higher education institution is the career center. Introdu-
cing job search and employment tactics and psychology to the 
students, this center also tries to establish relations between emp-
loyer companies and organization, on the one hand, and senior 
students, on the other. Graduates of the higher education institution 
also play a decisive role in this. One of the invaluable sources of 
power for a higher education institution is being in constant contact 
 59 
with the graduates and following their successes. That is why, one 
of the most serious tasks of a higher education institution is to help 
with establishment and functioning of the association of alumni. 
Students should be given a role in the management of a higher 
education institution and enhancing quality of education. Inclusion 
of student organizations in the university and faculty councils, 
systematic study of the students’ opinion on the university, school, 
instructors and subjects as well as various student support services 
through anonymous student polls, and including students as a side 
while making internal evaluations bring about certain degree of 
student participation in the overall administration and decision-
making process. Experience of Khazar University has proven that 
all steps towards listening to students’ voices play and important 
role in establishing high-quality student support services.  
 60 
Azerbaijan Moving Towards  
European Higher Education Area – 2005 
 
Report delivered at the seminar organized by 
Council of Europe and 
the Ministry of Education of the Republic of Azerbaijan 
April 20, 2005, Baku 
 
 
Hamlet Isaxanli 
(Khazar University, Baku, Azerbaijan) 
 
500 years ago Europe started to emerge as the new leader of the 
global historical process. With the discovery of America and 
determination of the Globe, the invention of the movable printing 
press, the spread of publication technology, and the formation of 
universities and scientific thinking, the “European Age” of the 
world history began. Finally, with the development of capitalism, 
Europe managed to far outpace the rest of the world.  
In the 20th century, rivalry and confrontation between European 
nations was at its peak; Europe became the scene for two 
devastating world wars. In 1945, Americans and the Soviets met 
in the middle of Europe – in Germany. This marked the end of 
the “European Age” – an end of the European hegemony in world 
politics and economy.  
In 1957, a Soviet satellite mobilized America and Europe, and 
inclination towards integration seriously started to rise in the 
 61 
West. The European Economic Community (European “Common 
Market”) agreement, signed in 1957, also included provisions on 
cooperation in the field of education. In mid-1970s, the issue of 
mutual recognition in the field of education was formulated and 
from mid-1980s, a mechanism for movement of students, 
researchers and scholars from one European country to another 
was devised; programs, like ERASMUS, proved successful in 
this. One of the most important documents of these years is 
Magna Charta Universitatum, signed in 1988 in Bologna, which 
emphasizes autonomy and independence of universities as the 
most vital factor in creation of the European Higher Education 
Area.  
The Joint Convention of the European Council and UNESCO on 
Recognition of Higher Education Qualifications and Documents 
(signed in Lisbon, on April 11, 1997) can be considered as the 
starting of a new period towards unity in the European higher 
education system. This convention covered such important 
issues as access to higher education, term of education, and 
recognition of higher education documents as well as creation of 
appropriate mechanism for these goals.  
After reviewing and discussing the Lisbon Convention, we 
achieved timely ratification of it by Azerbaijan. Unfortunately, 
in the following years, important steps taken towards creation of 
European Higher Education Area, excluding certain exceptions, 
were not closely observed in Azerbaijan. 
 62 
On May 25, 1998, in a meeting of the Ministers of Education of 
four leading European countries – France, Italy, United Kingdom 
and Germany – held at the Sorbonne, Paris, the Joint Declaration 
on Harmonization of the Architecture of the European Higher 
Education System was adopted. The Declaration proposed to 
announce European Higher Education Area open, to enable stu-
dents to continue their education in another European country 
and to do this through transferring obtained school credit-units. 
It also proposed two main cycles of higher education, 
undergraduate and graduate, where, after the first cycle, students 
would continue their education either towards a master degree or 
a longer-term doctoral study or research.  
In order to transform this initiative of four countries into an all-
European movement, a meeting of the Ministers of Education of 
29 European countries was held on June 19, 1999, in Bologna. In 
that meeting, where the three Baltic republics from former Soviet 
Union also participated, the Joint Declaration of European 
Ministers of Education was adopted. It aimed at creating a 
European Higher Education Area (EHEA) that would be in a 
leading position in the global competition by 2010. To achieve 
this, the following were proposed (grouping of objectives here is 
different from the original Declaration): 
1. Implementation of easily readable and comparable degrees, 
applying Diploma Supplement for this purpose that is 
composed of two cycles. First cycle shall last a minimum of  3 
 63 
years, and second cycle should lead to masters and/or doctoral 
degree.  
2. Providing free movement of students, faculty, researchers and 
administrative staff between countries; application of the 
European Credit Transfer System (ECTS) in the case of 
movement of students.  
3. Establishment of European dimension in higher education. 
Cooperation in the field of preparing criteria and methodo-
logies for the purpose of quality assurance in higher 
education.  
Approaching with respect various national education systems, a 
lingual and cultural differences, and autonomy of universities, 
while implementing this program, was specifically emphasized in 
the document.  
After this the process of creation of the European Higher 
Education Area was called the Bologna Process [in my opinion, 
Sorbonne-Bologna would be a more correct name].  
In order to provide coordination in successful implementation of 
Bologna Process and admit countries those are willing to join the 
Process, Ministers of Education decided to meet within two years. 
Through the Prague meeting of May 19, 2001 and Berlin meeting of 
September 19, 2003, a number of European countries joining the 
Bologna Process reached 40. It is expected that as a result of the 
Bergen (Norway) meeting on May 19 this year, Azerbaijan and all 
 64 
remaining European countries, except Belarus, will join the 
Process.    
It has been recognized by everybody that higher education insti-
tutions and students are not objects but the main players in the 
Bologna Process. The ministers also noted the necessity of keeping 
close contacts and working in cooperation with such organizations 
as the European University Association (EUA), European Associa-
tion of Higher Education Institutions (EURASHE), European Asso-
ciation of National Student Unions (ESIB), and European Network 
for Quality Assurance (ENQA). 
As an advancement of the Bologna Joint Declaration, it was pro-
posed to create European Research Area in addition to the Euro-
pean Higher Education Area and to prepare joint masters and 
doctoral programs. It was accepted that doctorate degree was the 
third cycle of higher education after the two cycles indicated in the 
Bologna Process. The ministers decided to attach a Diploma Supp-
lement to the graduate diplomas from 2005 onward and took the 
commitment of creating access to education for everybody, using 
all available resources and means. 
The main demand of European universities, on the other hand, 
was autonomy with responsibility. Universities demanded inde-
pendence for formulating their strategies, prioritizing fields of 
studies and programs, and choosing faculty members and students 
in accordance with their own criteria. Application of tightly cent-
 65 
ralized administration hinders dynamic development of higher 
education institutions and impedes their capability to compete and 
respond rapidly to the needs of the changing environment.  
The Bologna Process indicates that in the selection of the higher 
education model Europe is looking to the United States and is 
adapting the American experience. In other words, the Bologna 
Process in some way indicates the Americanization of the Euro-
pean Higher Education System.   
The Higher Education and Research Area was established on the 
basis of three-cycle degree system and comparative and accumu-
lative features of credits units which come from the United 
States – the global leader in higher education. The Regional 
Accreditation, which deals with the evaluation of the entire 
institutional quality, and Program Accreditation, which deals 
with the evaluation of the quality of separate fields of studies, 
both of them also belong to the American traditions in higher 
education. Unfortunately, Europe still cannot come to a common 
decision on the issue of evaluating quality. If all 45 countries 
approach the evaluation of their higher education institutions 
separately, will it be possible to achieve harmonization at all? In 
the United States only 6 regional associations fully undertake 
this work. Will regional or other types of broader-scale 
accreditation agencies be created in Europe too? 
 66 
From another perspective, whereas independence of US univer-
sities and the achievements brought about by this independence 
are evident, Europe does not seem to be ready to act in American 
way on this issue; centralized administrative management often 
puts obstacles on European higher education institutions’ 
assuming autonomy with full accountability. Is Europe 
completely ready for connecting the issue of accreditation solely 
with the presence or absence of the state financing and its 
amount? Also, in evaluating and funding individual projects, 
Europe seems to be lagging behind America. If these crucial 
issues are not solved, the idea of transforming Europe into the 
leading economy as well as highly competitive education and 
research area globally will sound like an old Soviet motto related 
to the Soviet-American competition – “Dognat’ i peregnat’” (to 
catch up and leave behind). 
What is the situation in Azerbaijan with regard to the Bologna Process? 
However paradoxical it may seem, although in the period of 
collapse of the Soviet Union Azerbaijan was going through 
severe political, economic and military crises, in several areas, 
including education, new ideas were spreading and new 
discourses and models were emerging. The first private university 
in Azerbaijan – Khazar University – opened and paved a new way 
for itself and for Azerbaijan in the field of education by offering 
a new substance and adopting a new form. Applying American-
style credit accumulation model and offering programs leading 
 67 
to bachelor, master and PhD degrees since its establishment in 
1991, Khazar has played the role of the field for an experiment 
and clearing-house for reforms in the higher education system of 
Azerbaijan. For the first time in Azerbaijan, Khazar University 
has applied a student-centered teaching model, prepared and put 
into implementation a 100-points grading system (with 60 points 
being the minimal satisfactory grade) and took Grade Point 
Average (GPA) as the criterion for granting various 
distinguished diplomas (honors, high honors and higher 
honors).  
As a result, in 1992, Milli Majlis (the parliament) of Azerbaijan 
passed the Law on Education, which was prepared a special 
working group with participation of the author of this report. 
The Law constituted a legal basis for the establishment of the 
two-cycle higher education system in Azerbaijan, namely the 
system composed of bachelor and master degree studies. Later 
on all higher education institutions and programs in Azerbaijan, 
with few exceptions (for medical studies and the like), adopted 
this system. 
However, as transformation to the two-cycle system was not 
carried out carefully and stage-by-stage, and instead was done in 
the form of a quick national-scale campaign, the purposes, context 
and differences between bachelor and master programs have not 
been grasped by many higher education institutions up until now, 
and remnants of this “incompleteness” can be observed even 
 68 
today. In addition, the contents and form of studies after masters 
degree, has not been explicitly established yet. Some people talk 
about a third cycle of higher education, that is PhD; some others 
argue for continuation of the old Soviet model of third and fourth 
cycles, which lead to the degrees of Candidate of Science and 
Doctor of Science.  
As mentioned above, Khazar has been offering and an implemen-
ting PhD program for a long time now and is the only university in 
Azerbaijan in doing this. But in general, the country is still keeping 
the system of Candidate of Science / Doctor of Science. Not enac-
ting the new bills on education keeps this issue and other related 
vital matters in a frozen condition.  
Usually, in countries undergoing transitional period, important 
laws need to be amended and/or renewed periodically (for 
example, every 5 years). Otherwise, inconsistency and contradi-
ction between rapidly changing environment and growing de-
mands, on one hand, and old, obsolete laws, on the other, act as 
obstacles and hold back development. Unfortunately, the 
attempts towards promulgation of a new bill on education, 
which started in 1997, have completely failed [and it is to my 
great chagrin that that draft law under discussion consists 
predominantly of such stipulations as “under the full authority 
of relevant executive bodies”].  
 69 
As a result, governance in the field of education is regulated not 
by laws, but through personal networks and connections with 
high-ranking executive officials. Furthermore, the success of an 
initiative mostly depends on the degree of closeness of the 
initiator to these high-ranking officials. What is awaiting us 
tomorrow? As long as this question remains unaddressed, it 
renders useless all strategic development and action plans 
prepared by higher education institutions.  
Endemic corruption and bribery in the education system is another 
factor leading to strengthening of central administration and 
strictly diminishing the autonomy of higher education institu-
tions. The role of higher education institutions themselves in 
proliferation of the problems is quite large. Moreover, lack of 
working relations between universities and the Ministry of 
Education as well as the absence of their joint struggle for quality 
in education has seriously damaged the autonomy and reputation 
of both.  
The saddest point here is that some higher education institutions 
that do not ‘deserve’, so to speak, this kind of treatment are also 
subject to it. The few universities that possess exemplary moral 
environment, offer high-standard study programs, implement 
modern teaching methods, maintain broad international 
relations, and whose graduates’ skills and abilities are 
appreciated highly by the industries and businesses, have also 
become victims of the general situation prevailing in the 
 70 
Azerbaijani system of education and depend on destiny and 
fortuity.   
Although Khazar University is considered one of the most 
serious and high-standard universities both according to the 
public opinion and in the seldom pronounced words of 
government officials, it has no autonomy in such important 
issues as student admission, selection of specialization 
programs, issuing diplomas to its own graduates, etc. The 
question here is what private rights do private universities 
enjoy? What are the things that make them private, after all? 
Private universities pay taxes to the government, but do not 
receive anything from the state, except for the obstacles to their 
development… 
Among 47 higher education institutions in Azerbaijan, only two 
universities – Khazar University and a Turkish-sponsored 
Qafqaz University – apply an education model based on credit 
accumulation. That is, students study courses which have certain 
credit value and they receive a corresponding number of credits 
for each course they pass. The credit unit applied in Khazar 
University can be considered as two European credits (ECTS).  
Credit accumulation model is based on prioritization of 
individual study trajectories for each student. That is, study 
schedules are not determined for groups of students, but for each 
student individually, and accordingly, each student accumulates 
 71 
the necessary number of credits through his/her own way – This 
is a student-centered model. To see at what point a student is in 
his/her study program, it is enough to know how many courses 
that student has successfully passed and how many credits 
he/she received for the passed courses [in order to evaluate 
overall performance of a student, it is also important to see 
his/her Grade Point Average].  
But it will not be so simple for higher education institutions in 
Azerbaijan to move towards application of this student-centered 
credit system. It is an issue of education or university culture, 
and therefore, it is not easy to implement it quickly, starting it 
from zero. One of the factors that create difficulties in transition 
to the credit system is excessive central administration, which is 
characteristic of most higher education institutions in 
Azerbaijan. Autonomy of universities and relative autonomy of 
intra-university units, such as schools, colleges, faculties and 
departments, is one of the most necessary conditions in 
application of the credit system, just as in many other things. On 
the other hand, existence of individual study trajectories for each 
student may create differences in study periods of various 
students. It we add the existing broad-scale bribery and 
nepotism to this, it becomes clear that real transition to the credit 
system will not be an easy technical issue in Azerbaijan.  
A main acting document of Khazar University is the University 
Catalog, which gives information on academic policies and rules 
 72 
of the University, programs leading to various degrees, short 
description of each taught course, requirements necessary for 
graduation, as well as on teaching and research bodies, facilities 
and resources, student support services, etc. The catalog and the 
fulfillment of its requirements are also important for student 
mobility. Unfortunately, among Azerbaijani higher education 
institutions, only Khazar University publishes, on a periodical 
basis, a standardized comprehensive catalog, which includes all 
necessary information [information brochures are sometimes 
published by other universities but are not similar in content to a 
catalog].  
When Azerbaijan becomes a member of the Bologna Process, 
various Azerbaijani universities will likely join student mobility 
programs at different times. One of the first and foremost aspects 
of Azerbaijan’s participation in educational programs of 
European dimension can be preparation of joint degree 
programs, especially masters and PhD programs, by European 
and Azerbaijani higher education institutions, which have 
experience in ECTS and international partnership programs. Of 
course, autonomy of higher education institutions is an 
important pre-condition for achieving success in this direction. 
But in Azerbaijan, as I mentioned earlier, even high-reputation 
private universities are deprived of their right to issue their own 
diplomas.  
 73 
As far as the issue of assuring and increasing the quality of edu-
cation is concerned, at the moment, discussions on determination 
of common European criteria and rules as well as activities of cor-
responding accreditation agencies are going on, and a certain 
consensus is expected in this area. It is not excluded that the role 
of certain pan-European accreditation agencies may be increased 
and new ones may be created. Azerbaijan will have to consider 
the results of these discussions. 
Quality in education is a system of values, a position, and a cul-
ture. Quality is changing of the existing form, and permanence 
of the evolutionary effort. Quality is a process and therefore, the 
concept of quality enhancement is something more important 
than quality assurance or quality control. 
Who measures quality in higher education institutions and why? 
There are evidently three candidates that are ready to undertake 
this responsibility – the education institution itself, the 
government and independent authorized accreditation agencies. 
Higher education institutions in Azerbaijan almost do not 
conduct any serious internal evaluation themselves; but here 
again, Khazar University is an exception. Khazar regularly 
conducts internal evaluation with active participation of students, 
and results of the evaluation are published both on paper and 
electronically. The experience of the motherland of accreditation – 
USA – shows that there is no need for direct participation of the 
state in accreditation; state interference, in fact, can only cause 
 74 
harm. In transition countries, like Azerbaijan, this issue is even 
more complicated. As a well-known maxim goes sometimes a 
child forgets that hammer is for hitting a nail, and starts to hit 
everything with it. The state, when it controls something, like acc-
reditation, behaves like a child with a hammer. That is why the 
most expedient form of it after internal evaluation is external eva-
luation carried out by independent authorized accreditation 
agencies.  
This independent quality agency can be a national agency 
staffed with prominent international experts (if the national 
government recognizes and registers such an agency) or a 
regional agency (intra-European) or even pan-European 
organization. 
Accreditation based on impartial evaluation of quality and sho-
wing the ways to increase it should mainly result in state assis-
tance to higher education institutions and formulation of the 
government’s policy for this assistance. Open discussions should 
be carried out on whether there will be financing from state budget 
allocated to public universities, and if yes, what will be the amount 
of it. The main result of accreditation for private higher education 
institutions should be the right of that private institution to obtain 
credits or loans from the state on very favorable conditions and the 
right of students of that institution to receive loans from the 
government also on favorable conditions for paying for their tui-
 75 
tions and fees. Of course, as a result of a successful accreditation, 
both public and private universities can receive other types of 
assistance as well. If the accreditation uncovers the weaknesses or 
incompetence of a program at an institution, that institution will be 
ineligible for state credits for development of that program, and 
accordingly students in that program will not be eligible to receive 
any state funding for their studies. 
 One of the crucial implications is that, in Azerbaijan, the state 
accreditation (the objectivity of which is doubtful) will define 
whether a private university can accept students to a program or 
not. Although the government does not extend any financial 
assistance to private higher education institutions, it has mono-
polized student admission to them at all levels of studies and 
tries to restrict admission to private institutions by any means. In 
terms of the access to higher education, Azerbaijan’s rating is 
one of the lowest not only in comparison to developed countries, 
but also among former-Soviet republics. Despite this apparent 
shortcoming, the government strictly prohibits prospective 
students to get admission to any university they want at their 
own expense!  
On the other hand, public education institutions, fully funded by 
the government, either are not subject to accreditation at all or their 
accreditation is only formal. In reality, the government should first 
of all think about expedience and effectiveness of its budget 
 76 
allocations, and in so doing, should act in accordance with the 
results of accreditation. 
There are Rectors Conferences in European countries, which act 
as main bodies uniting heads of higher education institutions. 
They actively participate in the discussion of problems in 
teaching, research, student and faculty exchange, and in general, 
on correct formulation of academic policies and development. In 
Azerbaijan, this body exists only on paper. Each rector is trying 
to keep his head safe, but keeping one’s head safe is getting 
more and more difficult or more and more expensive. The main 
reasons for rectors (and universities) not undertaking joint 
efforts in this direction are differences between their aims and 
purposes. Thus, Azerbaijani higher education institutions are 
not able to act as players and are rather played with, like toys.  
 77 
The Institute of Education Policy is starting to function at Khazar 
University. The main aim of the institute is to study 
international practices in education, work on quality 
enhancement of education and problems related to its 
evaluation, find out ways of development of educational policy 
and education system in Azerbaijan, and particularly, closely 
watch the Bologna Process and assist those interested in its 
furthering.  
  
 
 78 
E-Interview with  
prof. Hamlet Isaxanli 
 
 
The Caspian Crossroads, volume 6, Issue 2, summer 2002 
The US-Azerbaijan Council, Washington D.C. 
 
 
Professor Isaxanli is the founder and president of Khazar University 
located in Baku, Azerbaijan. Khazar University was founded in 1991 and 
was the first private university to be established in the former Soviet 
Union. Khazar University is a research-oriented university with strong 
and innovative programs geared towards educating a new generation of 
leaders for a new and open model of society based on a market economy. 
The Caspian Crossroads magazine recently submitted a series of questions 
to professor Isaxanli concerning the state of education and education 
policy in Azerbaijan. 
(Q) Prof. Isaxanli could you please give us an overview of the 
state of the education system in Azerbaijan (a) prior to 
independence and (b) in the aftermath of independence? 
An overview of the state of the education system in Azerbaijan 
during the period defined as "prior to independence" leads us to 
look back at Azerbaijan's history. Before the division of Azerbaijan 
between the Russian and Iranian empires that occurred in 1828 
there was basically one Azerbaijan, and its educational system was 
like that in much of the Middle East - most schools were religious. 
The main languages of instruction were Persian and Arabic. 
 79 
During the late Middle Ages Azerbaijani Turkic was introduced in 
some schools. Starting in the 14th century Azerbaijanis began 
composing poetry in Azerbaijani, which vied with Farsi for 
dominance in Azerbaijani culture, progressively achieving the 
leading role. Around that time in Maragha, near Tabriz, a 
university, research and training center with an observatory 
existed that distinguished itself in non-Euclidian geometry, 
trigonometry, astronomy, physics, and ethics. 
However, a general decline in scientific research and education 
began in the Muslim world during the 14th century, just as religion 
became more central in school curricula. The number of high 
quality schools declined, and higher learning institutions 
continued to exist only in important urban centers of the Muslim 
East Later, in the period of the Azerbaijani khanates (principalities) 
in the 18th and first decade of the 19th centuries the role of the 
Azerbaijani language became more visible in schools. 
After the Turkmanchay treaty of 1828 between Russia and Iran, the 
northern section of Azerbaijan became part of Russia, and South 
Azerbaijan remained with Iran (Northern Azerbaijan is where the 
modern Republic of Azerbaijan is located today). Educational 
development in Northern Azerbaijan from 1828 to 1918 was 
defined by Russia's policy to replace Persian with increased use of 
the Azerbaijani language, while at the same time making Russian 
the primary language of instruction. 
 80 
Academic programs and curricula were developed in a coopera-
tive effort between Azerbaijani intellectuals and Russian educators. 
The following types of schools arose: 
 Religious, but with introductory courses in secular subjects; 
 Secular, but with compulsory religious subjects; 
 Russian-Tatar schools, secular and bilingual; these schools 
contributed to the rise of the modern Azerbaijani intelligentsia. 
For higher education, students would mainly go to Russia and 
Europe. 
Azerbaijan's two-years of independence (1918-1920) before the 
country became part of the Soviet Union was not long enough for 
it to develop a national system of education, but three things were 
established: 
 1. A strong presence of the Azerbaijani language;  
 2. Minority rights education policy;  
 3. Azerbaijan State University (founded in1920). 
About one hundred students were sent to Europe for higher 
education. 
The Soviet period brought rapid advances in literacy, which rose to 
almost 100% within 10-15 years. Under the Soviet Union, there 
were two types of higher-learning institutions: 
 81 
1. Universities offering 5-year programs resulting in something like 
an M.A. or M.S. degree – each Soviet Republic had at least one 
University, comparable to an American college of arts and sciences 
(in many cases with Law); 
2. Specialized higher learning institutions (such as institutes of Fine 
Arts, Economics/Finance, Civil or Petro-Chemical Engineering, 
Agriculture, Pedagogy/Teacher Training, etc.); some of these offe-
red 4 or 5-year programs leading to something like a B.A. or B.S. 
After graduating from these universities and institutes, scholars 
could continue with a 3-year graduate program ("aspirantura"), 
leading to the Candidate of Science degree, akin to the American 
Ph.D. and then, a few of them could continue in pure research for a 
degree-doctor of science in certain fields. 
One of the most important reforms of the Soviet period was the 
progressive language policy. Most students could get educated 
from start to finish in their own language. A student, say, with 
native Azerbaijani language in Georgia could attend primary and 
secondary schools in Azerbaijani, study Russian as a second 
language, English/French/ German as a foreign language, and 
have classes in Georgian. 
The language of instruction in higher learning institutions in 
Azerbaijan was mostly Azerbaijani, with Russian in second place. 
For every 100 students majoring in Mathematics and studying in 
 82 
Azerbaijani, there would be a group of 25 or 50 math students 
studying in Russian. In the five Central Asian Republics, in 
comparison, the language of instruction at higher education was 
primarily Russian. 
The learning process was otherwise uniform across the Soviet 
Union: there was one textbook in each subject for the entire 
country and one curriculum for each course of study (Physics, 
Calculus, etc.) in the primary and secondary schools. The positive 
aspect of this system was that the textbooks were of high quality 
and often updated. On the negative side, it was difficult to inspire 
initiative and impossible to make changes. National identity (non-
Russian) was not reflected sufficiently in the curriculum. In the 
1970s and 80s especially, corruption and bribery penetrated 
educational activities, for example in entrance examinations. 
In the aftermath of independence the education system in Azer-
baijan has experienced changes, particularly in higher learning. 
(Q) Similarly could you give us an overview of where the 
education system stands today in Azerbaijan? 
Post-Soviet Azerbaijan's education system has experienced chan-
ges, particularly in higher learning. There are now 28 public uni-
versities (with Soviet like structures) and 15 private universities. 
Public universities get about half their money from the state 
 83 
budget, and the other half from tuition. Private universities do not 
get any public funding. 
There are a number of factors at present that have had a negative 
impact on the educational system, these include: 
• An economy in transition, plagued by corruption and bribery; 
• A poor tax system, at least as it concerns the educational 
system; 
• Poor libraries, weak access to knowledge and the development 
of knowledge; 
On the other hand, globalization has had a positive impact on 
education. 
(Q) What are the main strengths of Azerbaijan's education 
system? 
The current features of Azerbaijan's education system are twofold-
inherited from the Soviet past are quality curricula in fields like 
Natural Sciences, Applied Sciences, Engineering, but in general it is 
a strongly centralized educational system. The main strengths are: 
 Compulsory 11-year high-school education; 
 Existence of private universities along with the state (public) 
ones; 
 Ongoing reform in Education. 
 (Q) Similarly what are the main weaknesses in the education 
system and what is being done or should be done to address it? 
 84 
The Azerbaijani education system is undergoing important chan-
ges. Independence by Azerbaijan demands that we have a modern 
and quality educational system. The main weaknesses, which 
impede the process of change, are rooted in a strongly centralized 
system, which suffers from corruption and the influence of 
kinship. 
Private universities are controlled by the state and regulated 
heavily even though regulation is not based on the established rule 
of law. 
The notions of an "Independent University" as well as "Academic 
Freedom" are almost not present. Political biases are still strongly 
considered and do influence the success of an educational institu-
tions development. There are now many centers providing training 
in information technologies for librarians, students, etc., organized 
by individual universities as well as international foundations. 
(Q) How would you compare the system of education in rural 
areas to urban areas in Azerbaijan? 
High schools in the rural areas of Azerbaijan compared to the 
urban ones are deprived of certain basic conditions, including the 
lack of textbooks, teaching materials, poor facilities, power cuts, 
etc. Rural areas with concentrated Internally Displaced Peoples 
(IDPs) are provided with some support by the international 
humanitarian institutions. 
 85 
Out of a total of 43 Azerbaijani public and private universities, 
more than 30 are located in Baku, the capital city of Azerbaijan. 
The rural population would mainly come to Baku to apply to the 
university and thus they suffer a disadvantageous level of 
preparation for state entrance exams. 
(Q) With the Russian Cyrillic alphabet no longer in use what 
transition issues have Azeris encountered as the education system 
has passed onto using the Latin script? 
Transition issues Azeris have encountered as the education system 
switched onto using the Latin script are concentrated around the 
local book industry. The core issue here is publishing, including 
the development of books. Lack of textbooks and other resources 
still occur both at high schools and universities. Library collections 
are missing books in Latin Azeri. 
Important undertakings have been made through funding by US 
and European organizations, which bring money into the country 
to translate and publish the most important titles in different fields 
of Social Sciences, Law, Education, Journalism, Economics, 
Business, etc. 
(Q) What is the state of affairs concerning state funding for 
education in Azerbaijan and is it adequate to meet current and 
future needs? 
 86 
Funding is done by the state at the high school level with very few 
private schools. Generally it is very low and does not cover even 
basic operational and maintenance expenses. State universities get 
about half of their money from the state budget, and the other half 
comes from tuition. Private universities do not get any public 
funding. To meet current and future needs of the education system 
in Azerbaijan funding for high schools should be a priority for the 
state. 
(Q) Are any international organizations such as the World Bank 
involved in Azerbaijan's educational system today? And if so 
what are these organizations doing to help Azerbaijan? 
Since early 1990s when Azerbaijan got its independence many 
international organizations have been contributing to the reform of 
education in Azerbaijan. Among those the World Bank, European 
Union, UNICEF, Soros Foundation, IREX, Eurasia Foundation 
should be mentioned. Their involvement in today's educational 
system varies from direct grants and/or credits for technical 
assistance to launching research and training programs focusing 
on different issues of reform. 
(Q) Are Azeri students today being taught the skills that will 
enable them to compete in the international economy? 
Different educational institutions provide different curricula. 
While some universities are still using out-of-date programs, texts 
 87 
and materials, there are many providing their students with 
contemporary knowledge and skills? Some private universities, 
like Khazar University, invite international professors to help in 
curriculum development and special skills training. Modern cases 
are being developed with the use of authentic local data. 
(Q) How would you rate the state of training in information 
technologies in Azerbaijan? 
Both state and private educational institutions are paying a good 
deal of attention to training programs in information technologies. 
The most recent success to mention is the launching of the AzNet – 
Azerbaijani Academic Institutions Network, which is founded by 
five public and private universities under the auspices of the 
American Public Affairs Section Internet Access Training Project, 
IREX and Soros Foundation. This network provides connectivity, 
local content Web development, and intensive training programs. 
Another important benefit is that AzNet is working on providing 
connectivity for rural educational institutions. So far Internet cen-
ters have been started in 6 different regions of the country. There 
are now many centers providing training in information techno-
logies for librarians, students, etc., organized by individual univer-
sities as well as international foundations. Another benefit of this 
activity is making possible new projects in distance education. 
(Q) As the founder of the first private university in the former 
Soviet Union, you clearly believe that the private sector has a 
 88 
great role to play in the education system and in education policy, 
what would you identify as key elements for cooperation between 
governments in the FSU and the private sector as they seek to 
strengthen the education system of their respective countries? 
Current development of the education policy in some FSU 
countries is in fact influenced by the private sector. Thus, the 
public sector in education in Azerbaijan has become a less direct 
producer on the education market. Almost 50% present higher 
education institutions in Azerbaijan are newly established entities. 
Though currently there is almost no cooperation between 
government and the private sector (few exceptions can be 
mentioned, like Khazar University internships with the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs) it is very important. 
The private sector should act as a clearinghouse for projects 
intended to have a wide impact on education in Azerbaijani 
primary and secondary schools and institutions of higher learning. 
The current change is embedded within different stages of the 
education system. Quality inconsistencies affect all layers of 
performance from individual to institutional. The development of 
new curricula, textbooks, teaching methods, special training 
programs, testing processes, evaluation mechanisms, accreditation 
system, etc. could be undertaken by private institutions. At the 
same time these activities should be run in close cooperation with 
the government under state support and assistance. 
 89 
(Q) Could you tell us how you came to found Khazar University? 
Starting in the middle 1980s I was teaching as a visiting professor 
in Western Europe, Canada, Turkey, and then in the US and other 
countries. My experience helped me to compare different systems 
of education. I understood that reform in Azerbaijan's system of 
education was necessary and could be done in two ways: (1) by 
enacting gradual reform of the entire higher education system or 
(2) by starting from ground zero – establishing a small university 
with new models. The latter could have been done as a kind of a 
synthesis between an international perspective and national 
values. Government officials liked the idea of starting a new 
university. Although the government could not offer money, it did 
give permission to try. 
For details please refer to my article "In Search of Khazar", Journal 
of Azerbaijani Studies, Khazar University Press, 1998, vol. l, N 4 
(Q) What were the main challenges you encountered in setting up 
the university? 
Starting a new private English language research and educational 
institution under the Soviet regime was a big challenge. Among 
the main challenges I would mention attaining the following: 
academic freedom, strong student and faculty body, quality 
academic programs, no corruption, cooperation with North 
 90 
American and West European academic institutions, resistance to 
cultural imperialism, and university industry relations. 
 91 
(Q) It has been ten years since Khazar University was founded 
what would you say have been your biggest achievements? 
The challenges we encountered in setting up the University turned 
to be our achievements. The biggest ones are recognition, inclu-
ding at the international level, and respect. 
(Q) Finally professor Isaxanli could you kindly tell us what your 
aspirations are for the future of education in Azerbaijan? 
As my country Azerbaijan brings together West and East, I would 
like my University to serve as a leading research and educational 
institution, a center for excellence in education for the Central 
Eurasia region and of course the same goes for Azerbaijan. 
Thank You. 
 92 
Current Trends  
in Education in Azerbaijan 
 
Caspian Studies Program, Harvard University 
A discussion with Professor Hamlet Isaxanli 
April 25, 2001 
 
 
Summary by Emily Van Buskirk 
 
 
On April 25, 2001, Professor Hamlet Isaxanli spoke about current 
trends in Azerbaijani education in a Caspian Studies Program 
seminar at Harvard's Belfer Center for Science and International 
Affairs. Professor Isaxanli is president and founder of Khazar 
University in Baku, Azerbaijan. Established in 1991, Khazar is one 
of the first private universities in the former Soviet Union, and the 
first in Azerbaijan. Khazar University (www.khazar.org) is 
dedicated to reinforcing the idea of an open, pluralistic, democratic, 
market-oriented form of social organization.  
Professor Isaxanli, a mathematician by training, began with a 
lesson in Azerbaijani history. Before the division of Azerbaijan 
between the Russian and Iranian empires that occurred in 1828, he 
explained, there was basically one Azerbaijan, and its educational 
system was like that in much of the Middle East--most schools were 
religious. The main languages of instruction were Persian and 
Arabic. During the late Middle Ages Azerbaijani Turkic was 
 93 
introduced in some schools. Starting in the 14th century 
Azerbaijanis began composing poetry in Azerbaijani, which vied 
with Farsi for dominance in Azerbaijani culture, progressively 
achieving the leading role. Around that time in Maragha, near 
Tabriz, a university, research and training center with an observa-
tory existed that distinguished itself in non-Euclidian geometry, 
trigonometry, astronomy, physics, and ethics. However, a general 
decline in scientific research and education began in the Muslim 
world during the 14th century, just as religion became more central 
in school curricula. The number of high quality schools declined, 
and higher learning institutions continued to exist only in 
important urban centers of the Muslim East. Later, in the period of 
the Azerbaijani khanates (principalities) in the 18th and first decade 
of the 19th centuries the role of the Azerbaijani language became 
more visible in schools.  
After the Turkmanchay treaty of 1828 between Russia and Iran, the 
northern section of Azerbaijan became part of Russia, and South 
Azerbaijan remained with Iran. Even now, said Isaxanli, the 
Azerbaijani people are divided between two countries, the 
Republic of Azerbaijan (or "North Azerbaijan") with a population 
of nearly 8 million, where speakers of Azerbaijani form about 7 
million, and Iran, where there are 20-30 million ethnic Azerbaijanis 
(population estimates differ from source to source). The education 
systems in these two countries diverge. Isaxanli decided to focus on 
 94 
educational development and trends in northern Azerbaijan, where 
the modern Republic of Azerbaijan is located today. 
From 1828 to 1918, Russian policy sought first to increase the use of 
Azerbaijani to replace Persian and then to make Russian the 
primary language of instruction. Academic programs and curricula 
were developed in a cooperative effort between Azerbaijani 
intellectuals and Russian educators. The following types of schools 
arose: 
 Religious, but with introductory courses in secular subjects;  
 Secular, but with compulsory religious subjects;  
 Russian-Tatar schools, secular and bilingual; these schools 
contributed to the rise of modern Azerbaijani intelligentsia. 
 
For higher education, students would mainly go to Russia and 
Europe. 
Azerbaijan's two year independence period (1918-1920) before 
becoming part of the Soviet Union was not long enough for it to 
develop a national system of education, but three things were 
established: 1) a strong presence of the Azerbaijani language; 2) 
minority rights education policy; and 3) Azerbaijan State University 
(founded in1920). About one hundred students were sent to Europe 
for higher education. 
 95 
The Soviet period brought rapid advances in literacy, which rose to 
100% within 10-15 years. Under the Soviet Union, there were two 
types of higher-learning institutions: 1) universities offering 5-year 
programs terminating in something like an M.A. or M.S.--each 
Soviet Republic had at least one University, comparable to an 
American college of arts and sciences (in many cases with law); 2) 
specialized higher learning institutions (such as institutes of fine 
arts, economics, civil or petro-chemical engineering, pedagogy, 
etc.); some of these offered 4 or 5-year programs leading to 
something like a B.A. or B.S. After graduating from these 
universities and institutes, scholars could continue with a 3-year 
graduate program ("aspirantura"), leading to the Candidate of 
Science degree, akin to the American Ph.D.  
One of the most important reforms of the Soviet period was the 
progressive language policy: any student could get educated from 
start to finish in her own language. A student with native 
Azerbaijani language in Georgia could attend school in Azerbaijani, 
study Russian as a second language, French as a foreign language, 
and have classes in Georgian, said Isaxanli from personal 
experience (being born in Georgia). The language of instruction in 
higher learning institutions in Azerbaijan was mostly Azerbaijani, 
with Russian in second place. For every 100 students majoring in 
Mathematics and studying in Azerbaijani, there would be a group 
of 25 or 50 math students studying in Russian. In the 5 Central 
 96 
Asian republics, in comparison, the language of instruction at 
higher education was primarily Russian. 
The learning was otherwise uniform across the Soviet Union: there 
was one textbook in each subject for the entire country, and one 
curriculum for each course of study (physics, calculus, etc.). The 
positive aspect of this system was that the textbooks were of high 
quality and often updated. On the negative side, it was difficult to 
inspire initiative and impossible to make changes. According to 
Isaxanli, national identity was not reflected sufficiently in the curri-
culum. In the 1970s and 80s especially, corruption and bribery pe-
netrated educational activities, for example entrance examinations.  
Post-Soviet Azerbaijan's education system has experienced chan-
ges, particularly in higher learning. There are now 28 state univer-
sities (with Soviet-like structures) and 17 private universities. State 
universities get about half their money from the state budget, and 
the other half from tuition. Private universities do not get any 
public funding. Isaxanli named several features of the current 
Azerbaijani situation that have a negative effect on education:  
 An economy in transition, plagued by corruption and bribery;  
 A poor tax system, at least as concerns the educational system;  
 Poor libraries, weak access to knowledge and its development; 
 
On the other hand, the globalization phenomenon has had a 
positive impact on education. 
 97 
Finally, Professor Isaxanli discussed Khazar University and its 
conception. When Professor Isaxanli taught as a visiting professor 
in Western Europe and the United States, he wrote an article 
comparing different systems of education. At that time, it occurred 
to him that reform in Azerbaijan's system was necessary, and could 
be done in two ways: 1) by enacting step by step reform of the 
entire higher education system or 2) by starting from ground zero, 
establishing a small university with new models, as a kind of a 
synthesis between an international perspective and national values. 
Government officials liked the idea of starting a new university, 
and although the government could not offer money, it did give 
Professor Isaxanli permission to try.  
Professor Isaxanli hired out of his own pocket 6-7 professors and 
opened the doors of Khazar (which means Caspian) to 20 students. 
He decided to establish English as the principal language of 
instruction so that his students could participate in exchanges, 
benefit from visiting professors, and use Western textbooks. He 
was searching for the appropriate model of education, and decided 
that the school should use a credit system (in comparison, in the 
Soviet system, a student that failed one class had to repeat the 
whole year). Khazar gets much of its funding from international 
foundations, including USIA. It has partnerships with many 
universities, in Europe and the U.S., including UCLA. 
 98 
Discussion 
- Q. What are the basic requirements at Khazar University?  
- A: Students must take advanced English, Azerbaijani studies, and 
then they must fulfill distribution requirements in the social 
sciences, humanities, and sciences. It is similar to the American 
system, according to Isaxanli.  
- Q. How many students are there? How are they funded? 
- A. There are now about 1000 students at the university, 25% of 
who are graduate students (some from abroad). The school has 
need-based and merit-based scholarships. About 15% of students 
have financial aid. 
- Q. Who are the teachers? 
- A. Many are some of Azerbaijan's well-known professors (who 
teach at more than one University at once). Khazar also has many 
visiting professors teaching social sciences, which is advantageous 
compared to the state schools, where social scientists are mostly 
former Marxist-Leninists. 
- Q. What is the admissions process? 
- A. Even private universities cannot choose their own students. We 
have to sign up for central state exam system and request a certain 
number of students (and then sometimes bargain with the 
 99 
government). The system breeds corruption, as some private 
universities pay for students. 
- Q. What do Khazar graduates go on to do? 
- A. Most are employed by multi-national companies; some are 
employed by the state. Some continue their education in the U.S. or 
Europe. The most popular degree at Khazar is the M.B.A. 
- Q. Are there some subjects that it makes more sense to teach in 
Azerbaijani than in English, for example ones that depend on 
local context? 
- A. Yes. For example, in the legal field, international law, human 
rights and humanitarian law are taught in English. Criminal law 
and other kinds of law that are more country-specific are taught in 
Azerbaijani. 
- Q. Does Azerbaijan have a system of accreditation? 
- A. Yes, but it is not well established, not independent. Universities 
can be accredited by the Ministry of Education or Council of 
Ministers but this process is not always standard. It's very impor-
tant, according to Isaxanli, to have good partners in Europe, and 
the U.S., which may act also as external evaluators.  
 100 
Our Education at the Cross Roads 
 
The Conference  
"The Education Reforms in the Republic of Azerbaijan" 
Baku, January 27-28, 1995 
 
 
Hamlet Isaxanli 
(Khazar University, Baku, Azerbaijan) 
 
Azerbaijan is one of the countries which is at the cross roads of old 
paths and new directions, i.e., the transition from so-called 
socialism to capitalism, and yet we are uncertain of the new life 
style most people will accept. From an economic and political 
point of view the key issues of the transition period are closely 
connected with privatization and a democratic structure. And 
what about our science, culture and education? 
Our economical and political pasts have been described and 
analyzed in many research volumes. As a result of these 
investigations the necessity of new directions toward economical 
and political freedom and definite actions and game rules have 
been found and determined. 
The past, the present, and the nearest future of our science, culture 
and education are particularly important questions and need 
thorough discussions. These questions, especially school problems, 
are a grave concern for our experts in education. 
 101 
One of the primary characteristic features of the Soviet educational 
system was the over centralized and single-model system of 
education. On the one hand, it provided the students, with various 
knowledge which had been tested for many ears. On the other 
hand, because of that over centralization it radically stopped all 
initiatives and efforts to fashion new educational changes and 
experience. Education depended on the socialist ideology and it set 
the social sciences and humanities into a fixed framework. Russian 
language was merely an incidental means of solving specific prob-
lems of communication, text-books, curriculum and the whole 
education system. A national point of view, native culture, history, 
geography and literature were not sufficiently found in the 
school's curriculum and instruction; they were compiled (some-
times naturally, but mostly on purpose) to benefit the Russian 
style. 
Because curricula, programs, and textbooks were universal in the 
Soviet Union there was a decreased role of our Azeri language, 
habits and traditions (another cause was the absolute authority of 
Russian). 
Great attention was paid to the pupil's activities joining the Pioneer 
and Komsomol organizations. The students were brought up 
under the guise of the Soviet ideology, patriotism being well-bred, 
and were given opportunities to go in for sports, music and art. It's 
impossible to deny the fact that the Pioneer organizations had 
 102 
some advantages in forming a good school climate among primary 
and secondary school pupils. 
When Azerbaijan became an independent country, changes took 
place in our education system. 
The Azerbaijan government maintained the same centralized 
system (the Ministry of Education) which carried out only slight 
changes. First of all, this office had to accept the necessity of 
innovative ways and transitions in education. The other fact is that 
because of an unstable political situation in our country, a 
centralized system of education cannot function effectively. The 
last reason is the economic crisis which has caused inflation, salary 
problems, lack of text-books and economic support to schools and 
non-effectiveness of the administrative-command regime. It seems 
a paradox that all the attempts of the State University or Institutes, 
to seek ways, wherever possible, to enrich the curriculum by 
offering new methods of teaching in education are blocked by the 
centralized government. 
The important first step in education was the foundation of private 
higher learning institutes. Despite the fact that economic 
conditions, initial teacher's staff and social belief in private 
institutions were not at a required level, they could compete with 
state institutions due to their attempt toward educational reforms 
and innovations, effective financial policy and broad relationships 
with the foreign educational centers. They proved their capability 
 103 
to be rivals of the state institutes. Unfortunately, we can't say 
anything about strong private secondary schools at this point in 
time.  
Right now, there are no substitute institutions that have taken the 
place of Pioneer organizations. The priority of national pride, some 
signs of atheism in people's conceptions, educational activities based 
on some elements of Islamic traditions, are due to teacher's 
spontaneous action which leads to confrontation. It's a known fact 
that there isn't my development of a social and academic climate 
that gives a student a strong feeling of belonging to his own world. 
Secondary schools still have a single-model traditional system of 
education. The programs and text-books are traditional with only 
slight changes. 
Budget support to schools has decreased day by day, and it 
destroys the material base of schools, causes withdrawal of the 
experienced teachers from schools. The level of education is 
getting low, it increases the taking of bribes, presents and gifts 
from the parents. The Latin-based alphabet has been one of the 
main organizational steps in our education. But the problem of 
books and publications has not been solved. In fact, the problems 
have increased. Generally, the supply of text-books should be 
considered to be one of the most important problems. What is the 
problem of publishing and new text-books? 
 104 
First of all, the publication of national text-books (on literature, 
linguistics, history, geography, human beings and society, etc.) 
was considered to be a first priority. In a short period of time, 
many qualified specialists took part in this serious work and 
numerous textbooks have been already published. But the 
effectiveness and the pedagogical level of these textbooks will now 
be tested in practice. Students should understand the rationale of 
the methods by which they are being taught. The translated text-
books are supposed to supply our needs on this sphere. We 
shouldn't forget foreign language instruction (as Russian, English, 
German, French, Persian, Arabic) and the importance of the new 
textbooks. There is little question about the quality of these 
textbooks. On the other hand there's a great necessity to teach 
different subjects in foreign languages. In this field, Khazar 
University has done much work and we can already speak of some 
significant results. 
The refugee problem influences all our lives as well as education. 
The displaced persons from the occupied areas were located 
primarily at schools. So, the number of closed schools increased 
and affected the entire educational system. Refugee Camps and 
education in these camps are in the worst level. 
What principles are our educations based on? What standards do 
the schools have in comparison with our previous Soviet-Russian 
orientation? 
 105 
Are we somehow going to follow the American or European 
Education system? 
Or perhaps are we able to self-consciously prepare our own system 
of education? 
What educational system do we need? 
Shall we have enough time and patience?  
Azerbaijan is in a transition period.  
Our education is at a cross roads. 
 106 
Minority Education Policy  
in Azerbaijan and Iran* 
 
IREX supported research project 
 
Hamlet Isaxanli (Khazar University, Baku, Azerbaijan) 
and 
Val D. Rust (University of California, Los Angeles, USA) 
Younes Vahdati (Tabriz University, Tabriz, Iran) 
Afgan Abdullayev (Khazar University) 
Marufa Madatova ("Dunya" Lab School, Khazar University) 
Inna Grudskaya (Khazar University) 
 
 
The world is moving in the direction of a new era. Great changes 
are occurring in almost every section of the world, and schools are 
in the middle of these difficulties, for it is the schools that are being 
called on to prepare youth for a future society, a society that will 
certainly be very different from yesterday’s society. Among the 
changes occurring throughout the world is the requirement that 
social justice is gained on the part of minority groups in societies. 
This is particularly difficult in countries such as Azerbaijan and 
Iran, where recent political revolutions have stressed a high degree 
of nationalism and national allegiance. The implications these 
revolutions have for schooling are particularly difficult because 
schools are expected to draw young people into their national 
mainstreams, but if social justice is to be served, schools must also 
                                               
* Journal of Azerbaijani Studies. Vol.5, № 3-4, p.3-64, 2002. Khazar University Press. 
 107 
provide minority groups within society with a sense of cultural 
identity and equity. Often, however, the agenda set for 
schools focuses almost exclusively on nationalism and cultural 
homogenization. This is what has happened in both Iran and 
Azerbaijan, where education has been instituted to ensure that all 
young people develop a sense of identity and allegiance to the 
nation state.  
 
THE DEFINITION OF MINORITIES 
In this project we have undertaken to examine minority education 
policies in Azerbaijan and Iran. Our focus has been on indigenous 
ethnic minorities. That is, we have chosen not to deal with refugees 
in Iran or Russians in Azerbaijan. One complication in our project 
is the different ways Azerbaijan and Iran define minority groups.  
Azerbaijan, on the one hand, focuses on national and ethnic 
minorities within its borders; however, that straightforward view 
is complicated by the fact that Azerbaijan is not a conventional 
mono-national state but is a multi-national state. In most nation-
states, a dominant culture and/or ethnic group is found with one 
or more subordinate ethnic groups. However, Azerbaijan as a 
multi-national state with other important nationalities within its 
border. There are Russians and an extensive number of schools 
that continue to use Russian as the language of instruction. There 
 108 
are pockets of Georgians in Azerbaijan and Azeri-speaking people 
in Georgia. A complicated arrangement has been carried over from 
Soviet times where Georgians can follow the Georgian curriculum 
in Azerbaijani schools and be taught by Georgian educated 
teachers, although Georgian pupils must study Azerbaijan history 
(from textbooks translated into Georgian). And Lezghian pupils 
can study the Lezghian language through all eleven years of 
schooling in Azerbaijan in preparation to attend the university in 
Dagestan (Russia). 
To gain some glimpse of what it means to be Azerbaijani, we 
reviewed the textbooks on the history of Azerbaijan. It is taught in 
all grades of secondary school, but information about the Azeri 
people is given only in the sixth and seventh grade textbooks. In 
the sixth grade pupils learn about “The birth of the Azeri nation,” 
while in the seventh grade they learn about “The formation of the 
Azeri people,” which describes the formation process of the Azeri 
people and becoming Muslim. The texts indicate that Azeri nation 
originated from the local ethnic Turks and from the other Turkish 
speaking ethnic groups located in this region. There is a map 
showing where ethnic Turks lived, and it is very large, starting 
from Anatolia in the West and extending to the Chinese borders in 
the East. Though the names of the ethnic Turks were different, 
their origin was the same. Today’s Azeri Turks are their heirs. The 
texts also indicate that all the important ethnic groups in Azer-
 109 
baijan have some ethnic connection with each other. However, 
Azerbaijanis constitute the major ethnic group among them.  
In Azerbaijan, it is only the Azerbaijanis who make claim to the 
label “Azerbaijani.” Talish, Lezghian or Udin citizens would not 
identify themselves as being Azerbaijani, even though they are full 
citizens of the Azerbaijan Republic. In other words, there remains 
some separation between ethnicity and national identity. 
Iran, on the other hand, focuses on religious minorities. The only 
reference to ethnicity in the Constitution is Article 19: “All people 
of Iran, whatever the ethnic group or tribe to which they belong, 
enjoy equal rights; and color, race, language, and the like do not 
bestow any privilege.” But this is interpreted in a negative sense, in 
that no reference to ethnicity has been allowed, although we shall 
see that this practice is beginning to change. With the 1979 political 
revolution, the state of Iran was transformed into a theocracy, with 
the state religion being Shi’ite Muslim, although there are some 
Sunni Muslims as well as Bahá’ís, Assyrian and Armenian 
Christians, Jews, and Zoroastrians in the country. For the past 
three decades the revolutionaries in Iran have attempted to re-
arrange that country’s institutions, including its education system, 
in order to implement Islamic ideals and values. The new regime 
wished to change the old system’s values and institutions in a 
short period of time, and so the focus on minorities in schools has 
been on religion rather than ethnicity. 
 110 
It is significant to note that, according to Article 13 of the 
Constitution, “Zoroastrian, Jewish, and Christian Iranians are the 
only recognized religious minorities, who, within the limits of the 
law, are free to perform their religious rites and ceremonies, and to 
act according to their own canon in matters of personal affairs and 
religious education.” Iranian policy toward most religious 
minorities does not excuse the excesses that are apparent regarding 
certain religious minorities. For example, the Bahá’í religion is 
subjected systematically to persecution, because those in this 
religion refuse to compromise their beliefs in the face of Iranian 
officials.1 
For the purposes of this study, we operationally define minority 
education as that pertaining to ethnic minorities. Our concern in 
this project is to find the extent to which schools have gone beyond 
their nationalistic task and have begun to address the needs and 
interests of the ethnic minorities within their borders.  
To this point, little is known concerning ethnic considerations in 
education in either Azerbaijan or Iran. Both countries are 
multicultural in terms of their respective demographic profiles. 
Azerbaijan has Jewish, Armenian, Georgian, Russian, Kurdish, 
Talish, and Lezghian minority groups, while Iran has Azerbaijani, 
Kurdish, Bakhtyari, Baluchish, Jewish, Assyrian, and Arabian 
minority groups. In recent years both countries have experienced 
radical political change. In 1991 Azerbaijan became an indepen-
 111 
dent republic after the collapse of the former Soviet Union, while 
in 1979 the Shah was deposed and an Islamic republic was 
established. In both countries education has become a servant in 
efforts to build a unified nation state.  
 
TWO-PRONGED APPROACH 
Our task in this project has been to engage in a two-pronged 
assessment of education for ethnic minorities in Azerbaijan and 
Iran. First, we wished to determine what direction state policy is 
going regarding education for minority groups in the two 
countries. Second, we wished to look at a small number of schools, 
both at the primary and the secondary level to see what is actually 
happening in the schools themselves. Our assumption has been 
that in periods of great change, national policy is translated 
differently in particular schools, so it is not enough to look only at 
formal state policy.  
1. State Policy Data Collection 
Scholars in both Azerbaijan and Iran analyzed documents 
reflecting state policies regarding the education of minority groups 
to determine the degree to which state policies have evolved in the 
past one to two decades. We have relied on Azerbaijani scholars to 
 112 
investigate Azerbaijani policies and Iranian scholars to investigate 
Iranian policies. 
The researchers have addressed specific issues. Have policies 
changed in the recent past? In what direction have policies 
changed? In operational terms, the scholars have looked at specific 
educational dimensions: 
 Policies related to the Language of instruction 
 National Curriculum Developments 
 Textbooks Developments 
 Guidelines for Teacher Training Programs 
 
2. Specific School Data Collection 
Our plan was to look at schools at the primary level and schools at 
the secondary level in each country. Researchers visited primary 
and a secondary school in various communities in each country, 
where relatively large numbers of the community belong to ethnic 
minority groups. For example, in Iran we visited a city where 
Azeri speaking people dominate, and another community where 
Kurds are located. In Azerbaijan we visited a community in 
Lenkoran and another in Kuba, which have sizeable numbers of 
minority members, though no single minority group dominates in 
these areas.  
 113 
Each school was visited by a team of researchers. Researchers were 
trained over an entire week in the month of March, 2002. The 
trainer was the Director of the project, Val D. Rust. The team spent 
several days visiting schools. We chose to take qualitative 
approach to the study on the grounds that it would best serve the 
purpose of this investigation, namely: to understand the behavior 
of teachers in the context of the specific institutional context, to 
understand this context in relation to the local educational 
directorate, and to understand how the provisions for minority 
students either support or deviate from the national educational 
agenda. Interviews were conducted with local educational 
directorate leaders, school leaders, and teachers. They were open-
ended and respondents were asked for information and opinions 
concerning curriculum, instructional programs, language issues, 
and textbooks. However, researchers were careful to avoid leading 
questions or to reinforce participant responses. Questions were 
grouped around policy and practice related to minorities in the 
local directorate and the school. A second group of questions 
revolved around the curriculum, language issues, and textbooks. A 
third group of questions were related to their perspectives on the 
conditions that exist related to minority students and teachers. 
Observations were made of classrooms with the intention of 
getting some sense of the interactions of teachers and students 
with members of minority groups. 
We shall deal first with Azerbaijan, followed by Iran. 
 114 
 
I. EDUCATION OF ETHNIC MINORITIES IN AZERBAIJAN 
 
THE NATIONAL CONTEXT 
The country of Azerbaijan stretches from the Caucasus Mountains 
in the northwest to Iran in the south and the Caspian Sea in the 
east. To the west lies the disputed Nagorno-Karabagh territory. 
Azerbaijan covers an area of 86,600 square kilometers of which 
some 20 percent constitutes the Nagorno-Karabagh and neigh-
boring  territory occupied by Armenia. The country is divided into 
61 administrative regions and five cities. There is a significant 
difference in the quality of life, schools and teachers between the 
rural and urban regions. The country has good deposits of natural 
recourses which in time might change its economic position.  
Azerbaijan has a long history of minority groups, although in the 
past half century the status of minority groups has changed 
dramatically, in that the country has moved toward mono-
ethnicity.2 Analysis of the 1939, 1959, 1970, 1979, 1989, and 1999 
census data shows the dynamics of the growth of the Azerbaijanis 
in the total population of Azerbaijan has shifted from 58.4% in 1939 
to 90.6% in 1999: 
1939 1959 1970 1979 1989 1999 
 115 
58.4% 67.4% 73.8% 78.1% 82.7% 90.6% 
 
While various committees on nationality affairs exist at present in 
the Azerbaijan presidential administration and in the Azeri Parlia-
ment, minorities are seen as susceptible to manipulation by out-
siders. At the same time, the state does give financial and political 
support to officially sanctioned minority organizations. Currently 
the State radio broadcasts are in the Azerbaijani, Russian, Geor-
gian, Lezghian, Kurdish and Talish languages. State television 
programs are in Azerbaijani. There are two Russian television 
channels. There are some newspapers, magazines, books, dictio-
naries, and textbooks published in languages of various ethnic 
groups. Some are funded by the State, while international foun-
dations or NGOs contribute a good deal to publishing. 
Data below is given according to the report published by the 
Azerbaijani State Statistics Committee on the 1999 Census of 
Population, which was held in accordance with the UN recom-
mendations. 
 116 
The dynamics of change in the ethnic composition of the 
Azerbaijani Republic’s population 
 19
79
, t
ho
us
an
ds
  
of
 p
eo
pl
e 
19
79
, %
 
19
89
, t
ho
us
an
ds
 
 o
f p
eo
pl
e 
19
89
, %
 
19
99
, t
ho
us
an
ds
  
of
 p
eo
pl
e 
19
99
, %
 
Total 
population 
6,026,500 100 7,021,200 100 7,953,400 100 
Azerbaijanis 4,708,800 78.1 5,805,000 82.7 7,205,500 90.6 
Armenians 475,500 7.9 390,500 5.6 120,700 1.5 
Avars 36,000 0.6 44,100 0.6 50,900 0.6 
Georgians 11,400 0.2 14,200 0.2 14,900 0.2 
Jews 35,500 0.6 30,800 0.4 8,900 0.1 
Kurds 5,700 0.1 12,200 0.2 13,100 0.2 
Lezghians 158,100 2.6 171,400 2.4 178,000 2.2 
Russians 475,300 7.9 392,300 5.6 141,700 1.8 
Sakhurs 8,500 0.1 13,300 0.2 15,900 0.2 
Talish - - 21,200 0.3 76,800 1.0 
Tatars 31,400 0.5 28,600 0.4 30,000 0.4 
Tats - - - - 10,900 0.13 
Turks 7,900 0.1 17,700 0.2 43,400 0.5 
Udins 5,800 0.1 6,100 0.1 4,100 0.05 
Ukrainians 26,400 0.4 32,300 0.5 29,000 0.4 
Other 
nationalities 
40,200 0.8 41,500 0.6 9,600 0.12 
 117 
Note: The current population of Azerbaijan is 8,141,400 (January 2002) [Unfortunately we don’t have 
information on the number of nationalities by 2002] 
These figures show that the number of Azerbaijanis has grown over 
the past 20 years.3 The major reasons for population growth in 
Azerbaijan are the followings.  
1. The  birth rate  
2. The refugees from Armenia   
3. Azerbaijanis from Georgia for education or business 
The number of minorities has dropped increasingly after the Ar-
menians left Azerbaijan dew to Nagorno-Garabagh conflict. 
The number of Russians has dropped; over the past 20 years more 
than 330,000 Russians chose to return to their historical homeland. 
The number of Turks has grown following the events of violence 
against Meskhetian Turks in Uzbekistan in 1989. There is a minor 
change in the number of Tatars and Ukrainians. The number of 
those who registered as Talish, has increased as well, although 
many members of this nationality now regard the Azerbaijani 
Turkic language as their mother tongue. The dynamics in the 
growth of numbers of Lezghians over the past 20 years must be 
considered usual. There are persistent rumors that Lezghians have 
emigration north of the border into Dagestan, Russia, where the 
main body of Lezghians is located, but the figures indicate this is 
not happening. One can observe a drop in the number of Christian 
Udins people. A drop in numbers is also observed among the 
 118 
Jewish population; however, there has been a drop in the number 
of emigrants to Israel in recent years. There are fewer emigrants 
among “other nationalities” as well. The number of Kurds has 
grown from 5,700 to 13,100 since 1979.  
Like most countries the population in Azerbaijan is concentrated in 
the larger cities such as Baku (around 40 percent of the total 
population of 7.5 million). A slightly smaller percentage of ethnic 
minorities live in Baku (8.7 percent) than in the Republic in general 
(9.4 percent).  
About 900,000 people or 12 percent of the population are refugees 
or internally displaced persons, who have been pushed out of 
Nagorno-Karabagh and neighboring regions. Such a dislocation of 
the population has caused an overload on the provision of 
education in areas where the refugee camps are located. There 
were approximately 450 schools (primary and secondary) in 
operation in the occupied territories. Now part of them have been 
reorganized in refugee camps.. There were other educational 
institutions such as technical institutes and universities. It must be 
noted that the numbers only indicate the quantity. The quality of 
the infrastructure, in many cases, is in need of urgent attention.  
The collapse of trade among the republics of the former Soviet 
Union and the conflict with Armenia have been the main sources 
of continuous economic decline. Independent Azerbaijan now 
faces serious problems with employment opportunities in certain 
 119 
sectors of the labor market. Traditional areas such as manufac-
turing and agriculture that serviced the Soviet market are no 
longer viable.  
 
THE AZERBAIJAN EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM 
The government of Azerbaijan, since the devolution of the Soviet 
Union, has been trying to develop an education system that will 
complement the government’s plans to move toward a market 
driven economy and become a player in the emerging global 
economic system. Prior to 1992 Azerbaijan was a state of the old 
Soviet Union and during that period Azerbaijan education was 
planned and delivered from Moscow with little regard for local 
issues. At that time, curricula (i.e., the subjects to be taught and the 
time devoted to teaching them) were developed by the Ministry of 
Education of the USSR in Moscow and sent to the republics. In the 
republics, the local ministries could make minor changes to the 
received curriculum. For example, the Ministry of Education for 
Azerbaijan added to the curriculum time to allow for some study 
of the history of Azerbaijan and the Azeri language. The curricu-
lum could also be translated into the Azeri language. Schools were 
available using both Azeri and Russian as the language of instruc-
tion. The Minister of Education then approved the curriculum, and 
funding for the implementation of the curriculum was provided 
following the endorsement of the Azerbaijani Ministry of Finance. 
 120 
Implementation of the curriculum was the responsibility of educa-
tional institutions. All children in Azerbaijan had to learn Russian 
language and culture. 
Generally, there were a few controlled variations of the curri-
culum, and what was taught in schools did not differ throughout 
the Soviet regions. However, during the Soviet period there were a 
few reforms to this general pattern. In 1980, educational institu-
tions were granted more freedom and independence to resolve 
some educational problems, which enabled some innovations to 
emerge. For example, institutions provided for more in-depth 
studies of particular subjects and supported the establishment of 
studies that had a particular focus or emphasis (e.g., in the 
humanities or in technical studies). 
With the fall of the former Soviet Union, the Azerbaijan education 
system that had been closed from the outside world for the 
previous 70 years and depended significantly on Moscow to 
provide leadership, had to fend for itself. The search for a new 
education system is further complicated by the continued tension 
on some of the country’s borders with Armenia, Russia, and Iran. 
In 1992, the government passed the Law on Education, which out-
lined the purposes, tasks and directions for educational reform. 
New policy directions included a modification of the highly centra-
lized system, the incorporation of national and market economy 
perspectives within the curriculum, and the encouragement of 
 121 
parental and community participation in education. Even though 
schools using Russian as the language of instruction were per-
mitted, Soviet ideology was removed from teaching and learning. 
The reforms in the early 1990s resulted in a number of 
curriculum variations, and approximately 30 variations have so-
far been endorsed. For example, ordinary secondary schools in 
Azerbaijan start teaching English from the first year of 
secondary school, i.e., the fifth grade. However, some schools 
specialize in English or another foreign language and these 
schools start teaching a foreign language from the second grade 
of primary school. Additionally, there are new kinds of learning 
institutions: lyceums, gymnasiums and colleges.4 At the same 
time, international agencies, particularly UNICEF and the World 
Bank, have been developing so-called pilot schools with the idea 
that these pilot schools reflect world standards. These pilot 
schools provide different curricula and instructional innovations, 
such as student-active learning. The pattern of study in these new 
institutions is initially agreed upon in the Scientific and 
Methodological Center on Educational Problems and presented 
 122 
to the Minister of Education for approval. Schools could select 
which curriculum plan they wanted to adopt, and could adopt 
different plans for the primary and secondary years of the school.  
The increased flexibility in relation to curriculum plans helped to 
generate discussions about education and curriculum (e.g., as 
schools could choose between a range of curriculum plans, there 
was extensive discussion about which plan or plans would best 
suit the needs of the school and its students). These discussions 
helped to stimulate some school reforms, as did the Ministry’s 
acceptance of experimental schools (i.e., schools which were given 
approval to adapt curriculum plans). Azerbaijan’s curriculum is 
almost entirely subject based, even at the primary level, and all 
pupils are required to take almost all subjects. Because there are too 
many subjects little flexibility and choice are possible. Further, many 
subjects begin very late in the program. Finally, many critical 
subjects are missing, such as civics, ethics, logic, health, business, 
psychology, ecology, religion, political science and government. 
The 1998 reform proposals have been initiated to promote greater 
flexibility within the education system and to improve the learning 
opportunities and achievements of students. The proposed reforms 
are currently the subject of debate in the national Parliament. They 
are being advanced at a time when the education system is under a 
great deal of pressure. The fiscal restraints created by the economic 
 123 
downturn have resulted in a reduction of funds available for 
education. Further, there is uncertainty as the system attempts to 
adjust to and implement the changes that are necessary to make 
the transition from ways of thinking and acting that were 
consistent with the Soviet system to those that are consistent with 
the new vision for the Azerbaijan education system. Nevertheless, 
there appears to be a deep commitment from the Minister of 
Education to press on with proposed reforms. 
A draft reform concept was prepared in December 1998. It 
indicates that the planned reforms were to be phased in over a six-
year period. Phase one (1999) was to be the planning stage. Phase 
two (2000-2003) was to establish the conditions for the 
implementation of the reforms, and phase three (starting from 
2004) will cover the implementation of all the activities envisaged 
in the program. 
The proposed reforms include: 
 Establishing new educational institutions designed to cater for 
the full range of student abilities; 
 Reforming educational programs to align them to the needs of 
Azerbaijani society and a market oriented economy; 
 Establishing agreed educational standards and accountability 
measures;  
 124 
 Promoting greater flexibility at the school level through the 
devolution of agreed responsibilities (including control over 
financial allocations); 
 Reforming the financing of the education system. 
The concept paper outlining the intended reform program 
indicates that a great deal has been achieved in terms of 
educational advancement in Azerbaijan. Literacy levels are high; 
there is a well-established and extensive schooling infrastructure, 
and education is open to all and there is universal basic education. 
Current reforms in the education system are thus guided by two 
imperatives. The first is to educate Azerbaijan youth about their 
own history, culture; and traditions; and the second is to attune 
education to the changes in the social, economic, political and 
governmental structures of the Republic. Although steps have 
been taken to improve various aspects of schooling, these reforms 
have not been systematic nor all-encompassing.   
According to the latest Human Development Report 2001, Azerbai-
jan ranks 89th out of 173 countries of the world on the Human 
Development Index (HDI). Between 1992-95, the value of the HDI 
fell from 0.718 to 0.692. Thereafter, the country’s HDI value has 
improved and so has its ranking.5 
Azerbaijan’s adult literacy rate is at 97.3 percent. (Male: 99 percent, 
female: 96 percent). Most people complete, on average, ten years of 
schooling. Azerbaijan’s education system, run by the state, consists 
 125 
of schools which provide education at the nursery, primary and 
secondary stage. The state also looks after professional schools, 
which offer general and specialized education. Private educational 
institutions, which offer higher and secondary special education, 
are being set up. Nowadays there are five private high schools 
three of them are affiliated with Universities. Lyceums and 
gymnasiums with their own curricula have also been established. 
The country’s education index is high but there are some distur-
bing trends. 
The number of pre-school institutions has declined resulting in 
fewer jobs for teachers, who are mostly women. Although the 
number of secondary general schools has not changed, their condi-
tion has deteriorated. They have no money to renovate infrast-
ructure, buy teaching aids, or upgrade curricula. 
Since the beginning of 1996, the cost of textbooks, meals, and other 
services are being passed on to parents. Parents with low per 
capita income cannot afford to buy uniforms for their children or 
pay for school transport. Children are dropping out to supplement 
family income. International organizations and NGOs have 
pointed out that more girls than boys are not receiving an educa-
tion. According to official statistics and the assessment of experts, 
fewer children are graduating from secondary general schools. 
Enrolment has declined for children and young adults in the age 
group 6-23 years. In 1998, 68.5 percent were enrolled. By 1999, this 
 126 
proportion had fallen to 61.3. According to the State Committee on 
Statistics data, around 19,570 students were not enrolled in school 
during 1999. 
The number of secondary vocational and technical schools and 
upper secondary schools has decreased substantially during the 
last decade. This is because these programs were always a part of 
state-run farms, businesses, and industry and as they have been 
privatized, the private firms dropped them. As a result there is 
increased pressure on general education to provide students with 
knowledge and skills that are marketable. 
State-run schools, which prepare specialists in construction, 
transportation, and communication, have been reduced nearly four 
times, while agriculture courses have declined nearly five times. In 
contrast, private institutions, which offer quick courses in foreign 
languages and information technology, are thriving, though the 
quality of education they impart is questionable. Private higher 
education institutions have doubled their number of students in 
the last ten years. 
The state controls 25 universities and 13 private universities. 
Enrolment for higher education has declined from 148 students per 
10,000 in 1990 to 112 in 1999. Women constitute about 41 percent of 
students and men about 59 percent. At Baku State University about 
39 percent of young people opt for law and 34 percent for studies 
related to service. More men opt for science. They form a majority 
 127 
in courses on engineering, heavy industry, energy and mechanical 
engineering. 
In 2000, about 67 percent of students studying at secondary special 
schools were female. Almost 95 percent of them opted for medi-
cine, teaching, natural science and technology. More than 50 per-
cent of girls chose courses in the arts, computer science, economics 
and management. Civil engineering, machine construction, energy, 
agriculture and fishery were not popular with girls at secondary 
level. About 76 percent of students who opt for teaching are 
women. Seventy four percent of medical student and 68 percent of 
students who choose courses on natural sciences are female. 
According to official statistics, out of 1,538 people with a doctorate 
of science degree, about 30 percent are women. Among post-
graduate science students, nearly 31 percent are female. On the 
whole, science and mathematics receive low priority among stu-
dents. 
In every democratic society, the schools are a major mechanism to 
ensure social justice and help form feelings of cultural equality. 
And this mostly depends on the direction of the state policy about 
the education of the minorities in the country. During the research 
period we analyzed documents reflecting state policy regarding 
the education of minority groups, to determine the degree to 
which state policy have evolved in the past one to two decades.  
 
 128 
STATE MINORITY EDUCATION POLICIES 
The Constitution of the Republic of Azerbaijan says: “The Republic 
of Azerbaijan is the common and indivisible country for all of the 
citizens of the Republic of Azerbaijan” (Article 5, II). The education 
principles of the Azerbaijan Republic are built on equal rights, 
national identity (Law on Education, article 5.1.3; 5.1.6.) guarantees 
equal rights to different nationalities. Article 44 of the Constitution 
states: “Every person shall have the right to preserve his/her 
national/ethnic identity.”  
1. Policies Related to Language Instruction 
One of the first national policy steps after the collapse of the USSR 
in Azerbaijan was the Decree of the President of Azerbaijan 
Republic of September 16, 1992: “On protection of the rights and 
freedoms of national minorities, small-minorities and ethnic 
groups living in the Azerbaijan Republic and on rendering state 
assistance to the development of their languages and cultures.” 
According to this document the government would gradually 
solve such issues as: 
 State assistance for the preservation and the development of the 
cultural, linguistic and religious originality of ethnic groups;  
 Maintenance of their own national traditions and customs;  
 Protection of the historical and cultural monuments of all 
nationalities; 
 129 
 Free development of the national handicrafts, the professional 
and amateur talent groups. 
A preliminary comment about policies related to language of 
instruction is necessary. Policy is complicated by Azerbaijan’s 
Soviet past in two ways. First, the Soviet policy continues in allo-
wing Georgian schools to exist within the boundaries of Azerbaijan 
which could only be described as Georgian in orientation, person-
nel, and content. The main obstacle to overcoming this condition is 
that Azerbaijani schools also exist in Georgia, which have an 
Azerbaijani orientation, personnel, and content. Such a condition is 
not seen as desirable by the research team, at least in nationalistic 
terms, and it certainly does not reflect the policies regarding other 
ethnic minorities in the country. Second, Russian language schools 
continue to play a strong role in Azerbaijani education in Azer-
baijan although that role has declined sharply since independence 
in 1991. Today approximately 25 percent of pupils in Azerbaijan 
study in Russian language schools, although there is some 
discussion about the possibility that Russian language schools will 
be abolished. In this project, we have chosen not to deal with these 
two complications; rather, we shall deal primarily with language 
as represented by the other ethnic minorities in the country. 
On December 22, 1992 a law on the “State Language of Azerbaijan 
Republic” was adopted. It stipulated official status for the 
Azerbaijani language, but guaranteed the citizens of Azerbaijan the 
right to use any other national language on the territory of the 
 130 
Republic. Choice of the language of education was paid special 
attention in the Article 3 of the law: “Every child has an inalienable 
right to mother tongue education.” Another important quotation is 
“this right is ensured by the creation of a network of kindergartens 
and schools, with the language of education depending on the 
ethnic composition of the region’s population.” 
A Governmental Committee for Internal National Relations was 
established by the Resolution of the Republican Parliament of 
September 20, 1993 (#712). A Governmental Service of the Coun-
selor for National Policy was created by the President’s Decree of 
March 12, 1993 (#486). This special consultative council acts under 
the jurisdiction of the Governmental Counselor’s Service, which 
consists of the representatives of the various national minorities, 
small-numbered nationalities and ethnic groups. 
In the new Constitution of the Azerbaijan Republic (November 12, 
1995) the Azerbaijani language is decreed as the formal language, 
but at the same time Article 21 guarantees the preservation, free 
use, cultivation, and development of other languages of the 
Republic’s population. With regard to the choice of the language of 
education, citizens of the Azerbaijan Republic have a right of free 
choice of the language of education. Article 45 provides for the 
right to use the mother tongue. Everyone may receive education in 
his/her mother tongue and use this language in his/her creative 
works. Nobody can be deprived of using the mother tongue: 
 131 
“Everybody has the right to chose the language of education. 
Nobody can be deprived from the right to use his mother tongue.” 
According to the 1999 census data representatives of different 
ethnic groups do use their own nationality languages. 
Ratio (per cent) between the population’s ethnic origin and 
mother tongue, 1999 census data 
 The language of own 
nationality 
Languages of other 
nationalities 
Total population 99.0 1.0 
Azerbaijanis 99.7 0.3 
Armenians 99.9 0.1 
Avars 98.2 1.8 
Georgians 98.0 2.0 
Jews 87.1 12.9 
Kurds 48.9 51.1 
Lezghians 96.1 3.9 
Russians 99.3 0.7 
Sakhurs 99.3 0.7 
Talish 89.6 10.4 
Tatars 86.7 13.3 
Tats 83.0 17.0 
Turks 94.6 5.4 
Udins 98.8 1.2 
Ukrainians 32.1 67.9 
Other nationalities 75.3 24.7 
 132 
The situation plays itself out in different ways depending on the 
minority population. According to the data of the State Statistical 
Committee of Azerbaijan Republic there are schools with three 
languages of instruction in Azerbaijan. These are the Azerbaijani, 
Russian and Georgian languages. However, other linguistic 
minorities’ children, who reside in close together, are taught their 
own mother tongue.6 Data below reflects situation of 1996-1997: 
Talish language was taught to 23,919 pupils, 
Lezghian language was taught to 16,350 pupils, 
Tsakhur language was taught to 1,090 pupils, 
Avar language was taught to 4,082 pupils, 
Udin language was taught to 517 pupils, 
Khynalyg language was taught to 162 pupils. 
 
Lezghians and Talish receive language instruction in their mother 
tongue at the elementary level (grades I-IV). This means they 
receive two hours a week for four years. There are presently 104 
such preparatory classes, where 1,573 pupils learn Lezghian in the 
Gusar and Gabala regions. In the Astara region there are 78 classes, 
where 1,481 pupils learn the Talish language.  
During our research we found that in the Soviet period Lezghians 
mostly chose Russian as a language of instruction. After Azerbai-
jan gained its independence the number of Lezghians receiving 
instruction in Azerbaijani increased. Because there is no state 
 133 
policy directing them to do so, Lezghian’s have simply decided on 
their own that their respect for the independent Azerbaijan 
Republic, its language and history, are sufficient to attend 
Azerbaijani language schools. At present 75-80 percent of all mino-
rities chose the Azerbaijani language as a language of instruction 
(Georgians are the exception). The rest chose the Russian language 
schools. 
Only the Georgians have secondary schools in their mother tongue 
(Georgian language). In the Balakan region there is only one 
secondary school where the instruction is both in Azerbaijan and 
Georgia. In the Georgian section there are 12 grades with 205 
pupils. Out of 62 teachers, 32 are Georgians. 
In the Zagatala region at 4 schools Georgian is used side-by-side 
with Azerbaijani. At all 4 schools there are 55 grades with 943 
pupils, and out of 293 teachers 123 are Georgians. 
In Gax we have yet another situation. At one school side by side 
with Azerbaijani and Russian, Georgian is used as a language of 
instruction, but at 6 schools the language is only Azerbaijani. Out 
of 386 teachers 252 are Georgians. In all of these three regions at 
schools where different languages are used as the medium of 
instruction, the school principals are Azeris, but at Georgian 
schools they are Georgians. 
 134 
Thus, in the Zagatala, Balakan, and Gax regions there are 12 
schools with 2,541 pupils, with Georgian as the language of 
instruction. (But in the Azerbaijani section there are 2,560, and in 
the Russian section 87 pupils). Out of 739 teachers, 407 are 
Georgians. 
Region/ 
Language 
Balakan Zagatala Gax Total 
 
Sc
ho
ol
 
Pu
pi
ls
 
Sc
ho
ol
 
Pu
pi
ls
 
Sc
ho
ol
 
Pu
pi
ls
 
Sc
ho
ol
 
Pu
pi
ls
 
Georgian 1 205 4 943 7 1393 12 2541 
 
2. National Curriculum Developments 
Azerbaijan adheres strictly to a so-called subject-based curriculum, 
which claims to be based on goals consistent with the Azerbaijan 
Constitution, Law on Education, and international agreements. 
The objectives of the curriculum include general and subject-
specific efforts. General objectives transcend any specific subject 
field, and are related to life skills, democratic and other citizenship 
attitudes, critical thinking, learning how to learn, and problem 
solving skills. Subject-specific objectives include knowledge and 
skills in a subject field. We found there is almost no reference to 
ethnic minority groups within the curriculum of any subject. 
 135 
General education curriculum for 1999/2000 in the Republic of 
Azerbaijan (Instruction language: Azerbaijani) 
# Subject II III IV VI VII VIII IX XI 
I Azerbaijani 10 10 10 4 4 3 2 1 
2 Literature - - - 2 2 2 3 3 
3 Russian 3 3 3 3 3 2 2 2 
4 Mathematics 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 4 
5 Information Science and 
basics of computer 
engineering 
- - - - - - - 2 
6 History - - - 1/2 2/1 2/1 2/1 3/2 
7  History of Azerbaijan - - - 1 1 ½ 1/2 2 
8 People and Society - - - - - 2 1 1 
9 Natural History -     - - - 
10 Familiarization with the 
Environment 
1   - - - - - 
11 Geography -   2 3 3 3 1 
12 Biology -   2 2 2 2 2 
13 Physics -   - 2 3/2 4 4 
14 Astronomy -    - - - 1 
15 Chemistry -     3 3 3 
16 Sketching -   - - - 1 1 
17 Foreign Language -   3 3 2 2 2 
18 Drawing 1   1 1 - - - 
19 Music and singing 1   1 1 1 - - 
20 Physical Training 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 
 136 
21 Initial Military Training - - - - - - - 2 
22 Vocational Training 2 2 2 2 2 2 2  
23 Constitution of the Azer-
baijan Republic 
- - - - - - 1 - 
24  Basics of Economics - - - - - - 1 1 
 Total 25 25 25 29.5 32.5 34.5 37 36.9- 
 Free Electives 1 1 1 3 4 4 2 4 
 
There was occasional reference to ethnic minorities in geography 
and history curriculum guidelines.  
Example: History (Grade 4, Section 4) 
Albanian Kingdom (Caucasus)   
1.  The origin of the Albanian state. 1(2) hours. Territory, popula-
tion, geography, ethnic content groups. Occupations. Social 
structure. 
2.  The Albanian culture. 1 (2) hours. Cultural. Alban writing. 
Sculpture. The Spread of Christianity in some regions of 
Albania. The formation process of the Azeri people. 
3.  Turkish tribes and their role in the formation of Azeri people. 
In the above example, teachers are directed to use one to two hours 
to discuss the population, geography, and ethnic groups in the 
early Albanian Kingdom, and another one to two hours to deal 
with the early Albanian culture and Turkish tribes and how they 
contributed to the formation of the Azeri people.  
 137 
Example: Geography (Grade 8, Section 3) 
The social – economic geography of the Azerbaijan Republic. 
The ethnic content of the population of Azerbaijan. Migration. 
 
In this section the students are exposed to the social, economic 
geography of Azerbaijan, including the ethnic content of the 
population of Azerbaijan. The textbooks, as we shall see, provide 
almost no information about the ethnic groups under discussion. 
In the curriculum for the school where instruction is in the 
Georgian language, Azeri language is taught as a secondary one. 
Georgians who attend the school with Georgian instruction have 
an opportunity to continue their education in the Georgian 
language only in Georgia. 
In the regions where Lezghians live there are schools where 
instruction is either in the Russian or Azeri languages. In these 
schools the Lezghian language is taught as well. Lezghians also 
have an opportunity to continue their education at the higher 
levels in the Lezghian language in Dagestan. But the only options 
available to the Talish, Tats, Kurds, Avarz, and Udins are to enroll 
in schools where the instruction is either in the Russian or Azeri 
language. 
The Curriculum of Georgian language schools is worked out in the 
Ministry of Education of the Republic of Georgia, and it is then 
formally approved by the Ministry of Education of Azerbaijan 
 138 
Republic. All textbooks for Georgian schools are brought from 
Georgia. It must be noted that Azerbaijani is taught in these 
schools as the official language of the Republic. The history of 
Azerbaijan is not taught in these schools since there is no book on 
the history of Azerbaijan in the Georgian language. Article 8, (Item 
2) of the Law on Education notes that at schools where Azerbaijani 
is not a language of Instruction the History of Azerbaijan must be 
taught. To solve this problem the Ministries of Education of the 
Georgian Republic and Azerbaijan Republic have plans to publish 
The History of Azerbaijan in Georgian in two volumes, so that the 
Law on Education can be satisfied.  
As to university education of minorities, we must note that during 
the Soviet period, groups of people on the margins of the Soviet 
Union were given privileges at the entrance exams. Though no 
special seats were given to them, during the entrance exams they 
were given every assistance to pass the exams and gain entrance 
into higher education. After the independence of Azerbaijan the 
entrance test exams were centralized and smaller ethnic groups in 
Azerbaijan were not given any special privileges. Today, ethnic-
group pupils take their test side-by-side with other Azerbaijani 
citizens under the same conditions and terms. 
3. Textbook Developments 
Government policy regarding minorities is most clearly seen in the 
textbooks, because these contain the explicit information that is to 
 139 
be transmitted to the students. In the last several years a 
completely new set of textbooks have been published for all 
subjects in primary and secondary schools. Thus, in 1996 Ministry 
of Education published ABCs in six minority languages: 
Talish - 15,000 copies, 
Tat - 5,000 copies, 
Kurd - 2,000 copies, 
Lezghian - 8,000 copies, 
Udin - 1,000 copies, 
Tsakhur - 2,000 copies. 
 
At the same time, there were several textbooks in minority 
languages published. All textbooks are small consisting of less 
than 100 pages and they are designed in similar formats: 
Udin language for the 3d grade - 1.000 copies, 
Tat language for the 3d grade - 5.000 copies, 
Lezghian language for the 2d grade - 8.000 copies, 
Talish language for the 4th grade - 10.000 copies. 
 
We did a content analysis of all the most recent textbooks that have 
been prepared by the Ministry of Education for the junior and 
senior classes to see what references are made regarding ethnic 
minorities in Azerbaijan. If we were to put all of these textbooks 
together they would add up to 4,000 pages of text. In all of these 
 140 
4,000 pages we found references to minorities that amounted to 
less than two pages of text. And this is a generous calculation, as 
will be seen in the following comments. 
In the readers for primary school the only references to minority 
groups are stories and poems by Russian writers and poets, but 
these do not deal explicitly with the Russian people. No other 
references to other minorities were found in the readers.  
Textbooks for the higher grades are divided into subject fields. The 
textbooks on literature used in higher grades present a similar 
picture as the textbooks for the primary students. There is 
occasional information about a small number of Russian writers 
and their works in the textbooks for the seventh and tenth grades, 
although this information is presented as part of the foreign 
literature sections of the textbooks.  
The textbooks on geography list information about minorities in 
the eighth and eleventh grades. The appropriate passages in the 
books are in the section: “Population and Its National Content.” 
The following is the most extensive discussion of minority groups 
in any of the texts. It is taken from The Social and Economic 
Geography of Azerbaijan (Grade 8): 
According to the population census (1989), 17 percent of the 
Azerbaijan population are the representatives of more than 80 
nationalities, including 5.6 percent Russians, 2.4 percent Lezghians, 
 141 
5.6 percent Armenians. In addition, Tats, Talish, Avarz, Udins, 
Tatars, Jews and others live in Azerbaijan as well. 
Most of them are very ancient people of Caucasus. From an ethnic, 
cultural and psychological point of view they are related to the 
Azeris. 
Russians came to Azerbaijan in the second half of the XIX century, 
Armenians were imported after 1828.  
The above quotation represents the most extensive discussion 
about minorities in Azerbaijan textbooks, and it amounts to less 
than ten lines of text, and tells almost nothing about the people 
themselves.  
The textbooks on history make more references to minorities than 
any other textbooks, although these references give minimal 
information about the ethnic cultures. We interviewed the writers 
of several of the textbooks and they indicated that their intention 
was to teach more general issues and not focus on minority issues 
in the texts. It must be pointed out that during the former Soviet 
Union there wasn’t any information about the history of 
Azerbaijan in history texts produced by the USSR. Today the 
history of Azerbaijan is taught in all secondary school classes 
beginning from the fifth grade. Azerbaijan history textbooks make 
occasional references about the origin of the minorities beginning 
from the earlier stages of the history. 
 142 
Example: Azerbaijan History (grade 6): 
Azeri Turks developed as a nation having a very ancient territory, 
language, culture, political formations and settled in larger 
territories in the early middle ages (III – VIII). These territories 
started from the north of Derbent and continued till Zenjan – 
Gazvin – Hamedan, the south region of Iran. 
Azeru turks originally came from Turkish ethnic groups called 
Azeri, Gargar, Alban, Hun, Khazar, Sabir, Oguz. The history of the 
Persian language (Talish, Tats, Kurds) and the Caucasian language 
(Udins, Avarz, Lezghians, Sahurs, Khinaligs, Budugs, and others) 
nations is closely connected with the history of Azeri Turks.  
In this passage there is some reference that various ethnic groups 
were the source of the Azeri peoples. In other words, the main 
emphasis is that the various ethnic groups are closely connected 
with the history of Azerbaijan culture and language. 
Example: Azerbaijan History (grade 7): 
There are similar ties that connect all the groups in Azerbaijan.  
Firstly, they are under the influence of the same ideology. During 
different periods these ethnic groups had to fulfill the sacret texts 
of different religions, including idolatry, fire worshipping, 
Christianity, finally Muslim. 
 143 
Secondly, they fought against the oppression of the empires (Sasa-
ni, Arab and other empires) together as Azerbaijan was their home. 
Finally, they fought together against the attacks of external enemies.  
In this passage, we see again the emphasis on the ties these various 
groups have and their importance in fighting oppression, both 
from within and outside Azerbaijan. There is no discussion of what 
the ethnic groups are, but instead how they contribute to being 
Azerbaijani.  
4. Guidelines for the Teacher Training Program 
There is no mention of ethnic minorities in the guidelines for 
teacher training. We reviewed the program for future teachers, and 
all future teachers learn Azerbaijan history, but only as a part of 
their general studies in higher education. Some instructors have 
students read a textbook devoted specifically to minority groups, 
written by Gadamshah Javadov, entitled Small Ethnic Groups and 
National Minorities in Azerbaijan. Unfortunately, there is no 
provision in the professional development guidelines for dealing 
with ethnic minorities in Azerbaijan. We interviewed several 
lecturers at the State Teacher Training University, who had written 
textbooks, and they indicated to us that there are no provisions at 
the institution for sensitizing teacher candidates to minority 
populations and the teaching of the students of minorities. The 
sentiments of Irada Gasimova, from the Pedagogical University is 
 144 
indicative of the general sentiments. She strongly favors attention 
be given to minority groups but maintains that all citizens of 
Azerbaijan ought to speak Azeri and have a commitment to the 
Azerbaijani nation and to being Azerbaijanis. 
The teacher training for Minority schools is also a very crucial for 
Minority people. The situation at the Georgian schools and Lezghi 
schools is satisfactory since teachers fro these schools are trained in 
the universities in Georgia and Dagestan. But for other minorities 
it is challenging. Beginning 2002 Lankaran State University will be 
training a couple of minority teachers at the Masters level for 
Talysh schools.  
Teachers who teach in the schools where Georgian is the language 
of instruction are mostly graduates of institutions of higher 
learning in Georgia. In other words, they receive training to teach 
in Georgia. We might note that similar provisions are available in 
Georgia where schools are available for Azeri-speaking citizens of 
Georgia. That is, they don’t receive any instruction about minority 
populations in Georgia. 
 
SPECIFIC SCHOOL DATA COLLECTION 
We visited three different parts of the country where the minorities 
are the majority of the population. We had originally wanted to go 
 145 
to two areas, particularly Lezghian and Talish regions, but found it 
important to include Udin schools. The reason for this is that we 
found important innovations in Udin schools that might serve as 
school models for other regions where minority populations live. 
We have visited the following regions: 
Guba-Xachmaz-Oguz region where mostly Lezghian live 
Lankaran-Astara-Lerik region where the Talish live 
 
Udin schools 
Our plan was to look at schools at the primary level and schools at 
the secondary level in each region. Besides we visited the 
communities in these regions to establish a sense of rapport with 
administrators and teachers of the schools and attended classes to 
become familiar with the institutions. Our visits were informal and 
we did not communicate to the teachers that our specific aim was 
to look at education policy as it related to ethnic minorities. Our 
inquiries were done within the context of a much broader frame 
about schooling in Azerbaijan. We used a qualitative approach to 
the study on the grounds that it best served the purpose of our 
investigations namely: 
 To understand the behavior of teachers in the context of the 
specific institutional context; 
 To understand this context in relation to the local educational 
directorate;  
 146 
 To understand how the provisions for minority students either 
support or deviate from the national educational agenda. 
 
We conducted interviews with local educational directorate 
leaders, school leaders and teachers. The respondents were asked 
for information concerning curriculum, programs language issues 
and textbooks as well as opinions about them. We tried to group 
the questions around policy and practice related to minorities in 
the local directorate and the school and issues, and textbooks. And 
the third group of questions the conditions that existed related to 
minority students and teachers.  
We turn now to comments about the specific minority groups 
under investigation. 
 
Lezghians 
The Lezghian ethnic group lives along the northern border 
between Azerbaijan and Dagestan in Russia. While most Lezghians 
live today in Russia, there are pockets of the population in 
Azerbaijan. They are Muslims and retain a devotion to this 
religious orientation. During the Soviet period those in Russia 
resisted Russification and with the fall of the Soviet Union, those 
groups became somewhat strident in their demands for 
independence from Moscow. In Azerbaijan, demands for 
 147 
independence have not been strong, although they are a proud 
people. The quest for independence in Azerbaijan may be 
termpered by the fact that Lezghian people are represented in 
Azerbaijan’s Parliament and the Government, but especially in the 
local towns, districts, villages and hamlets, where Lezghians live. 
Newspapers (“Samur” and “Gusar”) and books are publish in the 
Lezghian language, and there are cultural centers and communal 
organizations, supported with state funds, specifically organized 
to preserve and develop the Lezghian culture.  
Schools serving the Lezghians conform to the school patterns of 
the rest of Azerbaijan. That is, there are Russian and Azeri 
language schools, and they provide the standard curriculum 
required by the Ministry of Education. However, most Leszghians 
choose to place their children in Russian language schools. 
Lezghian language instruction is available in all eleven grades of 
primary and secondary school, and a number of pupils take 
advantage of this possibility. This appears to be a transitional 
pedagogical approach, because the children would not succeed as 
well if instruction were in Azeri or Russian. 
Our queries as to provisions that are made to deal with Lezghian 
culture were usually met with perplexed looks. Educators made it 
clear that they followed the curriculum as it was issued by the 
Ministry of Education. There did not appear to be strict sanctions 
against teaching about the Lezghian culture; rather, the attitude 
 148 
among teachers was more that it was their professional obligation 
to follow the guidelines laid down by the Ministry. 
Because information given to people in interviews does not always 
correspond with actual behavior, we engaged in classroom 
observations in Lezghian schools. Of course, it is possible that 
teacher behavior changed while being observed, but our 
observations were that teachers rarely mentioned the Lezghian 
minority group nor did they make any reference to cultural and 
historical events connected with their Lezghian backgrounds.  
A substantial portion of the students in the schools we visited have 
Lezghian principals, teachers and pupils. Our general impression 
was that the teachers and pupils were proud to be Lezghian, but 
that there was essentially no place in the curriculum where the 
ethnic group received attention. We have seen that the curriculum 
and textbooks make no provision for a discussion of the culture 
and how it is to be distinguished from other groups in the 
Republic. In our classroom visits, we found references to local 
conditions, places, and events, but they were not tied to any 
cultural conditions of the minority population. One math teacher, 
for example, in an exercise on geometric designs, made reference 
to streets in the town and how they were laid out. In Kuba, the 
only incident we observed relating to Lezghian conditions was 
made by one teacher who was not Lezghian; she chided the 
 149 
children who misbehaved on one occasion that their behavior did 
not measure up to the expectations she had of Lezghians. 
We did inquire as to the attitude minority members have about 
themselves, and it was evident that they took great pride in who 
they were. By way of contrast, in talking with teachers who were 
not members of the minority group, they expressed some shock 
when we asked if they were part of that minority, as if such an 
identity were an insult to them. 
How do Lezghians develop such a sense of pride? The local 
families and community apparently provide sufficient support and 
reinforcement for the young people. Some efforts are taken on the 
national level. Regular cultural events are available where the 
young people demonstrate their culture through dance, music, and 
costumes. These events provide an outlet for the young to feel that 
they are a part of Azerbaijan and its people. In spite of this, we 
wonder why the schools pay almost no attention to ethnicity. It 
might be because of benign neglect. That is, ethnicity may not be 
considered crucial enough as a factor of national pride to be taken 
into consideration.  
In our conversations with educators we gained the impression that 
the Lezghians themselves do not want to have their own schools, 
and they preferred to participate in the national school system, 
because it provides more advantages to them than would separate 
schools. Because the national curriculum is so extremely 
 150 
centralized, they apparently consider it inappropriate to deviate in 
any way from that curriculum by giving attention to local, ethnic 
issues. Even so, there is some unhappiness with some aspects of 
the national policies. For example, in a group discussion with 
teachers, they complained bitterly about the decision in 1991 to 
change the Azeri language from the Cyrillic script to a modified 
Latin script. They felt that the children would thereby eventually 
be separated from their ethnic kin in Dagestan, Russia, who 
continue to use Cyrillic. 
 
Talishs 
Most of the 200,000 Talish in the world live in the south-east region 
of Azerbaijan, near the Iranian border in and around Lenkoran, 
Lerik, Astara. Lenkoran served for a long time as the capital of the 
Talish Khanate, which has enjoyed variable degrees of 
independence throughout history. Those in the mountains around 
Lerik are known for the longevity of their lives. The remainder of 
the Talish live across the border in Iran. They speak an Indo-
Iranian language that is also called Talish. Of course, almost all of 
those living in Azerbaijan are bilingual or trilingual, in that they 
speak Azeri and/or Russian. They have lived in this region for 
thousands of years. They adhere mainly to the Shi’ite Muslim 
religion, but are also more secularized than many other traditional 
groups, because of their association with the Soviet Union since 
 151 
1920. Their Talish traditions are connected with farming and the 
land, but a growing number are now skilled craftsmen. There is 
occasional talk of separatist intentions among the Talish, but it 
does not appear to be serious at this point.7 
As is the case with other minorities, the Talish are represented in 
Azerbaijan’s Parliament and the government, and in the local 
towns and districts. Newspapers (“Syado”), magazines (“Soz”) 
and books are published in the Talish language, and there are 
cultural centers and communal organizations, supported with state 
funds, specifically organized to preserve and develop the Talish 
culture.  
Schools serving the Talish are identical to those in the rest of 
Azerbaijan. That is, there are Russian and Azeri language schools, 
and the Ministry of Education dictates what the standard 
curriculum will be. However, as noted, Talish language instruction 
is available in the first four grades of primary school, and a 
number of pupils take advantage of this possibility. This appears 
to be a transitional pedagogical approach, because the children 
would not succeed as well if instruction were only in Azeri or 
Russian. Even though the schools we visited were populated 
almost entirely by Talish teachers and students, there is no place in 
the curriculum for a consideration of Talish traditions and culture 
in the schools, because the centralized curriculum mandates the 
same topics and content be provided throughout the Republic of 
 152 
Azerbaijan. Elmira Muradaliyeva, an Azerbaijan history professor 
from Baku State University explained to us that the Azerbaijan 
policy is that people should not be divided and sorted out as 
separate groups. Their national identity is believed to be more 
crucial to be taught than is their local, cultural identity. 
We pressed teachers to explain if and how they incorporated 
Talish culture into the school curriculum, and our queries indica-
ted that the teachers took for granted that they would teach the 
curriculum that was provided to them by the central Ministry of 
Education. Teachers considered it their professional responsibility 
to teach what the Ministry mandated. The textbooks were followed 
almost as if they were the teacher rather than the individual 
teacher.  
We devoted time in the classroom observing the instructional 
sessions. We anticipated that there would be some attention, 
however minimal to the local culture and local situation. Contrary 
to expectations, we found that teacher behavior was consistent 
with what they had told us. That is, teachers followed the prescri-
bed curriculum very closely. The language of instruction is Azeri 
or Russian from the very beginning, but teachers who spoke Talish 
did not hesitate to help young children, particularly in the early 
grades of school, by explaining the meaning of terms and concepts 
in Talish. However, they used the Talish language as a means of 
communicating the prescribed curriculum. In other words, the 
 153 
information provided in the textbook was binding for them, and 
they followed it closely and carefully. After a history class we 
inquired if the teacher ever pointed out local monuments, buil-
dings or other markers of local history, and the teacher appeared 
surprised that she might do this, and it appeared to be an 
appealing idea the teacher had never entertained. In fact, some 
teachers expressed an interest in incorporating this kind of local 
artifact into their instructional program. Obviously, they had not 
been encouraged to do such a thing in their training program or by 
the curriculum guidelines that come from the Ministry. 
It is clear that the Talish are a proud people. There apparently is 
enough support in the family and community for their culture to 
develop this sense of pride in their culture. The school is not at all 
hostile to Talish culture, but it takes for granted that its purpose is 
Azerbaijan nationalism and a sense of pride in being Azerbaijani. 
We found that the Talish educators and the students are not inte-
rested in having schools that teach the Talish language and culture. 
They wish to participate in the national school system and see that 
it provides them with more advantages than a Talish school would 
provide. In fact, the Talish language is at times considered a dead 
end for pupils, because they are unable to go on to higher studies 
in the language. More than one Talish teacher dismissed the lan-
guage issue, explaining that the children were not terribly 
interested in the written form of their native language. Other 
 154 
teachers were more dedicated to the perpetuation of the language. 
We noted above that some sentiment has been expressed for Talish 
independence from Azerbaijan, but this did not manifest itself 
among the educators we visited. They were proud to be thought of 
as Azerbaijan citizens though with a Talish cultural background. 
 
Udins  
The Udins are a small minority population living in the Gabala 
region of Azerbaijan, 350 km to the northwest of the capital city of 
Baku. On the whole, an estimated 10,000 Udins live in Azerbaijan, 
Georgia, Russia and Belarus today.8 They identify themselves with 
the Christian Albanians who used to live in the Caucasus (B.C.). 
The modern Udins (Udi) are descendants of one of the 26 Albanian 
tribes, who are believed to be the original residents of this region. 
After the conquest of Azerbaijan by the Arabs most of its 
population was assimilated into the culture of the conquerors. 
However, some part managed to retain their distinctive identity. 
The Udins and Hinaligs belong exactly to these groups. 
The Udins’ religious belief was influenced by Christianity, Islam, 
Armenian Gregorian Church religions. There are a number of lite-
rate sources going back to 1840 by German researchers. They are 
devoted to the history of Udin people, including some language 
development problems. 
 155 
Modern Udins have preserved themselves as a small ethnic group 
with its own language, material, and spiritual culture. There is a 
compact population of 4,000 people in the village of Nidge, in the 
Gabala region. They consider this place the only one where the 
language and cultural environment are preserved, as well as tradi-
tions and moral values are maintained. The main occupation of 
Udins is farming. Some people work at local enterprises, and there 
are also school teachers and local administrative authorities. Accor-
ding to the historical-ethnographical research devoted to Udins and 
published as a monograph by the Azerbaijan Academy of Sciences 
in 1999, in Nidge there are 131 teachers, 2 physicians, 12 workers of 
culture, 10 educators in kindergartens who are Udins by birth. 
The Udins speak Russian and Azerbaijani, but Udin is the main 
language of communication in families. People who live in this 
village but who are of Azeri or Lezghian origin would sometime 
also speak in Udin, which is the main language at a pre-school 
level, in 2 kindergartens for 150 kids. 
There are five coeducational schools in this village centrally 
developed by the Azerbaijan Ministry of Education. Azerbaijani is 
the language of instruction in two schools, and in the three other 
schools the language of instruction is Russian. Udin children 
attend the latter 3 schools. One of these schools is still located in 
the building constructed in mid-1930s according to the USSR 
Central Government Decree of January 1934 on Measures for Udin 
 156 
People Education. Currently the Udin language is compulsory for 
grades 1 to 3 in the elementary school. There has been a proposal 
made to extend the program up to the ninth grade and it is under 
consideration. Children from families who are not Udin, who 
attend these three schools do not have to take the Udin language 
lessons, although some non-Udins choose to learn the Udin 
language in school. Teachers and parents, whom we met, say 
though that all children study Udin with interest and motivation. 
There is no textbook used for teaching the Udin language in the 
first grade. Language lessons are presented orally. Teachers some-
times refer to a pictorial language learning textbook developed six 
or seven years ago, although it was not intended specifically for 
Udin language learners. We understand that publication of that 
textbook is under the discussion with the Ministry of Education. 
There are two textbooks called Udin Language ABC used in grades 
2 and 3. Both were published by the Azerbaijani Ministry of 
Education in 1996. Each title has a print-run of 1000 copies. Accor-
ding to the local school principal, the textbooks are distributed free 
of charge to schools and then to students. We met the author of the 
textbooks, the Udin writer Mr. Georgi Kechaari. According to him, 
the Udin Language textbooks do not present any specific 
national/cultural vocabulary or notions, but deal with the general 
lexicon only. The currently taught alphabet is formed on the 
modern Azerbaijani language alphabet, which in turn is based on 
the Latin script. Though there are 52 letters in the Udin alphabet 
 157 
(compared to 33 in the Azeri language), no special symbols are 
developed, but only extra-signs are added to letters or pairs of 
symbols are used. As this alphabet has roots in the Azeri language 
alphabet, Udin people living outside Azerbaijan cannot use it. 
Students of the upper grades of the middle school take Udin 
language weekly for 2-4 hours planned by the National Curri-
culum as an “elective” course. At the same time there are a number 
of choices children can make as part of extra-curricular activities 
run by all three schools in the village. These include “Study of 
Udin Customs”, “Udin Songs”, and “Udin drama” in the Udin 
language. There are additional materials available to the general 
public. In 2001 with the help of the Norwegian Humanitarian 
Enterprise Azerbaijan, which renders important help to the Udin 
minority group there were two books published. One is called 
“Orayin.” It’s a 144-page collection of poems, legends, and anec-
dotes published in the 52-letter alphabet of the Udin language. 
This anthology is compiled by Udin writer Georgi Kechaari. The 
second publication, “Waterspring,” is a 23-page booklet of Udin 
legends, humorous stories, and anecdotes in English translation. 
“We have waited 40 years to see our poems published in our own 
language,” says Mr. Kechaari. 
Teachers who work with Udin children are mostly born in the 
same village. They come back and work here after getting their 
Degree at one of the Universities in the capital city of Azerbaijan. 
 158 
II. EDUCATION OF ETHNIC MINORITIES IN THE ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF 
IRAN 
 
THE NATIONAL CONTEXT 
 
The country of Iran is located south of Azerbaijan and Armenia 
and north of the Persian Gulf. It covers 632,457 square miles and 
has a population of 66 million people, approximately one tenth of 
whom live in Tehran. The country is divided into 24 provinces, 
and there is a significant difference in the quality of life between 
the urban centers and the rural regions.  
According to Shahrokh Meskoob, Iran’s cultural identity is built on 
four major factors. These are: “(1) the country’s pre-Islamic legacy, 
which took shape over a period of more than a millennium, from 
the time of Achaemenians to the defeat of the last Persian dynasty 
(the Sasanians) by the invading Arab armies in the middle of the 
seventh century; (2) Islam, or, more specifically, Shi’ism, the 
religion of over ninety percent of the country’s present-day inha-
bitants, with an all-encompassing impact on every facets of Iranian 
culture and thought; (3) the more diffuse bonds, fictive or real, 
established among peoples who have inhabited roughly the same 
territory, with the same name, faced the same enemies, struggled 
under the same despotic rulers and conquerors, and otherwise 
 159 
shared the same historical destiny for over two millennia; and 
finally (4) the Persian language, currently the mother tongue of a 
bare majority of the population, but long the literary and “national 
language” in Iran (as well as in parts of Afghanistan, Central Asia, 
and parts of the Indian subcontinent).”9 In other words, the notion 
of being Persian goes beyond ethnicity, in that all ethnic groups are 
formally considered part of being Iranian. In Iran there are a 
number of ethnic minorities: 
1. Azeri speaking (24-42 percent) 
2. Kurds, (7-12 percent) 
3. Arab (minor) 
4. Baluch (1 percent) 
5. Bakhtiyari (1 percent) 
6. Jewish (.5 percent) 
7. Ashoori (minor) 
8. Talishs 
9. Turkamans 
 
Estimates of the number of Azeri-speaking people and Kurds vary 
widely. This can be explained in part, by the lack of solid infor-
mation available on the minorities, but also because Iran does not 
want its minority population to appear too significant in the 
country. Many of the smaller groups descend from slave and 
Indian trade. Farsi is the official language and native tongue of 
over half the population. It is also spoken as a second language by 
 160 
the majority of the remainder. Besides permanent ethnic minorities 
in Iran, there are also large numbers of refugees from Afghanistan 
and Iraq, who brought their own linguistic and cultural traditions 
with them.  
According to the most recent Human Development Report on 
Iran,10 from 1960 to 1995, Iran’s human development index values 
increased 0.452, moving Iran from the group of countries consi-
dered to have low human development to join the ranks of those 
with medium human development. The transformation of the so-
cial environment has significantly affected income, education, and 
health (three basic components of the human development index). 
While it took three decades (1960-1988) for life expectancy to rise 
from 49.5 to 61.6 years, it took only one decade (1988-1997) for it to 
rise from 61.1 to 69.5 years. Adult literacy rose from 41% on the eve 
of the Islamic Revolution (1979) to 57.1% in 1988, and then jumped 
to 74.5% in 1997. Similarly, combined enrolment ratio (combined 
first, second - and third - level gross enrollment ratio) shot up from 
46% in 1980 to 65.6% in 1988 and then to 75% in 1997.  
Before the revolution, real GDP per capita expanded at a rate equal 
to 150% from $1,985 in 1960 to 4,976 in 1976. After the revolution, 
the growth slowed registering an initial drop in the first decade 
after the revolution, but in the second decade it rose from $3,715 to 
$ 5,222. During the past decade, the female literacy rate rose from 
46.3% to 67%, while the female rate of admission in higher edu-
 161 
cation also saw a proportionate increase. Female life expectancy 
increased form 62.7 years to 70.6. During 1988-97 under - five 
mortality rate declined from 85.3 to 37.3 in every 1000 live births. 
During the past decade human poverty decreased form 31% to 
18%. Moreover, during 1988-97 the infant mortality rate was 
reduced from 63.5 in every 1000 live births to 30.7.11 In Iran, the 
Azerbaijani or “Turkish People” participate in partnership in jobs 
with the majority Farsi-speaking people, though the key jobs are 
usually held by Farsi-speaking people. 
 
THE IRANIAN EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM 
The state school system was formally established with Iran’s first 
constitution in 1905, although those in the cities were the main 
early beneficiaries of schooling. One way of promoting Iran’s 
interpretation of Islamic ideals and principles is to use the public 
school system. Since the Islamic revolution, all of the educational 
material used in the schools has been changed or updated to make 
sure that there is no conflict with the laws of Islam. The revolu-
tionary government recognized that the long-run consequences of 
the revolution depended on the transformation of the present 
school children by creating a new set of values. The old system’s 
values and institutions were to be fundamentally altered. The 
schools were seen as major vehicles for change, so in the schools, 
the major educational variables available were to be altered. 
 162 
Two of the most important factors in the improvement of human 
development levels in Iran from 1988 to 1997 were the improve-
ment of the adult literacy rate from 57.1% to 74.5% and the increase 
in the combined enrollment rate from 65.5% to 75%. Adult literacy 
grew at a higher rate than combined enrollment. This can be exp-
lained largely by the fact that because literacy was a prerequisite 
for access to further education, training and employment oppor-
tunities, demand for literacy courses was high. The gross enroll-
ment ratio at the tertiary level jumped from 6.89% in 1988 to 
18.17% in 1997, while the ratio at the secondary level went up from 
52.7% to 77.5% in the same period the ratio at the primary level, on 
the other hand, declined from 122.5% in 1998 to 119.2% in 1997. 
The significant increase in the number of universities and institu-
tions of higher education and the growing presence of the private 
sector at this level explain why growth in tertiary education has 
been higher than in secondary and primary education.  
The educational system is highly centralized, and the educational 
programs of the schools are highly uniform. The programs throu-
ghout the country look much the same as the programs in Tehran. 
The major difference with Tehran is that there are more facilities 
and a wider number of schools that are designed to provide edu-
cation at a single level, such as pre-primary schools, high schools 
and pre-university schools. However, all schools are managed 
within a single system with no differences observed in the prog-
rams of these schools. 
 163 
Although the composition of the population shows more men 
having an opportunity to become literate, women have shown a 
great interest in literacy. The index for the number of female 
students in higher education increased from 100 in 1988 to 322 in 
1996. In 1998, 60.5% of students were in urban areas, while the 
remaining 39.5% were in rural areas. Of all learners covered by the 
Literacy Movement, 56.8% were in urban areas and 43.2% were in 
rural areas.12 
Article 30 of the Iranian Constitution, which was drafted in 1979 
after the Islamic Revolution, states that primary education is 
mandatory for children between the ages of 6-11, and in Article 30, 
the Constitution stipulates that, “The government must provide all 
citizens with free-education up to secondary school, and must 
expand free higher education to the extent required by the country 
for attaining self-sufficiency.” One of the first measures adopted by 
the government after the Revolution in 1979 was the deseculariza-
tion of the public school system. This was a three-pronged prog-
ram that involved purging courses and textbooks believed to slan-
der Islam and substituting courses on religion; purging teachers to 
ensure that only those who understood the true meaning of Islam 
(i.e., were not secular) remained in the schools; and regulating the 
behavior and dress of students. Only one Jewish school remains 
open and its Muslim director is appointed by the ministry of 
education. The school is forced to operate on the Jewish sabbath 
 164 
and the teaching of Judaic texts is permitted only with Farsi 
translations of the Bible. 
The revolutionary government recognized that the long-run 
consequences of the revolution depended on the transformation of 
the present school children by creating a new set of values. The old 
system’s values and institutions were to be fundamentally altered. 
The schools were seen as major vehicles for change, so in the 
schools, the major educational variables available were to reinforce 
and conform with Shi’ite Muslim values.  
Although the government reintroduced the study of religion into 
the public school curriculum from primary grades through college, 
it did not act to alter the basic organization of the education 
system. Thus, schools have not changed significantly from the pat-
tern prior to the Revolution. Pupils can enter pre-school education 
at the age of five, where they receive training in the basic notions 
necessary to be successful in primary school. At the age of six, 
pupils then begin a five-year primary school cycle, which is both 
free and compulsory. They take examinations at the end of each 
year that determine if they move on to the next grade level. At the 
end of the primary cycle they have a major examination that 
determines if they are promoted on to the next cycle. At approxi-
mately age 11, most pupils then move on to the so-called guidance 
cycle, which might be considered as a three-year middle school or 
lower secondary school. Even though the education might be 
 165 
considered more general in nature, it is during this time that the 
talents of students are assessed and a determination will even-
tually be made whether they move on to academic or vocational/ 
technical education. At the end of this cycle students are examined 
to determine if they are allowed to move on to secondary educa-
tion. Secondary education is a three-year program covering grades 
9 through 11. It is divided into two main branches: academic and 
vocation/technical. The academic branch is divided into four 
streams, namely literature and culture, socio-economic, physics/ 
mathematics, and experimental sciences. The vocational/technical 
branch is intended to train students for the labor market and has 
three main streams, namely technical, business/vocational, and 
agricultural. National examinations are held at the end of each 
year during the secondary cycle. If a student wishes to attend the 
university, the student must take an additional preparation year.  
The new government put a high priority on education and inves-
ted money in adult literacy programs, new school construction, 
and expansion of public colleges and other institutions of higher 
learning. Tehran (Iran’s capital) is considered to be the center of 
higher education and learning. Educational projects in the rural 
areas include expanded extension services and agricultural trai-
ning as well as building and improving the primary schools.  
A significant percentage of the population is school age, and 
although many people go on to further their education, many 
 166 
others do not. The literacy rate for males is about 85 percent, while 
the literacy rate for females is about 70 percent. The most likely 
people in Iran to drop out of school after the age of 11 are girls 
who live in the rural areas. Many rural families still do not 
understand why it is important for women to be educated. These 
girls may stay home and help their families out financially by 
working and contributing to the family income. Rural families may 
also want to “protect” their girls from outside influences and 
instead keep them home to promote a more traditional female role 
and to prepare them for marriage.  
The grading system of Iran is important to understand. It is based 
on a 0-20 point scale. The pupil must score at least a 10 to be 
promoted. The scale is roughly equivalent to the American A, B, C, 
D scales as follows: 
A = 17-20 
B = 14-16.9 
C = 12-13.9 
D = 10-11.9 
F = below 1013 
 
STATE MINORITY EDUCATION POLICIES 
Iran’s minority education policies focus exclusively on religious 
minorities. However, we have chosen to deal operationally with 
 167 
ethnic minorities. We mentioned above that the only reference to 
ethnicity in the Constitution is Article 19: “All people of Iran, 
whatever the ethnic group or tribe to which they belong, enjoy 
equal rights; and color, race, language, and the like do not bestow 
any privilege.” In this project we investigated specific educational 
dimensions.  
 Policies related to the language of Instruction. 
 National Curriculum Developments. 
 Textbook Developments. 
 Guidelines for Teacher Training Program. 
 
1. Policies Relating to Language of Instruction 
According to Article 15 of the Constitution, “the official language 
and script of Iran, the lingua franca of its people, is Persian. Official 
documents, correspondence, and texts, as well as text-books, must 
be in this language and script. However, the use of regional and 
tribal languages in the press and mass media, as well as for 
teaching of their literature in schools, is allowed in addition to 
Persian.” According to Amir Hasanpour, this is interpreted to 
mean that literature of a minority group that is taught in the 
schools can be in the native language, but the language of 
instruction is always Farsi.14  
Clearly, Farsi is the national language and is closely connected 
with being Iranian. A negative consequence of connecting Farsi too 
 168 
closely with being Iranian, is the tendency to suppress the other 
languages spoken in the country. Iranian policy makers are 
attempting to create a country with a single language and a single 
identity. This means that Azeri-speakers must give up part of their 
cultural identity in order to be considered Iranian. There is little 
allowance for Azeri or Kurdish to be spoken, even though they 
constitute so much of the identity of the marginal cultures of Iran. 
According to Shahrokh Meskoob, the “ideal state of affairs ... is one 
in which all these languages could exist and thrive alongside each 
other, each in its area of concentration and in accordance with its 
own capabilities, but with Persian continuing as the common 
language of communication among all Iranian ethnic groups.”15 To 
this point such a state of affairs has not been attained. 
In areas dominated by minority groups, the school teachers usually 
come from the minority group. In the Azeri-speaking areas 99 per-
cent of the teachers speak Azeri as a mother tongue, while in Kur-
distan 95 percent of the teachers speak Kurdish as a mother 
tongue.  
2. National Curriculum Developments 
In the centralized system of education, the curriculum is 
everywhere the same. Even though in most countries teachers are 
not slaves to curriculum guidelines, in Iran, teachers are required 
to follow curriculum as outlined by the Ministry of Education. Of 
course, they are encouraged to choose the most appropriate 
 169 
instructional practices. New initiatives are under way in Iran to 
develop interactive and participatory learning in the schools, but 
teachers are expected to cover the content entirely without any 
opportunity to deviate. In addition, the system of examinations 
and all kinds of assessments are powerful reasons for teachers to 
follow the curriculum as it is provided to them. We have provided 
here the curriculum in the first eight grades of the Iranian school.16 
The curriculum requires children to engage in religious teaching, 
and some religious minorities are able to participate in their own 
religious instruction.  
We have refrained from including the curriculum for the upper 
secondary program, because it is not uniform. Upper secondary 
school students must complete 96 units within three years of which 
68 to 70 units are obligatory and common for all streams; however, 
26 units are specialized and elective. In mathematics, for example, 
students are able to specialize in three different kinds of mathema-
tics in the final year of secondary school study. However, within 
each course of study, the curriculum is explicitly spelled out.  
Islamic Republic of Iran. Primary education: weekly lesson 
timetable 
Subject # of weekly periods in each grade 
I II III  IV  V 
The Holy Quran   -  -  2  2  2 
Religious teaching  -  3  2  2  2 
 170 
Persian composition   -  2  2  2  2 
Dictation    -  3  2  2  2 
Persian (reading and   12  4  4  3  3 
comprehension) 
Social studies    -  -  2  -  - 
Arts (painting, calligraphy,  2  2  -  4  4 
workmanship) 
Health and natural sciences  3  3  4  3  3 
Mathematics    5  5  4  4  4 
Physical education   2  2  2  2  2 
 
Total weekly periods  24  24  24  24  24 
______________________________________________________ 
 
Islamic Republic of Iran. Lower secondary education: weekly 
lesson timetable 
Subject  # of weekly periods in each form 
     I II III 
Persian language and literature  5  5  5 
Mathematics  5  4  4 
Natural sciences  4  4  4 
Religious teaching  2  2  2 
History  1  1  1 
Geography  1  1  1 
Arabic language  2  2  2 
 171 
Social sciences  1  1  1 
Arts  2  1  1 
Introduction to  
techniques and vocations  3  3  3 
Foreign language  -  4  4 
Defense preparation  -  -  1 
The Holy Quran  2  2  2 
 
Total weekly periods  28  30  31 
 
While there are healthy developments in some aspects of Iranian 
curriculum, the nationalizing element so dominates the scene that 
the treatment of minority groups remains almost completely 
absent from the picture. For example, the geography curriculum is 
a likely candidate to stress ethnic groups of a country, and it has 
been upgraded so that it no longer focuses exclusively on 
memorization of names and places. It has incorporated some of the 
ideas prevalent in international geography programs. These 
include the development of a wide range of geographic skills on 
the part of the student, and the ability to actually engage in 
geography projects and solve geographic problems. Unfortunately, 
these new developments do not include coverage of ethnic groups 
in Iran itself, beyond the learning of the names of ethnic groups 
and where they are located in Iran. In other words, regarding 
ethnic minorities, the Iranian geography curriculum remains as it 
 172 
was in its most traditional periods in that it focuses almost 
exclusively on the learning of names and places.  
No course or special curriculum modules are found that deals with 
specific ethnic issues. Kurdish or Turkish people and other ethnic 
minorities in Iran are not allowed to institute special programs 
dealing with the group; all programs are uniform throughout the 
country. All pupils in all of the areas of the country are judged on a 
uniform scale at the same level and there is no distinction among 
them. In addition, the entrance examination for university students 
cannot take local considerations into account. Authorities cannot 
consider the ethnic situation in their decision to admit students.  
There is comparable treatment of ethnic minority groups in the 
Iranian curriculum as is found in the Azerbaijan curriculum, but it 
has a special value orientation, and this is best seen in the content 
of the textbooks. 
3. Textbook Development 
Because the system of education in Iran is highly centralized, 
textbooks, which are the main medium across the country, are 
centrally written and used in all schools. Each course at each grade 
level has its own textbook that is used in every school of Iran. More 
than a million copies of textbooks are used each year, and there are 
approximately 800 different textbooks produced for primary and 
secondary schooling. Teachers are instructed to use the textbook to 
 173 
guide every facet of their instruction. The pupils are supposed to 
study and understand the textbook in each course. Finally, testing 
and evaluation are limited to the contents of each textbook. In 
other words, the primary vehicle for transmitting the curriculum is 
the textbook. Shorish has noted the following regarding textbooks 
in Iran:  
It is through the textbooks that one sees the aspirations of the 
revolutionaries about the establishment of their ideal society 
expressed. This society is composed of men and women who are 
profiled in the pages of the textbooks as ideal citizens. It is hoped 
that children have, over the years, internalized the contents of the 
textbooks as well as other similar and reinforcing values inculcated 
by the other socializing agencies readily available to the 
revolutionary state like the news media.17  
We have noted that constitutionally textbooks must be in the 
Persian language and script. And true to the focus of Iran on 
religion, the textbooks are focused on Islamic pedagogy through 
training and purification. The purpose of textbooks is to inculcate 
sacredness and the attributes that an Islamic person possesses into 
each child.18 Thus, women always appear in the texts wearing a 
veil or scarf. Men do not wear a tie, which is a mark of a Western 
man. Pictures always display marks of Islam, including the Qur’an, 
religious leaders, a mosque, or some other symbol.19  
 174 
Iranian education clearly addresses minorities, but it is done in the 
context of religious minorities. We have noted that Iran recognizes 
Jews, Christians, and Zoroastrians, and it has sponsored textbooks 
specifically for these faiths, called Teaching of the Sacred Religions 
and Ethics for the Religious Minorities. The Ministry of Education 
produces the textbooks for the schools, but it claims to consult 
teachers and other appropriate groups as it develops the textbooks. 
In this context, the Ministry consults religious leaders of these 
minority religions in the production of the religious texts. The 
justification for creating such textbooks for religious minorities is 
the recognition that belief is not the major problem. It is disbelief 
that causes the difficulties. Those who don’t believe anything cause 
more problems that do the Zoroastrians, Christians, and Jews. We 
might generalize that the textbooks for religious minorities in 
many respects push the ideas that all religions have in common 
with Muslims. In fact, the same textbooks are used for all three 
minority groups, so it must emphasize things in common to most 
religions. That is, there is a supreme creator, a God. There are 
prophets, such as Jesus and Moses. The order of the universe is a 
manifestation of God’s hand in all things. There is a resurrection 
and an assessment of one’s deeds on earth. 
While there appears to be great efforts to recognize and address 
the educational needs of religious minorities, the textbooks give 
almost no attention to the fact that ethnic minorities are a part of 
Iranian national culture. And when they do, they are often 
 175 
negative in character. For example, textbooks in Iran include anti-
Semitic remarks relating to Middle Eastern history or religion. Of 
course, these are made in the context of Israel, but they pointedly 
degrade the Jewish tradition as being anti-social and against the 
family structure.20 
The only references to Azeri-speaking people in the textbooks are 
found in geography. They are factual in nature pointing out where 
Azerbaijan is and where in Iran the Azerbaijani peoples are 
located. There are no supplemental materials in schools available 
that deal with ethnic minorities in Iran. 
Textbooks define the content of the examination system in the 
country. In 2002, for example, the national examinations assessed 
performance of those in the fifth grade of elementary school, the 
third grade of the guidance or middle school and the third grade of 
high school. The content of these examinations was drawn directly 
from the textbooks. This means that teachers increasingly rely on 
the textbook to define what they teach. In addition, they resort to 
memorization of the content of the books.  
4. Guidelines for Teacher Training Program 
As is the case in most countries, primary school teachers are 
trained in different institutions than are secondary teachers. 
Primary and guidance school (similar to general lower secondary 
school) teachers are trained in two-year Teacher Training Centers, 
 176 
where they obtain something similar to an American associate 
degree. Secondary school teachers must pass the National 
University Entrance Examination and follow a four-year course 
leading to a bachelor’s degree. The most important aspect of any 
teacher is to be the kind of morally and ethically oriented person 
that children can emulate. The ideal teacher is the ideal Muslim. 
Students that attend Teacher Training Centers, have diverse 
educational backgrounds. Most have completed upper secondary 
school, but some are admitted with less education. Even though, in 
theory, in order to teach at the upper secondary level, a university 
degree is required, due to a shortage of teachers, schools have been 
compelled to use teaching staff with other educational 
backgrounds. Teachers are trained in universities and higher 
institutes. There are seven teacher-training colleges in Iran. There 
are, of course, programs in higher education that deal in one way 
or another with ethnic minorities, particularly history and 
geography, but the pedagogical and professional aspects of the 
training of teachers do not include any content related to ethnic 
minorities in Iran. There is nothing similar to multicultural 
courses, the special pedagogical needs of children from ethnic 
minorities, or the need to appreciate cultural differences. All 
teachers must have a healthy background in religious studies. 
 
 177 
Specific School Data Collection 
 
Our plan was to look at schools at the primary level and schools at 
the secondary level in each region. Besides we visited the 
communities in these regions as during the first days we 
established a sense of rapport with administrators and teachers of 
the schools and attended classes to become familiar with the 
institutions. As we familiarized ourselves with the schools, then 
became more systemic concerning data collection. The collected 
specific data concerning the ethnic background of teachers and 
students, their rate of success and specific provisions for them. 
Beyond this we, used a qualitative approach to the study on the 
grounds that it best served the purpose of our investigations 
namely: 
1. To understand the behavior of teachers in the context of the 
specific institutional context 
2. To understand this context in relation to the local educational 
directorate  
3. To understand how the provisions for minority students either 
support or deviate from the national educational agenda. 
We conducted interviews with local educational directorate 
leaders, school leaders and teachers. The respondents were asked 
for information concerning curriculum, programs language issues 
and textbooks as well as opinions about them. We tried to group 
 178 
the questions around policy and practice related to minorities in 
the local directorate and the school and issues, and textbooks. And 
the third group of questions the conditions that existed related to 
minority students and teachers.  
According to our research plan we visited two different parts of 
the country where ethnic minorities are the majority of the 
population. These are: 
1. Azerbaijani regions 
2. Kurdish regions 
 
Azerbaijan Regions 
Azerbaijanis often speak of Southern and Northern Azerbaijan, to 
distinguish between those Azeri-speaking peoples living in what is 
today known as the Republic of Azerbaijan and those living in 
Iran. The territory where the Azerbaijan peoples live was divided 
almost two centuries ago in two major treaties, the Treaty of 
Gulistan (1813) and the Treaty of Turkmenistan (1828). The 
Azerbaijanis had little to do with these treaties; they were in fact 
decisions made between Iran, Russia, England and other powers 
who were attempting to establish control over the territory. In 
those treaties, the territory constituting what is now the Azerbaijan 
Republic was given to Russia, while the territory where the Iranian 
Azeri-speaking people live was given to Iran.21  
 179 
Azeri-speaking people live mainly in three provinces which are 
part of the Islamic Republic of Iran: Eastern Azerbaijan, Western 
Azerbaijan, and Aradebil. A fourth province, Zanjan has a mixed 
population, although most of its population are also Azeri-
speaking. Other provinces have small pockets of Azeri-speaking 
people. Tabriz is the major Azerbaijan city, and it is located in the 
Eastern Azerbaijan province. The Azerbaijani population in Iran 
speak the Azeri language, one of the dialects of the Turkish 
language.  These people tend toward the Shi’ite branch of Islam, 
which makes them religiously similar to the mainstream Farsi-
speaking population.  
In Iran, the Azerbaijan “Turkish People” participate in partnership 
in jobs with the majority Farsi-speaking people, though most of the 
key jobs are held by Farsi-speaking people. However, one does 
find Azeri-speaking people in the top positions of education, the 
military, business and industry. One potential advantage of the 
educational system being highly centralized and the educational 
programs being highly uniform is that it provides more equal 
opportunity for the Azeri-speaking people. A growing number of 
Azeri-speaking people are moving to Tehran in an attempt to 
better their lot in life. Teachers complained that even though 
programs throughout the country look much the same as the 
programs in Tehran, there are better facilities and a wider number 
of schools that are designed to provide education at a single level, 
 180 
such as pre-primary schools, guidance schools, and pre-university 
schools.  
Our fieldwork took place in schools in and around Tabriz, 
including small villages. We had the good fortune of having on our 
research team teachers, university instructors and graduate 
students, most of whom spoke Azeri. There was therefore little 
hesitation on the part of teachers to share with us their feelings and 
attitudes.  
From our discussions with teachers, it was clear that these people 
maintain a strong preference for the Azeri language, but 
unfortunately the language is not allowed in public schools. Farsi 
has been the official language of the country since 1906, although it 
was not until the so-called Pahlavi dynasty (1925-1979) that the 
central government was strong enough to mandate Farsi in all 
public schools. As early as 1923 the Prime Minister prescribed Farsi 
in all schools attended by Azerbaijani children, and noted that 
provincial governor was to “notify all the schools under your juris-
diction to fully abide by this and to conduct all their affairs in the 
Persian language.” This tradition continued after the fall of the 
Shah, although enforcement of Farsi language policies has declined 
somewhat since that time.22  
Some educators complained that because there is no legal place 
for the Azeri language in the public education system, different 
accents in the language have developed over time. This has 
 181 
occurred in almost all villages and even in different areas of 
towns. And a situation has developed where distinctions are 
being drawn between different Azeri dialects. Tabriz Azeri, for 
example, is commonly recognized as being superior and 
commonly accepted among the more cultured, educated, and 
cosmopolitan Azeri-speaking people. Fortunately, recently the 
Azerbaijani language has been taught in a small number of 
private educational institutions and books in Azeri are now 
commonly published and an intention of this activity is to 
recreate a more uniform Southern Azerbaijani language.  
According to the people we visited in the schools, prohibitions 
against Azeri are being relaxed. Whereas in the past, Azeri was 
spoken at school in a whisper, now teachers and children speak the 
language openly and comfortably. In the spring of 2003 Azeri 
language classes will be taught at Alame Tababeti Institute, a 
teacher training college, in Tehran. And in the fall of 2003 Azeri 
language classes will be taught at Tabriz University.23 
In visiting classrooms, we were pleasantly surprised to find that 
teachers at the primary level occasionally used Azeri when the 
child did not understand in Farsi, even though Farsi was the 
formal language of instruction. We even witnessed a chemistry 
class at the secondary level where the teacher was giving 
instruction in Azeri. However, these were exceptional cases, 
although teachers candidly pointed out that if a teacher only 
 182 
speaks Farsi, that teacher will have great difficulty as a teacher 
instructing Azeri-speaking children, particularly if the teacher is 
working in elementary schools and in the villages. 
Traditionally, achievement levels among the Azeri-speaking 
peoples have been relatively low, mainly because of the language 
barrier. In 2000, for example, among the 24 provinces of Iran, the 
province of Eastern Azerbaijan ranked twentieth in terms of 
overall school achievement, while Western Azerbaijan ranked 
twenty-fourth, Aradebil ranked twenty-second, and the province 
of Zanjan, which is mixed, ranked twenty-first. In other words all 
four provinces where Azeri-speaking peoples live, ranked no 
higher than twentieth in terms of achievement.  
Some experts in Iran would explain away this low achievement by 
suggesting that the Azeri-speaking peoples may not be as 
intelligent as Farsi-speaking peoples or that they come from a 
different social class. According to Younes Vahdati, our Iranian 
team leader, there has been some research on the issue. Younes 
explains that in one study, achievement tests in spelling, reading 
comprehension, science, and mathematics were given to children 
in four schools of Tehran, and the same test given to four schools 
in Tabriz and surrounding villages. The average Azeri-speaking 
child made 7 spelling mistakes, while the average Farsi speaking 
child made only 1.5 mistakes. Even though the Azeri-speaking 
children scored lower than did the Farsi-speaking children on the 
 183 
science test, the differences in test scores were not dramatic. The 
mathematics test showed very similar results, indicating that 
language played a role in the outcome.  
In another research project, Azeri-speaking pupils were given a 
test in Farsi and the same test was also administered to pupils in 
the Azeri language. The average Farsi language score was 11 but 
the average Azeri language score increased to 15.5, indicating a 
dramatic improvement in the performance level, even though the 
children had not even received Azeri language instruction in the 
school. We recall that the grading system is such that an 11 would 
represent a grade of “D” while a score of 15.5 would represent a 
grade of “C”. 
In our research project the head of one school we visited showed 
us some data he had collected. The previous year, the school 
enrolled 451 students, 440 of whom spoke Azeri as their mother 
language. Of course, all pupils were taught in Farsi, and the Farsi-
speaking children experienced a higher degree of success than did 
the Azeri-speaking children. Only nine percent (less than 40) of the 
Azeri-speaking pupils passed the exams while almost all of the 
Farsi-speaking children passed. The average score of the Azeri-
speaking pupils was between 10 and 11 (barely passing with a 
grade of “D”), but the average score of the Farsi-speaking children 
in this school was about 18 (high score with a grade of “A”). In 
examinations and competitions, Persian students were not only 
 184 
more successful, in our visits to classrooms we found them to 
participate more actively in class discussions and to be more 
involved in activities such as the science experiments and 
demonstrations.  
We were told that Azeri-speaking young people appear to have 
become quite competitive with Farsi-speaking youth, but the data 
on university admissions does not substantiate this claim. 
According to the Rector of Tabriz University, for every 10,000 
people in Eastern Azerbaijan, where Tabriz is located, only 67 
school leavers are accepted in the university, whereas the average 
admission rate in Iran is 109 students. 
The textbooks, the teaching hours, and other aspects of the 
program in all of the areas are the same. Because the educational 
system is uniform, all children, whether they are Turkish, Kurdish, 
Baluch, Bakhtyari, Jewish, Ashoori, and Arab minorities receive 
this uniform education, and the language of instruction is in 
Persian/Farsi. Of course, ethnic minority groups have great 
difficulty with Farsi, and the people who live in villages are not 
familiar with it at all. As a result this uniform education tends to 
disadvantage ethnic minority groups. It is unreasonable to insist 
on a uniform education in terms of curriculum and textbooks, 
because the ethnic minorities are always at a disadvantage. The 
situation is so regulated that many children are embarrassed to 
 185 
speak because they are laughed at by Farsi-speaking children, who 
make fun of their poor language skills and dialect. 
From our visits to the schools, we observed that teachers were 
uniformly diligent in attempting to teach the prescribed 
curriculum and textbooks in Farsi. For many this was a difficult 
language and they were at a disadvantage in their ability to 
communicate, but they did so, in spite of the fact that in the schools 
we visited the Azeri-speaking children dominated the classrooms. 
In other words, both the teacher and the pupils were able to 
communicate better in Azeri, but they were both attempting to 
function in a second language.  
We asked teachers why they were so diligent in using Farsi, and 
they simply responded that it was necessary to do so, because 
teachers were required to do so. To do otherwise might mean they 
would loose their job or they would be placed in a more 
undesirable school. Some teachers also found the information in 
the textbooks to be dated or not reflect the latest research findings 
in the various content areas. Obviously, Azeri-speaking teachers 
have access to information from a wide variety of sources and are 
in a position to make critical judgments about the materials 
available in the classroom and its suitability.  
In elementary schools there are usually teachers’ meetings once a 
month and in this meeting the teachers discuss the school and 
student problems and difficulties. The director of the meetings is 
 186 
usually the headmaster of a school. But our observations were that 
the teachers, who were almost all native Azeri speakers, did not 
have courage to take part in the discussions, with the result being 
that the headmaster becomes very directive and imposes his will 
on the teachers.  
In elementary schools, at the beginning of the year, a number of 
parents are chosen as representatives according to the number of 
students in the school. These representatives participate together in 
an attempt to reinforce the relationship and partnership between 
the school and the home and thereby help improve the quality of 
educational activities and expand the relations between parents 
and school. Members of this council are as follows: (1) Head-
master, (2) One of the assistants chosen by the head master, (3) 
Representative of teachers council, (4) Training teacher, (5) 
Representative of parents. All school expenses must be confirmed 
by the parent/teacher committee in monthly meetings. Teachers 
usually have good relationships with each other and respect to 
each other and rarely do they quarrel with each other. In some 
schools one finds Azeri, Kurdish, and Farsi speaking teachers, and 
our data indicate that there is usually high respect shown among 
these teachers and high respect shown by the pupils toward all 
teachers, regardless of ethnicity.  
In Iran, all schools, either in Azerbaijan or in Tehran, Isfahan, 
Kurdestan observe the same holidays and periods that are held 
 187 
dear by national leaders. For example, 22 February is celebrated as 
the anniversary of the Islamic Revolution throughout the country. 
Essentially no special days that are honored by the Azerbaijani 
minorities are observed in the schools. There are no formal cultural 
events related to ethnic minorities. 
In some private schools, food is served but in all of the pubic 
schools of Iran there is no formal serving of food. In spite of this, in 
most schools the local community provides food services, without 
cost to pupils, so this is one means by which local foods are a part 
of the school. All classes and lessons are related to the whole 
country and books and lessons never discuss local problems. 
Teachers invariably hold to the curriculum and textbooks as they 
are distributed by Tehran. We might also note that research 
projects at Tabriz University are expected to focus on the whole 
country and are not expected to focus on local and racial problems. 
Researchers do not even acknowledge their understanding of 
differences in the country as a whole. 
We inquired of the teachers about their attitudes about being 
Iranian and Azerbaijani. Almost all of them expressed some pride 
in being both, although there appears to be an age factor in the 
equation. That is, younger teachers appear to have a greater sense 
of pride in being Iranian than the older teachers. However, none of 
the teachers expressed outright hostility toward being Iranian, 
even though they were uniformly proud to be Azerbaijani. An 
 188 
important element in the development of Azeri-speaking people 
concerning their self-identity is the presence of the Republic of 
Azerbaijan, which gained independence in 1991. In the past Azeri-
speaking people in Iran had no place with which they could easily 
identify, but in the last twelve years they have had close 
relationships with a country with which they can identify and 
relate to.  
In spite of this, the nationalistic educational mission of Iran has 
had a noticeable effect on the Azeri-speaking people. They 
constitute an important part of Iran and they identify strongly with 
the country of Iran. Significantly, Azeri-speaking people are not 
visible within the radical political movements of the day. We 
found some educators who said they were waiting in the wings 
until the right time, but others clearly were not interested in radical 
activities.  
Kurdish Regions 
The Kurds are a transnational minority ethnic population that 
inhabit the region in northwestern Iran adjacent to Iraq. They 
reside in the provinces of Kurdestan, Kermanshahan, and the 
southern part of Western Azerbaijan. As of the late 1990s, there 
were estimated to be more than 20 million Kurds, about half of 
them in Turkey. The Kurds in Iran constitute some 7% of the 
country’s people, about 4.2 million. Ethnically close to the Iranians, 
the Kurds were traditionally nomadic herders but are now mostly 
 189 
semi-nomadic or sedentary. The majority of Kurds are devout 
Sunni Muslims. Kurdish dialects belong to the northwestern 
branch of the Iranian languages. The Kurdish population in Iran 
speak Kirmanji, which is a collective term in Iran for dialects 
spoken by Kurds. However, in conventional discourse we usually 
refer to the language as Kurdish. The Kurds have traditionally 
resisted subjugation by other nations. In fact, in 1946 the People’s 
Republic of Kurdestan was established, under the leadership of 
Qazi Mohamnmad, although the Iranian army soon crushed the 
revolt. Despite their lack of political unity throughout history, the 
Kurds, as individuals and in small groups, have had a lasting 
impact on developments in Southwest Asia. 
We visited Kurdish schools in and around the provincial capital 
city of Sanandi, in the Kurdestan province, where most of the 
Kurds of Iran are located. The schools were extremely poor, as 
were the young people attending them. But we sensed them to 
be honorable people, but people most of whom do not have 
extensive formal education. We observed Kurdish teachers in 
the classroom and talked at length with many of them. They 
were initially anxious about who we were and whether we 
might be affiliated with the central government. Fortunately, in 
our group were graduate students who were Kurds and others 
who were immediately identified as sympathetic with their 
situation, so we felt few barriers in our conversations with them.  
 190 
In visiting classrooms, we found that Kurdish teachers were 
usually more open than were Azeri-speaking teachers about their 
Kurdish background. At the lower primary school level they often 
spoke in Kurdish to the children, if it appeared the child needed 
that additional input to understand a word or idea. We did not 
observe any classes taught in the Kurdish language, but we were 
told on several occasions that such classes are taught quite 
regularly when teachers feel that the children can achieve better if 
they are taught in Kurdish.  
Achievement levels in the schools populated by Kurds is low. In 
2000, for example, among the 24 provinces of Iran, Kurdistan 
ranked twenty-third in terms of achievement. Some experts in Iran 
would explain away this low achievement by suggesting that the 
Kurds are traditional peoples who have no interest in school and 
therefore they fail to achieve. According to Younes Vahdati, our 
Iranian team leader, there has been some research on the issue. In 
the study cited in the Azerbaijan section where 4 schools of Tehran 
and 4 schools of Tabriz were studied, an additional 4 school of 
Naghadeh and the villages it were also studied. Very similar 
results concerning Kurdish children came as was found with 
Azeri-speaking children. That is, the Kurdish children performed 
much lower than Farsi-speaking children on the spelling test, and 
their achievement in science and math was also lower, though not 
as dramatic as in the spelling test. The research project in which 
the same test was given in Azeri and Farsi was also given using 
 191 
Kurdish and Farsi. In this case the Kurds scored 12.5 (giving them 
a grade of low “C”) in the test given in Farsi, but scored 16.5 
(giving them a high “B” grade), when the test was given in 
Kurdish. 
The textbooks, the teaching hours, and other aspects of the 
program in all of the areas are the same. Kurdish teachers were 
very critical of the system, because they felt it was based on cruel 
and unkind purposes. They were aware of scientific evidence that 
children must learn in their mother language, at least at the 
beginning of school, if the children were to optimize their chances 
for success. Teachers were open that it is unreasonable to insist on 
a uniform education in terms of curriculum and textbooks, because 
the ethnic minorities are always at a disadvantage. 
In spite of the above criticisms, from our visits to the schools, we 
observed that teachers were diligent in attempting to teach the 
prescribed curriculum and textbooks in Farsi. For many this was a 
difficult language and they were at a disadvantage in their ability 
to communicate. As we observed the teachers in the classrooms, it 
seemed to us that even though the teachers taught the prescribed 
curriculum and held to the content of the textbooks, they were not 
always as dedicated to that content as Farsi teachers might be. Of 
course, one of the variables that mediates the influence of the 
curriculum and textbooks is the teachers. If teachers are 
sympathetic with the contents of the textbooks, their effectiveness 
 192 
is obviously greater. However, if teachers are ambivalent or even 
hostile toward the content, the learning process will be negatively 
affected. This may even be unconscious on the part of the teacher, 
but we observed a lack of enthusiasm for some content that was 
unsympathetic to Kurdish interests, particularly as it was asso-
ciated with the Farsi majority, the Shi’ite Muslim religion, and 
claims that the people of Iran are one people.  
The same can be observed on the part of the children. Some 
content obviously contradicts what the children are learning at 
home. Believability in the content of the textbooks by the children 
themselves may prevent them from learning and internalizing 
matters dealing with political socialization and other kinds of 
learnings. The lack of reinforcement by very important actors in 
the children’s lives such as the parents and the religious leaders of 
the community reduces the impact of teaching (and that of the 
textbooks) and sometimes forces children to compartmentalize in 
order to please the many significant advocates of conflicting 
values. That is, young Kurds obviously learn outside the school 
about their culture, their dress, special foods, their dances, etc. 
They learn to take pride in who they are, their religion and their 
condition as a minority population.  
We noted in our discussion of Azeri-speaking peoples, that no 
special attention is given to ethnic minority holidays, no cultural 
events are celebrated, no attention is given to local problems and 
 193 
issues in the schools. We asked teachers if they broke from these 
guidelines and did recognize certain events and special issues, but 
they made clear that they did not do this and took great pains to 
avoid mentioning local events and celebrations. In order for Kurds 
to rise to the point that they achieve higher education, they have to 
commit themselves to Farsi ways. It would be a great loss to them 
to challenge the course they had taken. 
In our discussions with teachers, we concentrated largely on the 
materials that were supplied to them, that dictated the content of 
instruction, particularly textbooks. We explored general concerns 
of teacher, as teachers. As expected, even though teachers were 
critical of the textbooks and their ability to interest students, and 
they were even critical of the kinds of pictures found in the books, 
the covers, and the way they were formatted, they tended to accept 
the program and content with a sense that they probably could 
have been worse, but that they were what might be expected. 
Teachers were aware that there is great discussion in the country 
about the importance of giving a balanced view of ethnic groups, 
sexual issues, occupations, social class, and language, but they felt 
little of this was reflected in the textbooks themselves. And what 
was there usually reflected a negative picture toward the Kurds. 
We also explored issues related to the degree to which the 
curriculum and textbooks addressed them as Kurds. There was 
consensus that the program of instruction was not intended to 
 194 
address the concerns of the Kurdish population, and particularly 
the personal needs of the students. In fact, the only place in the 
program of studies that the Kurdish population is mentioned is in 
geography, and in this aspect of the program, some attention was 
given to the location of ethnic groups in Iran and particularly 
where the Kurds were located in the country. However, no 
attention is given to the Kurdish history, culture, values, and arts. 
The school is devoted exclusively to being Iranian and the creation 
of a Shi’ite Muslim state. It is the task of the school to help young 
people learn how to be good Muslims and please Allah. In fact, 
academic competency takes a seat behind commitment to the 
Islamic state. Some teachers complained that the pictures in the 
textbooks reflected a negative attitude toward them as Kurds. They 
made them afraid and angry.             
We asked the teachers what their attitudes were about being 
Iranian and Kurds. They were quite open about their ambivalence. 
They live close to the Kurds in Iraq and feel a kinship as Kurds that 
has never existed toward being Iranian. In spite of this, they see 
themselves as Iranian although the sense of identity expressed by 
Azeri-speaking Iranians was not so evident among the Kurds. In 
spite of this, the nationalistic educational mission of Iran has had a 
noticeable effect on the Kurdish people. They constitute an 
important part of Iran and they identify with the country of Iran.  
 
 195 
III. OUTCOMES OF THE RESEARCH PROJECT 
 
POLICY FINDINGS 
 
The policy outcomes of our study can be stated in rather simple 
terms. In terms of the constitutions, school laws, curriculum plans, 
textbooks, and teacher training policies, we determined that in 
both countries the policies were clear and consistent. That is, 
constitutional articles and school laws pertaining to the education 
of minority groups were consistent with instructional policies, 
curriculum plans, textbooks, and teacher training policies, and 
they, in turn were consistent with each other. In fact, there is a 
conscious and deliberate attempt to meld them, by having the 
same people set policies and write the programs. In Azerbaijan, for 
example, the people who are asked to write the textbooks are the 
same people who serve on the curriculum councils charged with 
establishing curriculum programs. And these same people often 
teach at the teacher training university and they therefore partici-
pate in determining the content of teacher training programs. 
However, the straight forward articulation of all of these things, at 
least in Azerbaijan, is only found in the standard program, and a 
wide variety of experiments, pilot schools, and new school types 
 196 
are now to be found. Unfortunately, almost none of these inno-
vations relate to ethnic minorities. 
The policy in Azerbaijan is clearly that minority pupils be given 
the opportunity to be given instruction in the primary schools 
about their native tongue. The number of years in which the native 
language is used as the language of instruction differs, but the 
general policy is rather clear. Lezghian children are able to study 
the language as an optional subject in primary school to the end of 
secondary school, whereas for Talish the opportunity ends after 
four years of primary school. The rationale for this difference is 
that Talish is a dead end option in that there is no opportunity to 
continue in higher education, whereas Lezghian students are able 
to go on to higher education studies at Mahachgala University in 
Russia. Language provisions are generally seen as transitional in 
nature, in that they are not intended to help the children gain 
insight into the minority culture but to better prepare them to 
eventually succeed in schools where Azeri and Russian are the 
languages of instruction.  
In spite of this rather generous and insightful language policy, 
there is no place in the standard curriculum for minority children 
to learn about the minority culture, customs, and arts. We did a 
content analysis of all the most recent textbooks that have been 
prepared by the Ministry of Education for the primary and 
secondary classes to see what references are made regarding ethnic 
 197 
minorities in Azerbaijan. If we were to put all of these textbooks 
together they would add up to more than 4,000 pages of text. In all 
of these 4,000 pages we found references to minorities that 
amounted to less than two pages of text. In other words, there are 
almost no references to minority groups in the texts. In terms of 
teacher training, there is no provision in the professional develop-
ment guidelines for dealing with ethnic minorities in Azerbaijan. 
We interviewed several lecturers at the State Teacher Training 
University and Baku State University, some of whom had written 
textbooks. History teachers indicated to us they deal extensively 
with ethnic minorities in Azerbaijan history. In fact, they use a 
textbook written by Gamersha Javadov, Small Ethnic Groups and 
National Minorities in Azerbaijan, that tells the history of these 
groups. However, they confirmed that there are no provisions at 
the universities for sensitizing teacher candidates to minority 
populations and the teaching of the students of minorities.  
In Iran, the policies are also clear and straight forward. Farsi is the 
language of instruction for all children of Iran, without exception, 
and it is the language of instruction from the beginning of primary 
school to the end of compulsory schooling. In the centralized 
system of education, the curriculum is everywhere the same. 
Teachers are required to follow the curriculum as outlined by the 
Ministry of Education. Of course, teachers are encouraged to 
choose the most appropriate instructional practices, and new 
initiatives are under way in Iran to develop interactive and 
 198 
participatory learning in the schools, but teachers are expected to 
cover the content entirely without any opportunity to deviate.  
Constitutionally textbooks must be in the Persian language and 
script. And true to the focus of Iran on religion, the textbooks 
focuse on Islamic pedagogy through training and purification. The 
purpose of textbooks is to inculcate sacredness and the attributes 
that an Islamic person possesses. Curiously, there is a place in the 
curriculum for approved religious minorities to learn a special 
kind of religious program, but the things they learn are general 
enough that they do not appear to foster a particular religion; 
rather, they foster religious belief in general. The only textbooks 
allowed are those produced by the Ministry of Education, and 
there is no place in the Iranian textbooks for the child to learn 
about his/her ethnic minority culture, history, and literature. We 
found occasional references to ethnic minorities in Iran, but they 
were largely negative in character. References to the Jews were 
inevitably in reference to Israel and the sympathy Jews had for 
anti-Muslim causes. 
Teachers are trained in universities and higher institutes. There 
are, of course, programs in higher education that deal in one way 
or another with ethnic minorities, particularly in history and 
geography, but the pedagogical and professional aspects of the 
training of teachers do not include any content related to ethnic 
minorities in Iran. All teachers must have a healthy background in 
 199 
religious studies. A new development is being initiated in 2003. 
The teacher training college at Tehran and Tabriz University are 
scheduled to teach the Azeri.  
FIELD WORK OUTCOMES 
 
From our visits to the schools, we observed that teachers were 
uniformly diligent in attempting to teach the prescribed curricu-
lum and textbooks in the national language. For many this was a 
difficult language and they were at a disadvantage in their ability 
to communicate, but they did so, in spite of the fact that in the 
schools we visited the minority pupils were dominant. In other 
words, both the teacher and the pupils were usually able to 
communicate better in the ethnic minority language, but they were 
both attempting to function in a second language.  
There were great differences between Azerbaijan and Iran. In 
Azerbaijan, schools serving the minorities conform, by and large, 
to the school patterns of the rest of Azerbaijan. That is, there are 
Russian and Azeri language schools, and they provide the stan-
dard curriculum required by the Ministry of Education. However, 
the minority language instruction is available in the first four 
grades of primary school, and a number of pupils take advantage 
of this possibility. In addition, Lezghian is available at the secon-
dary level as an “optional” subject. Teachers treat language inst-
 200 
ruction as a transitional pedagogical approach, because the chil-
dren would otherwise not succeed as well if instruction were in 
Azeri or Russian. 
A substantial portion of the students in the schools we visited have 
teachers who represent the minority population. Our general 
impression was that the teachers and pupils were proud to belong 
to their minority population, but that they took for granted there 
was essentially no place in the formal curriculum for the ethnic 
group to receive attention. We have seen that the curriculum and 
textbooks make little provision for a discussion of the culture and 
how it is to be distinguished from other groups in the Republic.  
Our queries as to provisions that are made to deal with the 
minority culture were usually met with perplexed looks. 
Azerbaijani educators made it clear that they followed the 
curriculum as it was issued by the Ministry of Education. There 
did not appear to be strict sanctions against teaching about the 
minority culture; rather, the attitude among teachers was more 
that it was their professional obligation to follow the guidelines 
laid down by the Ministry. 
In our classroom visits, we found references to local conditions, 
places, and events, but they were not tied to any cultural 
conditions of the minority population. One math teacher, for 
example, in an exercise on geometric designs, made reference to 
streets in the town and how they were laid out. In Kuba, the only 
 201 
incident we observed relating to Lezghian conditions was made by 
one teacher who was not Lezghian; she chided the children who 
misbehaved on one occasion that their behavior did not measure 
up to the expectations she had of Lezghians. 
We did inquire as to the attitude minority members have about 
themselves, and it was evident that they took great pride in who 
they were. By way of contrast, in talking with teachers who were 
not members of the minority group, they expressed some shock 
when we asked if they were part of that minority, as if such an 
identity were an insult to them. How do minority members 
develop such a sense of pride? The local families and community 
apparently provide sufficient support and reinforcement for the 
young people, although they have taken efforts to meld the school 
and community. For example, students of the upper grades of the 
Udin middle school take Udin language weekly for 2-4 hours 
planned by the National Curriculum as an “elective” course. At the 
same time there are a number of choices children can make as part 
of extra-curricular activities run by all three schools in the village. 
These include “Study of Udin Customs”, “Udin Songs”, and “Udin 
drama” in the Udin language. There are additional materials 
available to the general public.  
In Iran, teachers were unified in their sentiments that a potential 
advantage of the educational system being highly centralized and 
the educational programs being highly uniform is that it provides 
 202 
a more equal opportunity. A growing number of Iranian minorities 
are moving to Tehran in an attempt to better their lot in life. 
Teachers complained that even though programs throughout the 
country look the same as the programs in Tehran, there are better 
facilities and a wider number of schools that are designed to 
provide education at a single level, such as pre-primary schools, 
high schools and pre-university schools.  
Teachers recognized that the ethnic minority groups have great 
difficulty with Farsi, and the people who live in villages are not 
familiar with it at all. As a result this uniform education tends to 
disadvantage them. It is unreasonable to insist on a uniform 
education in terms of curriculum and textbooks, because the ethnic 
minorities are always at a disadvantage. The situation is so 
regulated that many children are embarrassed to speak because 
they are laughed at by Farsi-speaking children, who make fun of 
their poor language skills and dialect. 
Classroom participation is also affected by language requirements. 
According to our observations and interviews with teachers, 
Azerbaijani children did not participate as actively as Farsi-
speaking children in class discussions and they even failed to be as 
involved in science experiments and demonstrations. This 
difficulty is especially acute in the early years of schooling. By the 
end of secondary school, Azeri-speaking young people appear to 
have become quite competitive with Farsi-speaking youth. 
 203 
All classes and lessons are related to the whole country and books 
and lessons never discuss local problems. Teachers invariably hold 
to the curriculum and textbooks as they are distributed by Tehran. 
We might note that research projects even at the university in 
Tabriz are expected to focus on the whole country and are not 
expected to focus on local and ethnic problems. Researchers do not 
even acknowledge their understanding of differences in the 
country as a whole. 
We inquired of the teachers about their attitudes about being 
Iranian and Azerbaijani and Kurdish. Almost all of them expressed 
some pride in being both, although there appears to be an age 
factor in the equation. That is, younger teachers appear to have a 
greater sense of pride in being Iranian than the older teachers. 
However, none of the teachers expressed outright hostility toward 
being Iranian, even though they were uniformly proud to be 
Azerbaijani or Kurdish. An important element in the development 
of Azerbaijanis concerning their self-identity is the presence of the 
Republic of Azerbaijan. In the past they had no place with which 
they could easily identify, but in the last twelve years they have 
had close relationships with a country with which they can 
identify and relate to.  
In spite of this, the nationalistic educational mission of Iran has 
had a noticeable effect on the minority people. They constitute an 
important part of Iran and their identity is strongly with the 
 204 
country. Significantly, Azerbaijanis in Iran are not visible within 
the radical political movements of the day. We found some 
educators who said they were waiting in the wings until the right 
time, but others clearly were not interested in radical activities. 
However, it is less clear how they are able to maintain such a 
strong sense of personal identity as Azerbaijanis. 
 
THE CHALLENGE OF CURRENT MINORITY EDUCATION POLICIES 
 
The school in Azerbaijan and Iran is a nationalizing institution. 
That is, the school and education are seen as prime agents for 
developing national consciousness and safeguarding national 
unity. In Azerbaijan, the focus on national unity is obviously 
necessitated by the fact that Azerbaijan only recently became an 
independent, autonomous nation state. Prior to the 1800s it 
consisted of a set of small Khanates, but then was brought under 
the umbrella of Russia in 1828. In 1920 it became a part of the 
Soviet Union. Independence is now only a dozen years old. There 
is a natural interest on the part of the state to forge a sense of being 
Azerbaijani. According to the Minister of Education, Misir 
Mardanov, a primary agent to accomplish this task is the school. 
There is an additional explanation for the focus in the schools on 
helping young people become Azerbaijani. The first public schools 
 205 
in the country were established by the Soviet Union about 1920. 
Consequently, the only public schools Azerbaijan has known are 
Soviet Schools, which were consciously and deliberately oriented 
toward the making of the “Soviet person.” Azerbaijanis have no 
other models of schooling in their history on which to build, so 
they clearly have emulated the Soviet model by emphasizing the 
national model and neglecting local and ethnic issues. 
Finally, the Nagorno-Karabakh crisis, which has resulted in the 
occupation of approximately 20 percent of Azerbaijan territory by 
Armenians, emphasizes the potential tragedy of severe ethnic 
divisions within a country. State leaders are doing everything in 
their power to prevent such divisions from leading to declarations 
of secession. 
Azerbaijan takes pride in its multi-ethnic tradition, and even 
though its multi-ethnic population has waned in the last half 
century in terms of numbers, the people of Azerbaijan continue to 
see themselves as multi-ethnic. The nationalist focus of its schools 
might one day be brought into harmony with that perspective and 
one day recognize that its strength lies in its multiculturalism to 
the point that the schools focus their mainstream programs of 
instruction on this historical legacy. 
In Iran, the focus on national unity is more acute. The mainstream 
Farsi population is barely dominant in terms of numbers. And the 
two major minority groups in the country, Azerbaijanis and Kurds, 
 206 
pose a threat to break away from Iran, unless a sense of 
nationalism is constantly instilled in them. The charge of the 
schools is to give all citizens of Iran a similar schooling which gives 
the state subjects a similar sense of cultural heritage, history, and a 
common language. Finally, similar schools are intended to build a 
sense of patriotism and devotion to the country.  
The policies of a nation state are only realized if fully implemen-
ted, and one aspect of our project was to determine if national 
policies played themselves out in the schools. The answer to this 
issue is simple and clear. In both Azerbaijan and Iran all of the 
teachers we interviewed and the schools we visited were 
dedicated to the national curriculum and instruction according 
to the textbooks. They maintained that they held to the program 
of the school and did not deviate in any way from it. There were 
clear differences in Azerbaijan and Iran in the reasons why 
teachers held to the mandated program of studies. 
In Azerbaijan, teachers had learned from their own schooling and 
from their teacher training that is was their professional 
responsibility to adhere strictly to the curriculum and the content 
of the textbooks. They had learned their responsibilities well, and 
did not question doing so. 
In Iran, teachers also felt a professional obligation to teach 
according to the national program of studies. They saw themselves 
as dedicated professionals, who were interested in the welfare and 
 207 
growth of their pupils. However, teachers representing minority 
populations also indicated that their dedication to the state 
program was dictated not only by a professional responsibility but 
by a clear threat that if they did not they would suffer serious 
consequences and even loose their jobs. They felt a greater sense of 
state oversight and control than was the case in Azerbaijan. One 
consequence of such strict oversight is that teachers tend to become 
mechanical in what they do. They forget how to exercise their 
creative abilities and take students off in wonderful and wondrous 
directions not anticipated by the program. 
There is consistency between central policy and practice in the 
field. Of course, this consistence is tempered by the use of the 
mother tongue in the schools, when it appeared appropriate to 
help the pupils better learn the content, but this was always in the 
context of wanting to communicate the national curriculum and 
textbook content more adequately, rather than try to instill a 
greater sense of appreciation for the local language and culture. 
Apparently, teachers in both Azerbaijan and Iran have learned the 
intended lessons of their own schooling well. They are not inclined 
to object to the school as a unifying and nationalizing instrument. 
And we sense that that the policies of both countries are working, 
in that ethnic minority groups are being drawn into greater 
participation and identity with the national culture. In this regard, 
the policies may be seen as a success.  
 208 
However, success does not come without severe costs. We don’t 
intend to begin an account of human rights violations rendered 
against those who object to the national policies. The autonomy of 
any state is difficult to challenge. We think Azerbaijan has the 
easier task. It already recognizes the pedagogical advantage of 
instruction in the mother tongue for the very young in its schools. 
The next step ought to be quite easy—building into the curriculum 
a way for minority groups to see themselves as a vital and integral 
part of the Azerbaijan nation. Iran remains so insecure in its 
nationalistic aims that it may find it necessary to continue to stress 
unity to the complete exclusion of diversity, but one day it must 
begin to forge a school system based on the strength of diversity as 
well as unity. 
 
POLICY IMPLICATIONS 
 
We wish to make a number of specific recommendations to policy 
makers. 
Azerbaijan: 
 We encourage the Azerbaijan ministries responsible for extra-
curricular programs that enhance the cultural awareness of 
minority students, to support and develop them. 
 209 
 Minority languages currently taught only in primary school 
ought to be taught in secondary school as well, and textbooks 
for secondary school instruction of minority languages 
developed. 
 It would be necessary to provide appropriate higher education 
studies to prepare teachers to teach minority languages in 
secondary school. 
 Textbooks prepared for minority languages are presently of 
much poorer quality than other textbooks published by the 
Ministry of Education. They ought to be made much more 
attractive and useful for young children. 
 
IRAN: 
 
 Schools where Azerbaijani and Kurdish children dominate the 
school population ought to provide language instruction at the 
primary school level. 
 Textbooks for the teaching of minority group language 
instruction ought to be developed. 
 Prospective primary school teachers ought to receive 
instruction that will assist them in teaching the minority 
language. 
 
We would make some general policy observations: 
 210 
 Current minority educational programs in Azerbaijan target 
children of specific minority groups and teach them their 
language and culture. The next step ought to be taken, to teach 
all Azerbaijani children about the rich multicultural 
environment in which they live and the important contribution 
all cultures make to Azerbaijan. 
 The international community could benefit from insights about 
the consistency of the educational program of both Azerbaijan 
and Iran in its language of instruction, curriculum, language 
development, and teacher preparation program. 
 
 211 
NOTES AND REFERENCES 
 
1. William Sears, A Cry from the Heart: The Bahá’ís in Iran (Oxford: 
George Ronald, 1982). See chapter 12 for a discussion of the children in 
schools. 
2. A. Matveeva, South Caucasus: Nationalism, Conflict and Minorities 
(London: Minority Rights Group International, 2002).; T. Alihanova, 
“Turkic Ethnos and National Minorities of Azerbaijan in the 20th 
Century,” Egednevnie novosti 25 (2002). 
3. Alihanova, “Turkic Ethnos and National Minorities of Azerbaijan in 
the 20th Century.” 
4. Asian Development Bank, “Sub-Regional Cooperation in Managing 
Education Reforms: Azerbaijan,” (Baku, Azerbaijan: 2002). 
5. United Nations Development Programme, Human Development Report 
2001 (New York: Oxford University Press, 2001). 
6. Gulshan M. Pashayeva, “New Language Planning Newsletter,” 
Central Institute of Indian Languages 12, no. 2 (1997). 
7. Anna Maatveeva, “The South Caucasus: Nationalism, Conflict and 
Minorities,” (London: Minority Rights Group International, 2002). 
8. G. Javadov and R. Huseynov, Udillar (Baku: Elm, 1999). 
9. Shahrokh Meskoob, Iranian Nationality and the Persian Language (Mage 
Publishers, 1999). 
10. Programme, Human Development Report 2001. 
11. UNDP, “Human Development Report - Iran’ 99,” (New York: United 
Nations, 2000). 
12. [UN, 2000 #67] 
13. Iran Embassy, Education System in Iran (Iran Embassy, Oslo, Norway, 
[cited). 
14. Amir Hasanpour, The Language Policy of Iran [website] (1999 [cited). 
15. Meskoob, Iranian Nationality and the Persian Language. 
 212 
16. Taken from the International Bureau of Education’s 2002 curriculum 
data set. 
17. Mobin Shorish, “The Islamic Revolution and Education in Iran,” 
Comparative Education Review 32, no. February (1988). 
18. Golnar Mehran, “Socializatoin of Schoolchildren in the Islamic 
Republic of Iran,” Iranian Studies 22, no. 1 (1989). 
19. David Menashri, Education and the Making of Modern Iran (Ithaca: 
Cornell University Press, 1992), 321. 
20. From the ninth grade geography textbook, p. 20. 
21. Audrey L. Altstadt, The Azerbaijani Turks: Power and Identity under 
Russian Rule (Stanford, California: Hoover Institution Press, 1992). 
22. Hasanpour, The Language Policy of Iran ([cited). 
23. This information comes from the head of the Iranian Cultural Centre 
in Baku. 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Alihanova, T. "Turkic Ethnos and National Minorities of Azerbaijan in 
the 20th Century." Egednevnie novosti 25 (2002). 
Altstadt, Audrey L. The Azerbaijani Turks: Power and Identity under Russian 
Rule. Stanford, California: Hoover Institution Press, 1992. 
Bank, Asian Development. "Sub-Regional Cooperation in Managing 
Education Reforms: Azerbaijan." Baku, Azerbaijan, 2002. 
Embassy, Iran. Education System in Iran Iran Embassy, Oslo, Norway, 
[cited. 
Hasanpour, Amir. The Language Policy of Iran [website]. 1999 [cited.] 
Hamlet Isaxanli. The Problems of Azerbaijan Education System. Caspian 
Crossroads, vol. 6, Issue #2, Summer 2002 
Javadov, G., and R. Huseynov. Udillar. Baku: Elm, 1999. 
Maatveeva, Anna. "The South Caucasus: Nationalism, Conflict and 
Minorities." London: Minority Rights Group International, 2002. 
 213 
Matveeva, A. South Caucasus: Nationalism, Conflict and Minorities. London: 
Minority Rights Group International, 2002. 
Mehran, Golnar. "Socializatoin of Schoolchildren in the Islamic Republic 
of Iran." Iranian Studies 22, no. 1 (1989): 35-50. 
Menashri, David. Education and the Making of Modern Iran. Ithaca: Cornell 
University Press, 1992. 
Meskoob, Shahrokh. Iranian Nationality and the Persian Language: Mage 
Publishers, 1999. 
Pashayeva, Gulshan M. "New Language Planning Newsletter." Central 
Institute of Indian Languages 12, no. 2 (1997). 
Programme, United Nations Development. Human Development Report 
2001. New York: Oxford University Press, 2001. 
Sears, William. A Cry from the Heart: The Bahá'ís in Iran. Oxford: George 
Ronald, 1982. 
Shorish, Mobin. "The Islamic Revolution and Education in Iran." 
Comparative Education Review 32, no. February (1988): 58-75. 
UNDP. "Human Development Report - Iran' 99." New York: United 
Nations, 2000. 
 214 
Appendix 1 
 
 
 
Visiting Advisors Program 
 
Summary Report of the Visit to 
Khazar University, Baku, Azerbaijan 
April 25–30, 2006 
 
 
Team Members: 
Mark S. Johnson  
(Team Leader),  
Associate Professor of History and Director of Russian and 
Eurasian Studies, Colorado College, USA 
 
Tapio Markkanen,  
President, Finnish Rectors Union, Helsinki, Finland  
 
Josef Hochgerner,  
Director, Center for Social Innovation, Vienna, Austria 
 
Helene Kamensky,  
Program Director, Salzburg Seminar, Austria 
 
 215 
1. 0  INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY 
Khazar University (hereafter referred to as “KU” or “the 
University,” for more information see www.khazar.org) invited a 
Visiting Advisors Program (VAP) Team from the Salzburg Seminar 
to review an array of organizational issues selected by the 
university leadership. Key interests for the VAP site visit to KU in 
April 2006 included academic structure and governance; university 
administration and finance; and institutional strategies for 
sustainability, focused especially on a possible long-term affiliation 
between KU and the Caucasus Research Resource Center (CRRC), 
an autonomous internationally-funded social science and business 
research institution located in Baku and run by the Eurasia 
Foundation (www.crrc.az).  
Khazar University, founded in 1990–1991, and fully accredited by 
1997 and then by 2002, has emerged as one of the leading private 
universities in Azerbaijan and has succeeded in establishing a well-
deserved reputation for integrity, academic rigor, and sustained 
attention to international standards in both teaching and research. 
Since its origins and under the leadership of founder and 
Chancellor Hamlet Isaxanli, KU has aspired to create a 
comprehensive arts and sciences university. KU also aspires to 
become a model for “best practices” in undergraduate and 
especially graduate education, in research practices and 
knowledge management, and in international cooperation. The 
 216 
current structure of KU includes six major academic units: a School 
of Architecture, Engineering and Applied Science; a School of 
Economics and Management; a School of Humanities and Social 
Sciences; a School of Law; a School of Medicine, Dentistry and 
Public Health; and a School of Education. KU also encompasses a 
number of specialized research institutes, as detailed below, and a 
general education school sponsored by the School of Education, 
“Dunya” (World) that is also intended as a model or experimental 
site. Instruction at KU is conducted primarily in English, with 
additional instruction and publications in Azeri and Russian. In 
fact, a key aspect of KU’s mission has been to recover and sustain a 
humanistic and progressive conception of the Azeri national 
heritage while simultaneously working to embrace recent 
international innovations and methodologies from across the 
academic disciplines. 
Nonetheless, for all of its accomplishments since 1991, KU clearly 
now faces some serious challenges as it works to consolidate its 
successes; to fill in the clear gaps that exist in its physical 
infrastructure, curriculum, and professional staffing; to establish 
functional autonomy vis-à-vis state structures and the Ministry of 
Education, especially regarding admissions policies; and most 
importantly to secure the University’s long-term financial 
sustainability and to continue to improve its administrative 
capacity, faculty development policies, and student services. 
Continued progress in all of these areas, and a coherent and 
 217 
consistent strategy to improve governance, management, and 
finance are urgently needed if KU is to fulfill its stated mission of 
excellence and innovation across the arts and sciences as well as to 
achieve long-term sustainability. 
The VAP Team conducted its site visit through three working 
groups, as follows:  
Working Group A: Academic Structure and 
Governance 
Chair: Mahammad Nuriyev, Professor and Vice Chancellor 
Co-Chair: Tapio Markkanen 
Dr. Rafig Ahmadov, Dean, School of Architecture, Engineering 
and Applied Sciences 
Dr. Jabir Khalilov, Dean, School of Law 
Dr. Nigar Bagirova, Dean, School of Medicine, Dentistry and 
Public Health 
PhD student Hafiz Aliyev, Coordinator for International Relations 
Dr. Isakhan Isaxanli, Director, Admission Office, Assistant to the 
President 
Dr. Eldar Shakhgaldiyev, Chair, English Language Department 
Rauf Shahbazov, Program Coordinator, School of Medicine, 
Dentistry and Public Health 
Tatyana Zaytseva, Director of Library Information Center 
Sabina Kerimova, Coordinator, School of Education 
 218 
Marufa Madatova, Deputy Director “Dunya” School 
Lala Huseynly, Assistant to Dean, School of Law 
Working Group B: University Administration and 
Finance 
Chair: Dr. Fuat Rasulov, Director, Center for Economic and 
Business Research and Education (CEBRE) 
Co-Chair: Josef Hochgerner  
Karim Karimov, Chief Accountant 
Mahammad Nuriyev, Professor and Vice Chancellor 
Nagi Bayramli, Head, Registration and Record Office 
Working Group C: Sustaining the Caucasus Research Resource 
Center (CRRC) Program in Azerbaijan 
Chair: Hamlet Isaxanli, Founder and Chancellor 
Co-Chair: Mark S. Johnson 
Michael Choe, Acting Director and CRRC Development and 
Outreach Coordinator 
Sabina Rustamova, Program Manager, CRRC 
Muhammad Nuriyev, Professor and Vice Chancellor 
The leadership of KU prepared documentation for the VAP Team 
in advance, although documents regarding internal budget and 
personnel processes were minimal, perhaps reflecting the 
seemingly informal or ad-hoc nature of many of those processes, as 
 219 
analyzed below. All of the issues under review were then 
examined in detail during the site visit in a series of working 
meetings and seminars. The KU leadership, faculty and staff were 
exceptionally gracious in their engagement with, and support of, 
the Team during its visit to Baku, and we wish to extend our 
heartfelt thanks especially to Chancellor Isaxanli and Vice 
Chancellor Nuriyev for their hospitality. We also hasten to clarify 
that this report does not constitute a formal evaluation, but only a 
series of general impressions and recommendations offered in the 
collegial spirit of the VAP.  
2.0 OBSERVATIONS AND PRELIMINARY 
CONCLUSIONS 
To summarize our observations as a VAP Team and the 
conclusions of this report, KU has achieved remarkable successes 
over the last fifteen years, and is poised to emerge as a model for 
higher education, both public and private, throughout Azerbaijan 
and the southern Caucasus. In fact, given the widespread 
reputation for corruption and nepotism in many state universities 
across the region, along with ongoing turmoil in the private higher 
education sector and recent state policy changes as detailed below, 
KU stands in a unique position to emerge as the most vital and 
viable university in Azerbaijan that truly upholds international 
standards. If able to consolidate itself, KU is positioned to combine 
 220 
what is best from the legacy of Soviet higher education, perhaps 
especially in mathematics and the sciences; together with what is 
best from the Azeri national heritage, perhaps especially in the 
arts, humanities, and Azerbaijani or regional studies; and to blend 
that together in a sustained and rigorous way with what is best 
from Western higher education, perhaps especially in the social 
sciences, economics and management, education, medicine, and 
legal studies. Of course, the foundation upon which all of that 
innovation must rely is an “everyday” or “invisible” excellence in 
university governance, management, and finance. 
Because if KU is to fulfill its ambitious and potentially historically 
significant mission, then it is the consensus opinion of the VAP 
Team that serious measures must be taken with real urgency to 
improve internal governance and make it more transparent; to 
implement a sustained program to train and continually retrain 
university administrators; to improve and clarify budget 
procedures and prioritize a more sustained and professional 
development or fundraising campaign; to construct innovative 
mechanisms to continually assess and improve the quality of 
faculty teaching and student learning; and to continue to build 
partnerships with business interests, policymakers, and with both 
local and international communities. Such partnerships are vital 
not only to enrich KU’s teaching and research, but also and 
especially to foster improved internship, service learning, and 
career opportunities for current students and alumni. Of course, 
 221 
such partnerships will also allow KU to call upon corporate 
partners and successful alumni to financially and professionally 
support the University and its students.  
3.0 THE POLICY ENVIRONMENT OF AZERI HIGHER 
EDUCATION 
Khazar (or “Caspian”) University was founded in 1990-1991 
(initially as the English Language Azerbaijan University), and has 
emerged as one of the leading private universities in Azerbaijan, 
with a reputation for being free of corruption and maintaining 
consistently high academic standards, and currently enrolls about 
1,600 students. As throughout the former Soviet Union, higher 
education in Azerbaijan since independence in 1991 has been 
characterized by contradictory trends. On the one hand, the sector 
has witnessed a rapid expansion in the number of institutions 
legally organized as universities (including many former technical 
and other specialized institutes that were, in some cases nominally, 
upgraded or renamed as universities), as well as the emergence of 
private institutions, especially around the fields of economics, 
business, and law. On the other hand, as is also true throughout 
the former Soviet Union, the post-Soviet educational systems have 
been marked by endemic corruption, and the rapid expansion in 
the number of universities and students enrolled in higher 
education has clearly been achieved to some degree at the expense 
of academic rigor and quality, as well as of systemic “coherence” 
 222 
and mobility within higher education. While much progress has 
clearly been made in curricular change, instructional innovation, 
and the introduction of new information technologies, acute 
problems remain in faculty and staff development, in university 
management, in integrity and transparency within the sector, and 
especially around the neglected issues of student assessment, 
institutional research, and strategic planning. While ambitious 
World Bank and other international assistance programs have been 
launched that include higher education, it remains unclear 
whether the endemic corruption in the sector can be mitigated, 
whether the chronic inertia and lack of research capacity within the 
Ministry of Education can be overcome, and whether the 
professional will exists to embrace systemic change, especially in 
the state universities. Finally, while Azerbaijan joined the Bologna 
Process of European higher education integration in 2005, and at 
least rhetorically committed to the adoption of a two-cycle, credit-
based system and alignment with European standards, it remains 
unclear whether either the Ministry or the leaders of the state 
universities are fully willing to embrace the transparency and 
comprehensive reform that such integration would require.  
All of this is directly relevant to the status and mission of KU 
because it is the emerging higher education “market” within which 
KU operates and in which it must establish its comparative 
advantage, as well as the policy environment in which KU aspires 
to lead as a model for “best practices” in higher education. It is also 
 223 
worth noting that two other private universities in Baku, 
Azerbaijan International University and the Independent 
Azerbaijan University, have recently been warned to close down 
by state authorities amid allegations of corruption and the “illegal” 
admission of students without the approval of the State 
Commission on Student Admissions (SCSA); and that another 
private rival to KU, Western University, looking for quality 
education has also struggled against allegations of corruption and 
low academic standards. In fact, KU’s only real competitor in the 
private sector with a comparable reputation for integrity and 
academic quality is the Turkish-funded Qafqaz (or “Caucasus”) 
University, which currently enrolls approximately 2,200 students 
(www.qafqaz.edu.az), although Qafqaz’s mission is clearly 
distinctive in that it is oriented towards Turkish Islam and Turkish 
professional networks, and serves a more regional student 
population. Unfortunately, Qafqaz is also now, at least potentially, 
at risk in light of the May 2006 decision by collegium of Ministry of 
Education to close all affiliates of foreign-based higher education 
institutions, a move presumably targeted especially at Russian-
sponsored (and often narrowly commercial) institutions.  
Thus, given the chronic problems that persist in the state univer-
sities and the ongoing turmoil around private higher education in 
Azerbaijan, the unique role that KU can play in providing a model 
of professional integrity, transparency, academic rigor, and 
international curricular and instructional standards will only 
 224 
become more important. However, it is also clear that the 
informality that often seems to characterize many governance and 
management procedures at KU will have to be rigorously analyzed 
and made more professional, with greater procedural regularity 
and transparency established throughout, if KU is to fulfill that 
extraordinary potential, and be in a position to truly make the 
most of Azerbaijan’s entry into the Bologna Process and the other 
major policy changes that will inevitably come to Azeri higher 
education.  
4.0 RECOMMENDATIONS AND DEVELOPMENT 
STRATEGIES  
Again, it must be reiterated that this report does not constitute a 
formal evaluation but merely an advisory report, and that the 
recommendations that follow should be reviewed critically by the 
KU leadership as well as by key faculty and student interest 
groups with an eye to adapting and implementing only those 
suggestions that seem realistic and necessary within the institu-
tional culture and evolving mission of KU. All members of the 
VAP Team were exceptionally impressed by what seemed to be a 
very high level of professional morale and institutional pride at 
KU, and that spirit and commitment to the institution can be called 
upon to help negotiate the potentially significant changes that will 
be required to successfully consolidate new policies and 
procedures for university governance, management, and finance.  
 225 
While some passing comments are included below about academic 
issues and relations between departments and disciplines, such 
curricular issues were not the focus of the VAP site visit. There are, 
of course, legitimate and serious questions that must be asked 
about the larger mission and overall curriculum of the University. 
To look at all of this more critically, has KU attempted too much 
too fast? Has it pushed ahead into the creation of expensive and 
complex new programs in the technical sciences, medicine, and 
engineering which require a huge physical infrastructure, labora-
tory equipment, and computer resources, or the professional and 
paraprofessional staff needed to sustain such programs? While 
KU’s mission of becoming a modern and fully comprehensive arts 
and sciences university is certainly admirable, how coherent and 
transparent are its internal processes for making the difficult 
choices that must inevitably be made between its six schools, or for 
deciding how the University will prioritize its scarce resources? 
How can the University best manage its relationship with the state 
authorities and the SCSA and especially the fact that it does not 
control its own admissions process? Should excellence in 
undergraduate education be focused on initially with graduate 
research and training to follow once the undergraduate core is well 
established? Or should a few key graduate programs be cultivated 
intensively in order to provide new faculty for the undergraduate 
program, to generate income through contracted research, and to 
cultivate relationships with business interests, international 
 226 
donors, and government patrons within Azerbaijan? Of course, 
such decisions are ultimately and appropriately the responsibility 
of the University and its internal interest groups, and this report 
thus focuses only on possible new approaches to internal gover-
nance, management and finance that might better guide and 
support KU’s institutional development regardless of the specific 
strategies that emerge from those internal decision-making 
processes. To summarize, while the informal and often highly 
personal nature of many of these processes have worked well to 
date, these procedures must become more professional and 
transparent if KU is to consolidate its gains, and to engage in the 
kind of serious fundraising and strategic planning that is now 
required to face both the challenges and the very real opportunities 
that lie ahead.  
 4.1  Accountability and Transparency in Internal Governance 
As noted, KU does have reasonably well-established routines for 
internal governance, which seem firmly centered on the personal 
leadership and authority of Chancellor Isaxanli, and especially on 
weekly but seemingly somewhat informal meetings of an “inner 
circle” of decision makers, a group of about six or eight that 
includes Vice Chancellor Nuriyev and some or all of the deans of 
the six academic units. The precise functions of the larger 
University Council, a group of about thirty five, seem a bit 
undefined, and those meetings could perhaps be made more 
 227 
regular, with regularly scheduled meetings open to the university 
community, an agenda that is distributed in advance, and more 
precisely delineated responsibilities. There are also two student 
groups, a student council (or telebe meclisi) for undergraduates and 
a council of graduate students (or yuksek telebe meclisi (sovet 
aspirantov?), and the president of the former is a member of the 
University Council. However, the precise role of student groups in 
decision-making also seems a bit undefined, and some students 
have complained in their responses to the annual written surveys 
that there are too few opportunities for them to participate in 
university governance in a serious and sustained way. In fact, such 
student participation is now integral to all of the reforms 
envisioned in the Bologna Process.  
One area in which KU has truly innovated is in the creation of a 
Board of Trustees and Advisory Board, which was done initially 
only in the School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, with 
representatives from major Azeri and international corporations 
such as SOCAR, British Petroleum, AZEUROTEL, Halliburton, and 
others. In fact, this is the first functioning board of trustees at any 
university in Azerbaijan, public or private, and there are plans to 
introduce similar boards into the other schools of KU. However, in 
a relatively small institution, a more practical possibility might be 
to have one unitary Board of Trustees for the entire University, and 
to carefully delineate how its functions and responsibilities mesh 
with those of the University Council. Then, an array of six 
 228 
Advisory Boards might be created that are oriented to the specific 
methodologies, needs, and professional networks of each of the six 
academic units. For example, those Advisory Boards might initiate 
and coordinate proposals as relevant to each school; the University 
Council could then act as a common forum to debate, prioritize 
resources, and establish relations between those programs and 
new initiatives; and then the Board of Trustees could have ultimate 
responsibility to approve major expenditures, rationalize 
investment priorities, and lead fundraising campaigns. In that 
regard, another key potential role for Trustees is to either “give or 
get,” in other words, to either donate financially themselves, or to 
ask their friends and professional colleagues for funds on behalf of 
the University.  
Again, it must be stressed that it is the ultimate responsibility of 
the university leadership and its key internal constituency groups 
to make these kinds of decisions, but the larger point is that greater 
accountability and transparency in governance would serve 
several vitally important purposes. First, it would make both short-
term planning and longer-term strategic planning more 
consensual, thereby ease tensions between the academic units and 
different constituency groups within KU, and add greater 
legitimacy to the allocation of scarce resources. Second, such 
regularity would raise the “comfort level” for both international 
and local donors, who might be more inclined to help finance 
specific campaigns or initiatives if they were assured that 
 229 
mechanisms for accountability and transparency were in place to 
ensure that grants or donations are allocated as intended. Third, 
such mechanisms might overcome the tendency to operate from 
year-to-year on an ad-hoc basis, and create the flows of 
information and financial data within the University, and between 
KU and its external donors and partners, that could better inform 
long-term strategic planning. Finally, such governance policies 
would contrast ever more favorably with the often murky 
governance procedures, rumors of corruption, and nepotism that 
often seem to dominate the state universities, and that have 
severely compromised several major European projects (especially 
TACIS) and multilateral technical assistance projects (especially 
early World Bank efforts). In other words, KU could provide a 
model for the future of Azeri higher education not just in what it 
decides to do, but also, and perhaps more importantly, in how 
those decisions are reached and implemented within the 
University.  
4.2 External Relations with the SCSA and MOE  
Of course, greater accountability and transparency in internal 
governance might also provide greater leverage vis-à-vis key 
external actors, most notably the State Committee on Student 
Admissions (SCSA), the Ministry of Education (MOE), and the 
Cabinet of Ministers. A key obstacle to the future growth and 
functional autonomy for KU is its dependence on the SCSA and its 
 230 
tight control of student admissions into each specific academic 
program and degree track, although it should be noted in that 
regard that each year since 2002 has seen a steady but controlled 
growth in admissions. Yet as VAP Team Member Josef Hochgerner 
stressed in his report during the site visit, it should be reiterated 
frequently to the state authorities that the “mobility of students 
and the autonomy of universities are indispensable obligations” 
for the Bologna Process, and that KU is uniquely positioned to 
model practices such as autonomous governance, a credit system, 
and quality assurance. Additionally, it could be argued that KU 
deserves, along with Qafqaz University, to be entitled to 
“Distinguished Status,” and given greater autonomy by the MOE 
to shape its own curriculum and management procedures. 
Another possibility might be to follow Qafqaz’s lead in working to 
secure an ISO (International Organization for Standardization) 
9001-2000 Quality Management Certificate (www.iso.ch). By 
entering into such processes to embrace global standards for 
quality management and financial transparency, KU might not 
only generate skills and tools to improve its own internal 
procedures, but also have greater leverage and legitimacy vis-à-vis 
external decision makers, potential critics, and rivals from the state 
universities. Of course, all of this also suggests that it might be 
useful for KU and Qafqaz to overcome their institutional rivalry, 
and to work together to lobby on behalf of such policy innovations 
and the legal rights of private universities. Perhaps even more 
 231 
constructively, in order to transcend what often seems to be an 
adversarial relationship with the MOE and the state universities, 
KU and Qafqaz might join together to share and help to demon-
strate such policy innovations with the SCSA and other state 
agencies or ministries. In that regard, while tensions have persisted 
about the right of KU to issue its own diploma, a more practical 
strategy might be to continue to issue the state diploma (thus 
assuring graduates’ entry into state university postgraduate 
programs and state employment), while lobbying for more 
autonomy in how to implement state academic standards, as well 
as more active participation in admissions into KU.  
4.3 Management Training and Staff Development 
All of this points to the urgent need to also establish greater 
regularity, and to allocate real resources, to ongoing management 
training and staff development. Again, by Azeri standards KU has 
done exceptionally well in this regard, and publishes an annual 
Staff Information Guidebook, which lays out procedures for hiring, 
promotion, firing, pay, benefits, and the rights and responsibilities 
of employees. However, it also seems that many key 
administrative tasks at KU are done on a semi-voluntary basis by 
faculty and staff, presumably out of financial necessity. Yet such 
administrative tasks (for example running the career center, 
installing and maintaining ICT services, enriching distance 
learning, supervising student services, mentoring international stu-
 232 
dents, overseeing internships, running the budget office, ensuring 
compliance with grants and contracts, and ensuring accuracy in 
enrollments and student registration) are all serious professional 
jobs that require training, adequate pay, and continual retraining. 
Of course, such staffing and staff development is difficult and 
expensive, and yet these are precisely the “invisible” foundations 
upon which all else rests at a modern university, and without 
which research, teaching, and learning are simply impossible.  
There are many different international models for this kind of 
management training and staff development, not only from 
various TACIS projects in Azerbaijan and the southern Caucasus, 
but also from organizations such as the European University 
Association (EUA, www.eua.be), the Programme on Institutional 
Management in Higher Education (IMHE) of the Organization for 
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD, 
www.oecd.org/edu/higher), as well as from various US, British, 
and other universities. An interesting potential model for KU 
might also be a more targeted program such as the Faculty 
Development and Training (FDAT) program that was organized 
between Indiana University and the American University of 
Central Asia (AUCA) in Kyrgyzstan, in which exchanges and 
training focused not only on issues of curriculum and instruction 
for faculty but also on exchanges and training for key management 
staff and the improvement of their professional skills in budget 
 233 
procedures, personnel policies, student registration, and 
information systems.  
4.4 Faculty Training and Professional Development 
Of course, management skills and staff training are only the 
foundations upon which the real work of the University rests, and 
in that regard sustained attention to faculty training and ongoing 
professional development are also vitally important. Clearly one of 
KU’s greatest assets is the reputation of its faculty, although a key 
concern is that only 25 percent are full-time (on three to five-year 
contracts), with the remainder either drawn from other 
professional spheres or simultaneously employed at various state 
universities and academies out of financial necessity. In that re-
gard, faculty salaries could be the focus of a special fundraising 
effort, and new procedures and policies put into place to cultivate 
faculty skills in research and teaching. For example, internal grant 
competitions could be held to allocate small grants to support 
faculty research, faculty-student collaborative research, course 
development, instructional innovation, and release time, provided 
that clear work plans are provided that show how those resources 
or that subsidized release time will be used to directly benefit the 
applicants’ department or academic program. Such an internal 
“mini-grant” program could initially be modestly funded, could 
then be the focus of a targeted fundraising campaign or grant 
applications, and could also be used to “train” faculty in grant-
 234 
writing and research methodologies. Such a program could also 
include training to encourage KU faculty to apply more regularly 
and systematically for international research grants, fellowships, 
and exchange programs, as well as a special effort to systematically 
encourage the placement of Fulbright and other international or 
visiting faculty at KU. Furthermore, greater clarity and trans-
parency regarding the hiring, promotion, and dismissal of faculty 
could be established and better publicized, especially if KU is to 
succeed in its desire to attract visiting or international faculty. 
Finally, KU could assist its faculty in systematic efforts to 
participate in large-scale or multi-national research projects, 
perhaps most notably through the Seventh Framework Program 
(FP7) of the European Community for research and technological 
development (2007-2013), and perhaps most notably around issues 
surrounding renewable energy and environmental sciences. 
Finally, there are several useful professional associations that draw 
together resources on these issues, such as the EUA (www.eua.be); 
and the United States-based POD Network (Professional and 
Organizational Development in Higher Education, 
www.podnetwork.org).  
4.5 Internal Assessment, Program Evaluation and Quality 
Assurance 
Khazar has also been quite innovative in its use of internal assess-
ment data, especially its per-semester student polls, and is also 
 235 
relatively advanced in its collection of regular course evaluations. 
However, much more could be done, perhaps especially through 
KU’s Center for Academic Quality Assurance, to systematically 
gather assessment data on the quality and techniques of faculty 
teaching as well as the nature and depth of student learning, and 
especially to train KU faculty and staff in the use of new survey 
methodologies and psychometrics. There are excellent models 
emerging in the United States, Europe, and even in Russia about 
how to use such assessment data to “close the loop” and to 
continually improve the quality of teaching and learning. In fact, 
this global “assessment movement” reflects the increased demand 
for efficiency and accountability in higher educational systems 
around the world. In the context of the Bologna Process, this has 
led to new collaborative mechanisms for “quality assurance” and 
transnational evaluation, especially through the EUA, the 
European Network for Quality Assurance (ENQA, www.enqa.eu) 
in Helsinki, and the Transnational European Evaluation Project 
(TEEP). All of these efforts are also intended to cultivate the 
professional practice of peer review, as well as to strengthen 
management accountability and transparency by drawing faculty 
and student voices into the process of university reform.  
There are also several excellent models for these processes in the 
United States, such as the Cooperative Institutional Research 
Program (CIRP) out of the University of California at Los Angeles 
(www.gseis.ucla.edu/heri/cirp.html); the National Survey of 
 236 
Student Engagement (NSSE) and the Faculty Survey of Student 
Engagement (FSSE) out of Indiana University 
(www.nsse.iub.edu/); and the Collegiate Learning Assessment 
(CLA), sponsored by the RAND Corporation and the Council for 
Aid to Education (www.cae.org). For example, the NSSE, FSSE and 
other related surveys are specifically designed to assess the extent 
to which faculty and students engage in effective educational 
practices, and to provide detailed data to assist and train faculty in 
how to improve their teaching and mentoring. In fact, the very act 
of responding to the surveys requires faculty and students to 
reflect on what they are putting into and getting out of their 
university experience. Finally, the availability of valid and 
objective assessment data will be of keen interest to the tuition-
paying public, and could be incorporated into an array of new, 
more objective and relevant performance measures which would 
coincide, in European terms, with the emerging interest in 
“consumer protection.” Yet again, developing the skills and tools 
for sophisticated assessment and evaluation would be expensive, 
but could lead to collaborative research grants as well as generate 
vitally important data for KU’s own public relations and 
marketing, negotiations with state agencies, institutional research, 
and strategic planning.  
Finally, it should also be noted that such assessment data on the 
student experience and the contours and depth of student learning 
could also generate information that would be invaluable to 
 237 
improve student services, to enrich tutoring and the development 
of student study skills and time management, and to more fully 
and successfully engage students in university life. Such strategies 
and services could improve student retention and graduation 
rates, their academic success, KU’s attractiveness for fee-paying 
international students, as well as alumni loyalty to KU. 
4.6  Budget Procedures, Fundraising and Development 
Strategies 
Of course, while such paid professional staff and increasingly 
complex techniques for governance and management are unde-
niably expensive, they should be considered as necessary invest-
ments in the “foundations” of any modern university. If KU truly 
does aspire to a leadership role, and to serve as a model for “best 
practices” in such areas, then it could apply for collaborative 
research and development grants to finance innovation in 
governance, management, and finance. Existing budget procedures 
at KU seem relatively simple and straightforward, perhaps because 
the bulk of the University’s income is from student tuition, with 
only modest additional income streams from grants and services. 
The bulk of KU’s expenses are in salary and scholarships, with 
continuously increasing  annual expenses for infrastructure, 
community services, and technology.  
However, it is also clear that KU has enormous financial potential 
and could undertake much more aggressive efforts to “market” 
 238 
their comparative advantages, which include their reputation for 
honesty and ethical standards, the fact that most instruction is 
conducted in English, KU’s relatively greater participation in 
international projects and exchanges, the University’s reputation 
for critical thinking and creative teaching, as well as the 
leadership’s very real dedication to cultivating a humanistic and 
progressive conception of Azeri national culture and identity. 
However, to realize the full financial potential of those “market” 
advantages, KU must aggressively invest significant resources in 
professional fund-raising, grant writing, and institutional 
development. When conceptualizing how to become this kind of 
“entrepreneurial” university, it must also be kept in mind that the 
essential idea is to generate new income streams for the institution 
as a whole, and not simply for individual faculty members or 
academic units in some narrowly proprietary or “commercial” 
way. Such leadership and focus might best be provided by a new 
Vice Rector or Vice Chancellor for Resources and Development, 
which would allow Chancellor Isaxanli and Vice Chancellor 
Nuriyev to focus on the core of the academic mission and faculty 
development.  
An important first step might be to engage with an international 
accounting firm to conduct an independent audit of KU. For 
example, the American University of Central Asia (AUCA, at that 
time the American University of Kyrgyzstan or AUK) struggled for 
several years to improve its internal budget procedures, and then 
 239 
contracted with Deloitte and Touche in 2000-2001 to conduct such 
an audit. The initial audit research uncovered some serious 
problems, which were corrected with the assistance of Deloitte and 
Touche and other international partners such as the Open Society 
Institute (OSI). The dramatic improvements in financial 
management and budget transparency that resulted then 
contributed directly to AUCA’s successful campaign to create a $15 
million endowment for the University, with major contributions 
from OSI and the United States Agency for International 
Development (USAID). It is also worth noting that a key aspect of 
AUCA’s endowment campaign was their stated goal to serve a 
regional mission as a model for university management as well as 
for excellence in undergraduate education. 
While cultivating potential major donors for an endowment or 
capital campaign is critical, it is also vitally important for an 
institution like KU to demonstrate that it can develop viable 
revenue streams and income of its own. In this regard, it might 
consider a more aggressive effort to develop and market the 
Khazar University Press, not only for its own internal publication 
needs but for the broader educational market as well; and to 
expand its capacity and “services” in English language and other 
foreign language training. Another possibility might be for KU to 
“market” its own consulting services to other universities, both 
public and private, for example about how to innovate in 
curricular design, instructional methods, and university manage-
 240 
ment. Other possible entrepreneurial initiatives could be generated 
through more aggressive efforts to market the consulting and 
research “services” of units such as the Center for Economic and 
Business Research and Education (CEBRE), the Gender Studies 
Center, the Institute of Politics, the Khazar Legal Clinic, the 
Translation Studies Center, and the new Institute for Education 
Policy (IEP). Such efforts could not only generate revenue, but also 
provide “real world” research and study opportunities for faculty 
and students. Finally, KU might also undertake more aggressive 
efforts to recruit tuition-paying international students, provided of 
course that housing, mentoring, and additional language and other 
tutoring can also be provided to ensure that such international 
students succeed at KU. Such revenue streams, even if modest, can 
then be used to convince major donors that the university 
leadership has committed to strategies for institutional 
sustainability and financial viability, and possibly convince major 
donors to commit to an endowment or capital campaign, and not 
simply to provide day-to-day financial support.  
Additional steps to improve KU’s finances and budget procedures 
might include hiring a professional chief financial officer (CFO); 
clarifying internal control and key accounts management; possibly 
hiring a full-time and professionally experienced fundraiser and 
grant-writer, as noted above; more intensive efforts to lobby 
together with other universities both public and private to exempt 
donations and grants from VAT taxes; and more systematic efforts 
 241 
to cultivate philanthropic and corporate donations, perhaps linked 
to specific internships and programs. Stepping back from specific 
needs and programs, all of the recommendations in this report 
might also be better served not through a series of disconnected or 
temporary international partnerships, which often seem not to 
endure past the end of their grant funding, but through a possible 
new or permanent consortium of key university partners, with one 
or two partners carefully selected and cultivated in the United 
States, Europe, Turkey, and Russia.  
4.7  Partnerships with Business, Government and Community 
Groups 
As noted above, Khazar has done exceptionally innovative work in 
establishing new partnerships with business and corporate 
interests, especially around its Advisory Board for the School of 
Architecture, Engineering and Applied Sciences. Yet such efforts 
should be driven not only by financial necessity, or by the narrow 
needs of external or corporate partners, but developed as part of a 
coherent and university-wide strategy. Equally importantly, the 
University must develop a clear code of ethics to guide such 
partnerships, as well as clear guidelines on potential conflicts of 
interest and financial transparency to safeguard the integrity and 
centrality of the academic mission.  
Of course, leading universities around the world are aggressively 
pursuing partnerships with business and industry for collaborative 
 242 
research, employee training, and information technology, not only 
in order to generate funding but also to expand internships and 
career opportunities for students and alumni. KU possesses 
enormous potential for growth in this area, through all six of its 
academic units, and efforts should be made to accelerate the 
development of Advisory Boards for each school, precisely in 
order to cultivate links to business and other professional partners, 
to medical and public health agencies, to training program and 
agencies in the service professions such as social work and social 
pedagogy, and to teacher education institutions and with schools.  
There is also significant untapped potential for KU in providing 
contract research and employee training to public and state 
agencies, as well as perhaps providing training in management, 
research, and survey methodologies to non-profit organizations 
and non-governmental organizations (NGOs). Vitally important 
innovations in global education have emerged out of the service 
learning movement, which is now increasingly referred to as 
community-based learning and community-based research. In 
such courses, students simultaneously study economics while 
placed at a business, or study poverty or migration while simul-
taneously placed at a social service organization or non-profit that 
works with disadvantaged or migrant populations. Other 
examples include studying the sociology and psychology of 
domestic violence or women’s issues in an academic course while 
placed at shelter or service agency, or studying translation and 
 243 
linguistics while volunteering to provide translation services. 
Research has shown that such linkages and partnerships with 
community organizations can enrich student learning and deepen 
student engagement, but can also improve student retention and 
academic performance, as well as expand professional networks 
and career opportunities.  
4.8 Potential Partnership with the Caucasus Research Resource 
Center  
The final theme of the VAP site visit was to explore the possibility 
of an institutional partnership between KU and the Caucasus 
Research Resource Center (CRRC), an autonomous policy research 
organization located in Baku. In fact, both KU and the CRRC seem 
to be moving forward reasonably well on parallel tracks, and there 
might be political value, at least in the short term, for both in 
remaining independent amid the rather volatile political and 
policy environment in Azerbaijan. There is, of course, also the 
critical issue of the longer-term financial sustainability of the 
CRRC once its primary donor, the Carnegie Corporation of New 
York, winds down its major grant support in two or three years. In 
other words, now would be a fruitful time to begin discussing 
expanded cooperation and then a possible formal institutional 
affiliation between KU and the CRRC. In such a relationship, KU 
would have much to offer: its broad base of academic programs 
across the humanities, social sciences, and into the life and physical 
 244 
sciences, the latter especially in petroleum engineering and 
management. KU’s strengths in medicine and dentistry could also 
be vitally important, which is linked to a network of affiliated 
clinics and hospitals around Baku, and has enormous potential if 
linked together with CRRC capacities into a broader public policy 
program around issues in demography, environmental studies, 
and public health. 
The current acting leadership of the CRRC suggested a possible 
strategy of moving into corporate-funded marketing and other for-
profit research, but the potential risks of such a move would be the 
difficulty of competing with the many businesses and consulting 
firms already providing such services in the Azeri market, as well 
as potentially fatally compromising the CRRC’s reputation for 
scholarly objectivity and methodological rigor. What the CRRC 
and its staff could offer KU would be state-of-the-art capacity in 
social science research; real skills and experience in research 
management; advanced computer technologies and network 
capacity; advanced methodological training opportunities for 
faculty and especially for graduate students; and a network of 
relationships and contacts in the business and public policy 
communities. An ideal possible location for this formal 
institutional affiliation might be Khazar’s downtown building, 
which would link the combined activities of KU and the CRRC 
directly into the heart of Baku’s corporate, financial, and policy 
communities. Finally, a possible initial institutional link might be 
 245 
between the CRRC and KU’s Center for Economic and Business 
Research and Education (CEBRE), a semi-autonomous non-profit 
that would complement the CRRC’s strengths in demography, 
sociology, and public policy.  
5.0        FINAL THOUGHTS 
In conclusion, it was clear to all members of the VAP Team that 
Khazar University has made extraordinary progress in its goal of 
creating a modern, state-of-the-art university, and has achieved 
real successes in the face of significant financial obstacles, struggles 
over admissions and other policies, and occasionally threatening 
political obstruction. KU is also poised, should it be able to 
consolidate its governance, management, and finances, to become 
an example of “best practices” for all of Azeri higher education. 
This leadership role could be demonstrated in all areas, from 
curricular design and instructional innovation to institutional 
research and strategic planning.  
More specifically, KU, possibly together with Qafqaz University, is 
uniquely positioned to lead the way into the Bologna Process, 
because Khazar and Qafqaz are clearly the two institutions in 
Azerbaijan that have made the most progress in modernizing their 
management, internationalizing their curriculum and instructional 
technologies, and leading the way into a student-centered credit 
system. One possible strategy for more constructive cooperation 
might be that Qafqaz leads the way into relations with Turkey and 
 246 
Europe, and Khazar into relations with Europe, the United States, 
and through its strengths in regional and international studies, into 
the southern Caucasus, Russia, and Central Eurasia. Another 
possibility that was mentioned during the VAP site visit was to 
participate more directly in the “Regional Caspian Studies” MA 
degree project led by American University in Washington, DC, 
together with university partners in Georgia, Armenia, and 
Turkey. Furthermore, cooperation could be expanded with 
Georgia around its efforts to establish an independent agency for 
university accreditation, together with its US partner, the Academy 
for Educational Development (AED); or possibly with Russian 
partners in their efforts to establish a new system of student loans 
and tax-free university endowments or “resource capital;” or 
perhaps with the Aga Khan Humanities Program (AKHP) and other 
similar efforts in Central Asia. Such regional relationships could be 
the core of an expanded network of collaborative and institutional 
partnerships for KU, possibly even with selected units or depart-
ments of state universities such as Baku State University, and 
possibly with the Heydar Aliyev Foundation or other Azeri NGOs.  
Finally, we would like to conclude by thanking the leadership, 
faculty, and students of Khazar University for their sustained enga-
gement and hospitality during our visit to Baku, and to wish them 
the greatest possible success in their future endeavors. Because of 
the skills and dedication of its leadership, faculty, and students, KU 
has the potential to become the most innovative and successful 
 247 
university in Azerbaijan, and to thereby not only secure its financial 
viability and institutional sustainability, but to also create a new 
paradigm for the future of Azeri higher education.  
6.0 REFERENCES 
Isaxanli, Hamlet. Azerbaijan Moving Towards European Higher Education 
Area. Report Delivered at the Seminar Organized by the Council of 
Europe and the Ministry of Education of the Republic of Azerbaijan, 
Baku (April 20, 2005).  
Isaxanli, Hamlet. Higher Education in Azerbaijan: Strengths and Weaknesses 
of Private Universities in a Transition Economy: A View From Azerbaijan. 
Paper presented at the UNESCO Conference on the Reform of the 
Education System of Azerbaijan for a Sustainable Future, Paris (July 6, 
2005); and the 18th International Conference on Higher Education, 
Ankara (August 26-28, 2005).  
Isaxanli, Hamlet. In Search of Khazar. Baku: KU Press, 2006.  
Khazar University. Student Profile, 1992-2005. Baku: KU Press, 2005.  
Khazar University. Catalog, 2006-2007. Baku: KU Press, 2005.  
Republic of Azerbaijan Ministry of Education and UNESCO. Conference 
Report: Reform of the Education System in Azerbaijan for a Sustainable Future, 
July 2005. Baku/Paris: MOE/UNESCO, 2005. 
 248 
Visiting Advisors: 
 
Mark JOHNSON, USA (Team Leader)  
Mark Johnson is associate professor of 
history and director of Russian and Eura-
sian Studies at Colorado College in Colo-
rado Springs, where he teaches courses in 
history, the history of education, and 
comparative and international education. His recent projects and 
publications include "Trends in Secular Educational Development 
in Azerbaijan and Central Asia: Implications for Social Stability 
and Regional Security," for the National Bureau of Asian Research 
Analysis; "The Legacy of Russian and Soviet Education and the 
Shaping of Ethnic, Religious and National Identities in Central 
Asia," in Challenges for Education in Central Asia; and an assessment 
prepared for the U.S. Department of State in 2001-2002, Creating a 
Regional Center for Excellence in Undergraduate Education: A Develop-
ment Strategy for the American University of Kyrgyzstan (2002-2005). 
Dr. Johnson has also prepared policy analyses and evaluations for 
a variety of foundations and agencies, and is currently working to 
draw all of this work together into a book-length study, 
Globalization and the Transformation of Russian and Eurasian Higher 
Education. Dr. Johnson holds a B.A. from the University of 
 249 
Wisconsin at Madison and an M.A. and Ph.D. from Columbia 
University in New York. 
  
Josef  HOCHGERNER, Austria 
Josef Hochgerner is founder and scientific 
manager of the Center for Social Inno-
vation in Vienna, Austria and is also a 
visiting professor at the University of 
Agricultural Sciences in Vienna as well as 
at numerous other Universities in Austria and abroad. He served 
as the secretary general of the International Forum on Work, 
Information Society and Employment (WISE) from 1998 to 2003 
and from 2001 to 2005 as president of the Austrian Sociological 
Association. A specialist on issues of the information society, Dr. 
Hochgerner has in-depth knowledge of national and European 
policies on innovation, science, and technology development and 
also on issues such as employment, trends in business organization 
and eWork, Technology Assessment, and education and training. 
He has participated in a variety of European Union sponsored 
projects including the Multilingual Urban Network for the Integration 
of City Planners and Involved Local Actors (MUNICIPIA); The 
European Charter for Telework (DIPLOMAT); and the Voluntary 
Industrial Code of Practice for global eWork (VIP). Dr. Hochgerner was 
also highly active in the Austrian contributions to the European 
 250 
Union’s Sixth Framework Program and the European Research 
Area. 
 
Tapio MARKKANEN, Finland 
Tapio Markkanen has served as the 
secretary general of the Finnish Council of 
University Rectors in Helsinki since 1992. 
In this capacity he has been involved in 
both national and European policies of 
research and higher education. Professor Markkanen is a member 
of the Finnish National Commission for United Nations Educatio-
nal, Scientific, and Cultural Organization and has been highly 
active in the development of science education and communication 
in Finland. Widely published in the field of the history of science, 
Professor Markkanen has taught astronomy at the University of 
Helsinki and conducted research on galactic structure, magnetic 
fields, and star formation. Professor Markkanen earned a Ph.D. 
and also an M.S. in astronomy from the University of Helsinki. 
 
 
Helene KAMENSKY, Austria 
 251 
Helene Kamensky is program director of the Salzburg Seminar, 
where she is responsible for the development and direction of 
academic programs on education and related issues. Before 
joining the Salzburg Seminar, Dr. Kamensky served as an ad-
junct professor of philosophy at the Institutes of Philosophy at 
the University of Salzburg and the University of Vienna. 
Previously, she was research fellow at the Institute of Scientific 
Theory at the Salzburg International Research Center. From 1985 
to 1989, she was dean of the Faculty of Foreign Languages at 
Novosibirsk State Pedagogical University in the Russian Fede-
ration, where she previously served as associate professor and 
senior lecturer in the department of philosophy. Dr. Kamensky’s 
area of research interest is higher education policy and 
management. She holds a Ph.D. in philosophy from the 
Department of Logic and Epistemology at the Russian Academy 
of Sciences, which was authenticated by the University of 
Salzburg, Austria, in 1993. 
 
 
 252 
THE UNIVERSITIES PROJECT OF THE SALZBURG SEMINAR 
 
Universities throughout the world are undergoing systemic 
changes in their governance, academic design, structure, and 
mission. From 1998 to 2003, the Salzburg Seminar’s Universities 
Project focused on higher education reform in Central and East 
Europe, Russia, and the Newly Independent States as universities 
in these regions redefined their relationships with governments 
and try to become more integrated into the global intellectual 
community. 
The Universities Project was a multi-year series of conferences and 
symposia convening senior representatives of higher education 
from the designated regions with their counterparts from North 
America and West Europe. Discussion in the Project’s programs 
focused on the following themes: 
 University Administration and Finance 
 Academic Structure and Governance within the University 
 Meeting Students‘ Needs, and the Role of Students in 
Institutional Affairs 
 Technology in Higher Education 
 The University and Civil Society 
 
 253 
THE VISITING ADVISORS PROGRAM (VAP)  
The Salzburg Seminar launched this enhanced aspect of the 
Universities Project in the autumn of 1998. Under the VAP, teams 
of university presidents and higher education experts visit 
universities in Central and East Europe and Russia at the host 
institutions’ request to assist in the process of institutional self-
assessment and change. To date, seventy-six visits have been held 
at universities in Central and East Europe and in Russia. The 
addition of the Visiting Advisors Program brought to the 
Universities Project an applied aspect and served to enhance 
institutional and personal relationships begun in Salzburg. 
 
THE RUSSIAN HIGHER EDUCATION PROGRAM (RHEP) 
In 2003, in response to the need for continued engagement, the 
Salzburg Seminar and the Ministry of Education of the Russian 
Federation initiated a five-year partnership (2003-2008) designed to 
promote the exchange of knowledge and best practices between 
the higher education leadership of the Russian Federation and 
their counterparts from North America, Western Europe and 
Central-Eastern Europe, Commonwealth of Independent States 
countries and Eurasia. The Russian Higher Education Program 
consists of two symposia per year, which take place in Salzburg 
and in the Russian Federation. Each symposium convenes 
 254 
representatives of universities, higher education organizations, 
service organizations, governmental structures, and stakeholders. 
The Russian Higher Education Program centers around five main 
topics:  
 Russian Program of Modernization in the Context of Global 
Education Reform  
 Higher Education Governance Reform: Issues and Challenges  
 Strengthening the Role of Russian Universities in Service to 
Society  
 Quality Assurance in Higher Education: Sharing International 
Experience  
 Higher Education and Research (Networks, Linkages, Best 
Practices) 
 
The Salzburg Seminar acknowledges with gratitude the William 
and Flora Hewlett Foundation, the W.K. Kellogg Foundation, and 
the Carnegie Corporation of New York, which provided funding 
for the Universities Project, the Visiting Advisors Program, and the 
extension of the VAP in Russia, respectively. 
 
 255 
FOR MORE INFORMATION 
For more information regarding Salzburg Seminar programs, 
please contact one of the Seminar’s offices below. 
Salzburg Seminar 
Schloss Leopoldskron 
Box 129 
A-5010 Salzburg, Austria 
Telephone: +43 662 839830 
Fax:  +43 662 839837 
 
Salzburg Seminar 
The Marble Works 
P.O. Box 886 
Middlebury, VT 05753 USA 
Telephone:  +1 802 388 0007 
Fax:  +1 802 388 1030 
Salzburg Seminar website: www.salzburgseminar.org 
 256 
Appendix 2 
 
Using Distance Learning Methods 
For Petroleum Industry Technical Training 
In Baku, Azerbaijan* 
 
 
David Maggiori 
BP, Drilling and Completions, Learning and Development 
Coordinator 
 
 
BP Exploration on behalf of its partners through the Azerbaijan 
International Oil Company, have been tasked with developing 
several world-class petroleum fields in the Caspian Sea.  These 
fields contain billions of barrels of crude oil and trillions of cubic 
feet of natural gas.  Activities incorporated into this development 
cover construction of offshore drilling and production facilities, 
pipelines, storage facilities and the drilling and completion of 
hundreds of wells.   
As can be imagined, there is a great fiscal responsibility placed on 
BP to manage such a project.  To do this effectively, many 
expatriate engineers, geoscientists and business support specialists 
have been brought into Azerbaijan to help deliver this project 
within budget and on time.  
                                               
* Baku, 2004 
 257 
A major role of these expatriate staff is to ensure that BP develops 
the workforce of the future to keep in line with aspirations of 90% 
nationalisation by the year 2013, as outlined in the Production 
Sharing Agreement.  Organisational Capability Development is the 
term used for this and covers activities such as Recruitment, 
Training, Personal Development, Succession Planning etc. 
Recently it was recognised that the source of staff needed to fulfil 
our requirements came mainly from recent graduates.  With this in 
mind BP has focussed efforts on maximising the benefits from this 
resource pool.   A rigorous recruitment process is in place, 
focussing on areas of interest such as English Language skills, 
technical awareness, mathematical skills etc., followed by technical 
and behavioural interviews. 
Education in Azerbaijan, especially in the Petroleum sector, has 
historically been very strong.  In fact Azerbaijan trained most of 
the Petroleum Professionals in the Former Soviet Union.  However, 
in recent years since independence, funds for further education 
have been minimal especially in the Petroleum sector of tertiary 
education.  BP has recognised there may be limitations to the 
foundations of the more technical disciplines and has introduced 
several measures designed to target some of these limitation for 
young employees in the fields of Drilling & Completion 
Engineering.    
 258 
The following article attempts to describe how a new approach to 
Distance Learning is being offered to our Challenge and Early 
Development stage engineers in Baku.   
BP – University Links 
At an early stage of this project the need for a strong, quality 
driven, Azeri university partner was paramount to the success of 
this project.  Khazar University was chosen as it was perceived that 
it had strong leadership and an expansionary goal based on 
International Relations, International Standards and a willingness 
to deal with industry in less bureaucratic manner than most. 
In fact Khazar University has identified quality assurance as a 
cornerstone of its development since its foundation in 
1991.  Programmes of co-operation with the University of 
California in Los Angeles (UCLA), Georgia State University 
(Atlanta) and the University of Michigan (Ann Arbor) have led 
Khazar to adopt the American accreditation procedure and 
indicators, including the internal evaluation system.  Additionally 
the University has also studied the accreditation experiences of the 
Middle East Technical University, which is recently accredited by 
the European University Association (EUA) and the Accreditation 
Board of Engineering and Technology (ABET). The University has 
already conducted two internal evaluations and currently 
developing the third internal evaluation system. 
 259 
This international exposure set Khazar University up to be a 
successful partner going forward with a programme of enhanced 
learning for BP Drilling & Completions Engineers. 
Distance Learning 
Distance Learning is a requirement for the Challenge Pathway (an 
early development plan) and a decision was made in Baku to 
apply this with more rigor than solely utilising available Web/CD-
rom based teaching methods.  All too often these methods are not 
utilised or followed through, as it’s easy for other distractions to 
influence the learner.  This scheme involves class room training 
followed by 3 months of “Supported Problem Based Learning” 
culminating ( if desired ) in an official exam offering credits from a 
UK based University MSc. in Petroleum Engineering. 
The proposal is to offer BP Petroleum related Engineers the 
opportunity to replace previously accepted training in specific 
discipline relevant material with similar material from a Distance 
Learning MSc but affiliated and accredited to Heriot Watt 
University in Scotland under the guidance of both Khazar and 
Heriot Watt for ongoing tuition of the engineers. 
Issue 
The MSc. In Petroleum Engineering historically offered as a 1 year 
in-house course by Heriot Watt University covers many of the 
compulsory modules of training for the following disciplines: 
 260 
 Drilling Engineering 
 Completion Engineering 
 Petroleum Engineering 
 Reservoir Engineering 
 
Modules covered by the post-graduate degree are as follows: 
 Drilling Engineering 
 Petroleum Geoscience 
 Production Technology ( 2 modules ) 
 Reservoir Engineering ( 3 modules ) 
 Petroleum Log Analysis 
 Introduction to Petroleum Economics 
 A Group Field Development Project 
 An individual Research Project 
 
These modules cover at least 5 of the required learning activities 
within each of the Challenge Pathways.  Heriot Watt, in 
conjunction with it’s officially recognised Approved Support 
Centre ( Khazar University ) now offers a more sophisticated 
method of teaching within its Distance Learning MSc course to BP 
on a local Azerbaijan basis.   
This approach can be encompassed into the working routine of the 
Challenger / Early Development engineer without having to 
attend specific training at the Heriot Watt University, so 
 261 
complementing their on the job training experience.  Assessment is 
an integral part of any Tertiary Institutes approach to learning and 
is offered through an end of module exam in Baku under the 
auspices of Heriot Watt University in conjunction with the British 
Council.   
However, for the Challenger, once embedded into a working team, 
assessment of training is not a normal part of learning.  In fact for a 
drilling engineer, the only assessed part of training, on an on-going 
basis, is the Well Control examination, required every 2 
years.  Many modules of training are offered and courses attended 
without BP being fully aware of levels of understanding and 
potential competency following this training.   
This MSc. method offers the opportunity for young engineers to 
commence their learning within BP via on-the-job training in 
combination with a University approach to assessed learning 
which delivers not only the assurance of learning to BP 
management but could lead to the attainment of a Western 
accredited MSc. within the early years of employment with BP (the 
remainder of modules will be supported by BP, but completed 
following Challenge Graduation – to be explained later in this 
document). 
Feature 
Heriot Watt University has recently developed a Problem Based 
 262 
approach to MSc. in Petroleum Engineering for Distance 
Learners.  The format under trial for BP Azerbaijan is as follows: 
 A 1 week course of lectures given by a Heriot Watt lecturer 
in Baku 
 Full Module course notes for each engineer. 
 6 sets of Challenge exercises to be completed in teams and 
assessed through a Web Board linked to a Heriot Watt Tutor 
in the UK. 
 Heriot Watt module exam in Baku. 
 
This approach offers more intensive education in the given module 
while assessing the student’s understanding of the subject matter 
through the Challenges and the end of module exam.  The students 
need to work as a team during the Challenge period, effectively 
networking and communicating approaches focussing on the 
delivery of the required material.  Engineers take turns submitting 
the required information so that communication with Heriot Watt 
is spread amongst the team. 
The following is an example of the Challenge Requests and a Mind 
Map that are utilised to encourage the engineers to think about all 
associated processes, equipment and calculations that may go into 
a given topic of enquiry: 
 263 
Benefit 
Benefits to the engineers are 
obvious as described above 
However, another benefit 
comes with the link between 
BP, Heriot Watt University 
and Khazar University 
(Baku).  Given the mainly 
narrow focus and theoretical 
nature of many of the tertiary 
education courses BP, as described previously, wanted to create 
closer ties with a chosen university to ensure we access students 
with a more rounded educational background.  Khazar was chosen 
to complete this triangular link for several reasons mentioned 
below: 
 A well managed University  
 Has introduced western standard curriculum 
 Teaches all subjects in English 
 Has an Petroleum Engineering & Business undergraduate 
and MSc. programmes currently running. 
 Has a managed Quality Assurance Programme for all 
University Administration & Curriculum Management. 
 
 264 
This University is 13 years old and still in an expansion mode.  The 
Rector – Hamlet Isaxanli – is recognised within the country and 
internationally as a forward thinker and is open to such 
opportunities. 
The ultimate goal of this triangular relationship is to utilise the 
Heriot Watt curriculum with lectures and ongoing tutorial support 
provided, at a much cheaper cost, by Khazar lecturers.  Exams will 
still be organised and marked by Heriot Watt University and 
award will be through the same institute. 
The current status of this project is that BP has two contracts with 
the aforementioned educational institutes.  BP – Heriot Watt for 
provision of initial Lectures, Web-board Tutorials and MSc. 
Module Training Material.  BP – Khazar for provision of Tutor 
Support via the Web-board and face to face with the Baku based 
engineers and additionally BP currently pays for expenses for a 
two-week train the trainer experience for those Khazar Lecturers 
chosen to support the programme. 
It is envisaged that sustainable delivery of this educational method 
will be reached in 2005 where Khazar lecturers will take over the 
delivery of the Baku based Lectures and the Web-board tutorials, 
while Heriot Watt will continue to provide the training materials 
and exams, with a quality assurance overseeing role to ensure that 
this Distance Delivered MSc. continues with the same quality as it 
is delivered in the UK.  
 265 
 
Proof of Success 
10 BP Drilling Engineers have undertaken 3 modules of this MSc. 
with good results from the assessment exams.  Most feel pretty 
upbeat about their performance.  Within 3 years we hope to see the 
first BP – Heriot Watt – Khazar MSc. degree awarded to a BP 
engineer.  Additionally we hope to see positive influence from this 
process in a continually modernising degree in Petroleum 
Engineering at Khazar University.   
BP is currently entering into a relationship that should see up to 20 
Petroleum Engineering scholarships at Khazar University linked to 
a continually improving educational process, which up to now 
they have proven highly achievable.  
Scholarship Programme 
Following on from the success of this trilateral relationship, BP has 
decided to utilise Khazar University in the first true Industry 
Sponsored Scholarship Programme in Azerbaijan.  BP will pay for 
up to 16 undergraduate Petroleum Engineering Scholarships per 
anum.  Khazar will take the role of administrator of the monies 
and deliverer of a high level education programme.  Khazar will 
also find the top performers in Azerbaijan-wide high schools and 
jointly we will enter into an initial assessment programme prior to 
choosing the successful candidates.  Through Khazar’s proven 
 266 
approach to Quality Control, a method of performance manage-
ment will be developed for all parties involved to ensure the 
success of this programme going forward. 
Additional Khazar University – Industry Links 
The university has been a pioneer in Azerbaijan in prioritising the 
nourishing of relations with industries as an integral part of its 
development. These help the university to uphold the quality of its 
programs, faculty, support services and students. 
The Centre for Economic and Business Education is intended to 
support Khazar University in developing relations with industries. 
The Centre periodically conducts various training seminars and 
workshops in Economics, Finance, Marketing, Small Business and 
alternative disciplines, for small and medium entrepreneurs in 
Baku and other regions of the country.  
In October 2003, the School of Economics and Management at 
Khazar University and the Malaysian Institute of Economic 
Research (MIER) under the auspices of the Sasakawa Peace 
Foundation (Japan) launched the project “Corporate Governance 
in Azerbaijan.” The project sets a wide range of goals and 
purposes, such as: to study the situation before and changes after 
privatisation in a system or corporate management and objectives 
of managers in new settings; to compare efficiency of state and 
private governance at enterprise; to analyse ownership principles 
 267 
and forms; to analyse development of corporate governance; to 
study the experience of public enterprise management; to study 
the principles and methods of the public entrepreneurship.  
As a result of this joint research project Khazar University and 
MIER undertook to prepare recommendations on improvement of 
management for midsize and large businesses and government 
entities in Azerbaijan.    The project will contribute to the 
strengthening of relations between Azerbaijan, Malaysia and Japan 
and promote development of corporate governance in Azerbaijan. 
 
