Realities Of azeRbaijan 
1917-1920
AnAr IsgenderlI
Copyright © 2011 by Anar Isgenderli.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2011903484
ISBN:  Hardcover  978-1-4568-7954-9
  Softcover  978-1-4568-7953-2
  Ebook   978-1-4568-7955-6
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted 
in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including 
photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval 
system, without permission in writing from the copyright owner.
First published in 2011.
Isgenderli, Anar—
Realities of Azerbaijan: 1917-1920
Foreword by Justin McCarthy
Translated by Yusif Axundov
© Anar Isgenderli, 2011
This book was printed in the United States of America.
To order additional copies of this book, contact:
Xlibris Corporation
1-888-795-4274
www.Xlibris.com
Orders@Xlibris.com
75308
CONTENTS
FOREWORD ...................................................................9
INTRODUCTION .........................................................11
CHAPTER 1: TURks AND ARmENIANs ....................17
1.1. The Armenian Settlement in the  
South Caucasus ...............................................17
1.2. Armenians under the Ottoman Empire ...........34
CHAPTER 2: FROm FEBRUARY REVOLUTION TO  
THE COLLAPsE OF THE TRANsCAUCAsIAN sEIm .....51
2.1. The Special Transcaucasian Committee and the 
Transcaucasian Commissariat ..........................51
2.2. The Transcaucasian Seim ................................59
CHAPTER 3: mAssACREs OF TURks AND OTHER 
NATIONALITIEs ..........................................................71
3.1. The Massacres in Baku ....................................74
3.2. The Shamakhi Massacres ...............................103
3.3. The Guba Massacres ......................................112
3.4. The Lankaran Massacres ................................121
3.5. The Zangezur Massacres ................................122
3.6. The Erivan Massacres ....................................128
3.7. The Massacres in Maku, Khoy, and Urmia ....132
CHAPTER 4: PROCLAmATION OF THE 
AZERBAIJANI DEmOCRATIC REPUBLIC AND  
ITs ACTIVITIEs ..........................................................137
4.1. The Azerbaijani Democratic Republic:  
The Period in Tiflis .......................................137
4.2. Establishing the Azerbaijani  
Democratic Republic in Ganja ....................... 141
4.3. The Caucasus (Ottoman) Army of Islam  
and the Rescue Campaign on Azerbaijan .......143
4.4. The Baku Soviet of People’s Commissars .......167
4.5. The British Troops Enter Baku .....................170
4.6. Forming the Azerbaijani Parliament ..............174
4.7. The Government’s Foreign and Domestic 
Policies ..........................................................182
4.8. The Azerbaijani Delegation at the  
Paris Peace Conference ..................................188
4.9. The Government’s Activity ............................193
4.10. Invasion by Soviet Russia ...............................196
CONCLUsION ............................................................205
GLOssARY ...................................................................211
LIsT OF REFERENCEs ..............................................213
INDEX .........................................................................225
It should not be possible any longer to write the 
history of atrocity and inhumanity without including 
the losses of the Turks of Azerbaijan.
—Prof. Justin McCarthy

D9E
FOREWORD
THE HISTORY OF the suffering of the Turks of the Southern Caucasus has been little known. Some 
historians have written of the military aspects of Russian 
campaigns, but not of the effect of the Russian conquest on 
the people of the region: Baddeley’s monumental The Russian 
Conquest of the Caucasus is a catalog of battles and politics. 
Allen and Muratoff’s Caucasian Battlefields devotes only the 
occasional sentence to massacre and forced migration, stressing 
the suffering of Armenians. With few exceptions, Armenian 
historians make very limited reference to Turkish refugees 
and even more limited mention of Turkish deaths. Standard 
textbooks do not consider the deaths and forced migration of 
Azerbaijani Turks at all and often avoid mention of even the 
existence of Azerbaijan.
Realities of Azerbaijan is a corrective to the long neglect of 
a history of great significance. The book’s strength lies in its 
Russian, Turkish, and Azerbaijani sources, often sources that 
have been seen in no other studies. They relate a history much 
at odds with the conventional belief that only Armenians 
suffered. For the historical record, the most important section 
of the book is chapter 3. It relates, in great detail, the slaughter 
of Turks in Azerbaijan and Armenia. It is not a cheerful 
reading. Relation of slaughter following upon slaughter can 
never be enjoyable. Yet the long list of inhumanities is the 
D10E ANAR ISGENDERLI
stuff of accurate history. It tells us that the death and exile of 
the people of Azerbaijan is one of the great human disasters.
Realities of Azerbaijan will hopefully not be the last study 
of the slaughters of Azerbaijan. Those writing on the period 
of World War I and on the Turkish-Armenian conflict have a 
new source for balanced histories. It should not be possible any 
longer to write the history of atrocity and inhumanity without 
including the losses of the Turks of Azerbaijan.
Justin McCarthy
Professor of History and Distinguished University Scholar,
University of Louisville
D11E
INTRODUCTION
THE ANCIENT INDIGENOUS peoples of the region, now known as the Azerbaijanis, had generally 
benevolent relations with their neighbors. It is known that in 
the middle of the third millennium BC, the Azerbaijani tribes 
of Guti, Turukku, and Lullubi established close trade relations 
with their neighbors, including tribes of Mesopotamia. The 
ninth century BC was marked by the formation of an ancient 
state of Mannea, which became one of the earliest states on the 
territory of Azerbaijan. Historical records characterize Mannea 
as a neutral yet powerful state that stood against incursions 
of Assyria and Urartu. Unlike neighboring Media, Assyria, 
and Urartu, Mannea did not encroach on neighboring lands. 
Settlement of Cimmerian, Scythian, and Saka tribes in this 
country yet strengthened the positions of the Turkic people.
The downfall of the empire of Alexander the Great 
triggered the emergence of independent states of Atropatene 
and Albania on the territory of Azerbaijan. Later, in the times 
of historical turmoil, these polities underwent Roman and 
Sassanian invasions. In parallel to benefiting from Hellenism, 
these states sought defense from invaders. Atropatene adopted 
Zoroastrianism as an established faith, whereas pyrolatry 
dominated in the plains of Albania, and Christianity prevailed 
in the Albanian highland. The lands of Atropatene and Albania, 
which had become an arena of Sassanian-Roman wars prior to 
D12E ANAR ISGENDERLI
the Arab invasion, lay on the territory of the contemporary 
Republic of Azerbaijan. The nonaggressive nature of the politics 
in these two states is supported by historical records.
As a result of Arab incursions, the seventh century gave 
rise to common Islamic culture in Albania and Atropatene 
although Christianity preserved its dominant status in the 
Albanian mountains. Despite the fact that in AD 705 Arabs 
put an end to the Albanian statehood, ancient Albanians 
continued to remain real possessors of these lands and kept 
trade and cultural relations with neighbors. One of the most 
reliable records on the ancient Albanian history—The History 
of Albania by Moses of Kalankatuyk—provides a glimpse of 
that historical period. According to the writing, there were 
twenty-six tribes in Albania that spoke different languages and 
had nothing in common with Armenians. Some of the tribes 
spoke Turkic, and others spoke Caucasian languages. The 
book concludes that Armenians did not inhabit in the South 
Caucasus and had no neighborship with the people dwelling 
in this area.
The decline and dissolution of the Caliphate was followed 
by the emergence of independent feudal states in ninth to 
eleventh centuries. There are plenty of historical documents 
on relations between these polities and neighboring Georgians. 
The fact that the Shirvanshah and Shaddadi states had common 
borders with Georgia stipulated an abundance of historical 
texts that survived through ages.
Lands of Azerbaijan witnessed the rise and decline of the 
Eldeniz (or Eldegiz) state in the twelfth to thirteenth centuries. 
The Eldeniz borders ran from Georgia in the north to Central 
Asia in the east and Asia Minor in the west. In the fourteenth 
D13EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
to fifteenth centuries, this vast territory was inherited by 
Kara-Koyunlu and Ak-Koyunlu polities. Ak-Koyunlu became 
the first Azerbaijani state that established formal diplomatic 
relations with the European states and was acknowledged as an 
international actor due to its immense political influence in the 
region. A question arises—was there any Armenian statehood 
in that era? It’s hard to find a positive answer to this question 
simply because no Armenian statehood existed.
The historical legacy of Kara-Koyunlu and Ak-Koyunlu 
served as a ground for establishment of the Safavi state in 
the sixteenth century. Its territory extended from the rivers 
of Amu-Darya, Syr-Darya, Euphrates, and Tigris to Georgia. 
Originally, the official language was Azerbaijani (or Turkic). 
Gradually, the state evolved into the Safavi Empire and absorbed 
and established its rule over the neighboring territories. Yet 
today, Azerbaijanis don’t lay any claims to other lands or fight 
for restoration of the Safavi Empire.
In 1722-23, the Russian emperor Peter the Great undertook 
the Caspian campaign. The campaign ended with seizure of the 
Caspian coastal territories including the city of Baku. In 1724, 
Peter the Great issued an edict on resettlement of Armenians on 
these lands. If Armenians had been populating these areas, then 
probably, there wouldn’t be any need for such an edict. This 
fact reaffirms that Armenian resettlement on these territories 
occurred later in the history of the region.
In the mid-eighteenth century, independent khanates 
emerged on the territory of Azerbaijan. How could an 
independent Armenian state exist in this case? Even Soviet 
history textbooks included information on the Azerbaijani 
khanates in the South Caucasus.
D14E ANAR ISGENDERLI
In early nineteenth century, czarist Russia began 
encroachment on the South Caucasus. It is noteworthy that 
during its invasive march, Russia signed treaties with historical 
Azerbaijani territory Jar-Balaken (the Solemn Plight of 1803) 
and the Karabakh khanate (the Treaty of Kurekchay on May 14, 
1805). The Sheki and Shirvan khanates joined the Kurekchay 
Treaty in May and December 1805, respectively. Here is the 
next question: if Armenians had existed as a political entity 
within the Karabakh khanate, then why aren’t they mentioned 
in treaties between Russia and the Azerbaijani khanates? This 
suggests that Armenians entered the political stage in Karabakh 
only after the Russian invasion. The most eloquent evidence 
is the fifteenth clause of the Treaty of Turkmenchay signed 
in February 1828. This very treaty instigated resettlement of 
tens of thousands of Armenians from Iranian territories in 
the Azerbaijani lands. This fact was recorded in writings of 
the Russian historians V. Velichko, I. Shopen, S. Glinka, A. 
Griboyedov, V. Potto, N. Dubrovin, N. Shavrov, and others. 
In March 1828, the Russian czar Nicholas I signed an edict on 
establishment of an Armenian province on the territories of the 
invaded Erivan and Nakhchivan khanates. Following the edict, 
Armenians did not just undermine the relative stability in 
the South Caucasus but also disturbed the local demographic 
equilibrium.
In the late nineteenth century, Armenians from the 
Ottoman territories strived to obtain a home rule with the 
help of czarist Russia and the European states by all means, 
including terrorizing and killing the civil population and 
forming riotous groups and armed gangs. Although these 
events had a certain undermining effect on the Ottoman 
D15EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
Empire, Armenians failed to achieve their goal. Yet they 
continued to exploit every opportunity to demonstrate 
their distrust of the Ottoman state. Close to World War I, 
Armenians formed their troops with the blessing from the 
Dashnaktsutiun Party leadership and the Armenian Church 
and chose to fight in the war against the Ottomans. The 
intervention of the Russian army in Eastern Anatolia by the 
end of 1914 enabled the Armenians, who had been living on 
that territory for years, to massacre Muslim civilians. There 
were attempts to create an Armenian state on the Ottoman 
territory with the help of the Russian army; however, none of 
them succeeded. After failing to accomplish their objectives 
on the Ottoman territory, Dashnak detachments went on 
slaughtering Muslim population of Azerbaijan. The purpose 
was clear: to create an Armenian state in the South Caucasus 
and broaden its territory at the expense of neighboring 
countries.
There are plenty of documented evidences of massacres 
of Muslim civilians (Azerbaijani Turks) initiated by Armenian 
gangs in 1918-20 in the north, south, and west of Azerbaijan. 
Among all records, the documents of the Special Investigation 
Commission, compiled in 1918-20, draw particular attention. 
These documents constitute thirty-six volumes on 3,500 
pages. These are the witness testimonies of those who survived 
the mass murders committed by Armenians. These documents 
unequivocally testify the carnage of the Azerbaijani population 
in 1918 in Baku, Shamakhi, Guba, and other provinces 
of Azerbaijan. In 1919 and 1920, the day of March 31 was 
commemorated by the Azerbaijani government and people as the 
Day of Genocide. But in 1918, the founders of the independent 
D16E ANAR ISGENDERLI
Azerbaijani state who advocated peace and order in the South 
Caucasus, despite all the pain to make such a decision, conceded 
the city of Erivan, which had been the capital of the former 
Erivan khanate, to Armenians and allotted twenty-one seats for 
Armenian representatives in the first Azerbaijani parliament. 
Heartened by the concessions, Armenians, actively supported 
by Soviet Russia, seized Zangezur province of Azerbaijan and 
laid unjustified territorial claims to mountainous Karabakh 
and Nakhchivan.
Later, in early 1950s, Armenian ideologists, backed by 
the Soviet leadership, initiated deportation of thousands of 
Azerbaijanis from their homeland with the purpose to clean 
Armenia from Turks. Then in 1990s, the remaining Azerbaijanis 
were expelled from these territories and were doomed to live a 
refugee life. Moreover, the Armenian armed forces invaded 20 
percent of the territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan, and one 
million people were forced to leave these lands.
Resettled in the South Caucasus in the mid-nineteenth 
century, Armenians brought carnage, ethnic and religious 
discrimination, and hatred. Today, they continue to maintain 
this policy.
The authors set to complete quite an uncomplicated task: 
to present a summary of piles of records and writings about the 
Armenian claims. It is up to the readers to make conclusions. 
We have only a rhetoric question: as opposed to Azerbaijanis, 
who historically advocated peace in the Caucasus and authored 
the idea of creation of the Caucasian House, what is the goal of 
the Armenians? This is the very core of the subject.
D17E
CHAPTER 1
TURks AND ARmENIANs
1.1. The Armenian settlement in the south Caucasus
ARMENIAN IDEOLOGISTS CLAIM that the creation of the world is allegedly attributed to Armenians. The 
authors of this claim opt for legends rather than historical realities. Yet 
actual writings about Armenians provide absolutely different insight. 
Herodotus, the Father of History, writes, “On the upper reaches of 
Euphrates lived Armenian tribes.”1 According to Tacitus, “I did not 
come across the name Armenian amongst the people abiding on 
the Caspian coast—Huns, Albanians, Cadusii and others.”2 The 
Russian historian Igor Dyakonov writes, “The Armenian ethnos 
was formed beyond the Caucasus.”3 Even an Armenian historian, 
Pastermasian, confirms, “Armenians moved to East from West in 
7th-6th centuries BC.”4 According to Justin McCarthy, “The early 
history of the Armenians is not known with any certainty . . . It is 
known that . . . for many centuries Armenians remained as vassals 
of others, including the Roman, Persian Sassanian and Byzantine 
1 Herodotus, Istoriia [History] (Leningrad, 1972), p. 113.
2 Tacitus Cornelius, Sochinenia [Writings] volume 2 (St. 
Petersburg, 1887), p. 395. 
3 M. M. Diakonov, Predistoriia armianskogo naroda [Pre-history of 
the Armenian people] (Yerevan, 1968), p. 93. 
4 S. S. Markosian, Zapadnaia Armenia v kontse XIX v. [West 
Armenia in late 19th century] (M., 1949), p. 322. 
D18E ANAR ISGENDERLI
Empires.”5 Armenian historians feigned so many myths about the 
creation and formation of the Armenian people that it appears very 
complicated to tell facts from fiction. 
The claims that Armenians have historically been living in 
the South Caucasus are not backed by academic researches. The 
actual legal document—the Kurekchay Treaty of 1805 between 
Russia and the Karabakh khanate—may serve as a reference 
to prove groundlessness of such claims. None of the eleven 
clauses of the treaty mentions Armenians. If Armenians indeed 
possessed these lands, then why did the Russian government, 
which broadly protected Armenians, not mention them in the 
treaty? Instead, the first clause expressly notes, “We, namely Khan 
Ibrahim of Shusha and Karabakh and Prince Pavel Tsitsianov, the 
Infantry General of all-Russian troops and Infantry Inspector 
of the Caucasian Inspection, with all authority and power 
endued by egregiously benign His Imperial Majesty, the most 
merciful and great Sovereign-Emperor Alexander Pavlovich and 
with God’s help, concluded, resolved and signed the following 
conditions to initiate acceptance by Ibrahim Khan of Shusha 
and Karabakh, his family, kin and country, of eternal allegiance 
to the All-Russian Empire and its blessed sovereign Alexander 
Pavlovich and his exalted heirs.”6 As is evident, the treaty was 
5 Justin McCarthy, Caroline McCarthy, Turks and Armenians: 
A Manual on the Armenian Question (Washington, D.C.: The 
Assembly of Turkish American Assosiation, 1989), p. 6. 
6 “Traktat mezhdu Karabakhskim khanom i Rossiiskoi imperiei 
o perekhode khanstva pod vlast’ Rossii ot 14 maia 1805 goda” 
[“The treaty between the Khan of Karabakh and the Russian 
Empire on accession of the Khanate to Russia”] (Aktı, sobranniye 
Kavkazkoyu Arxeograficheskoyu komissieyu [AKAK]: records 
D19EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
concluded with Ibrahim Khalil, the Khan of Karabakh, and 
testifies inherence of these lands to Azerbaijan.
It is on record that czarist Russia did not meet its commitments 
under the Kurekchay Treaty. In summer 1806, upon hearing of 
the approaching Iranian troops, Khan Ibrahim Khalil moved to 
Khankendi with his family (all but Mehdigulu aga). Armenians 
assured Major Dmitri Lisanevich that the Khan allegedly 
attempted to flee to Iran. Convinced by Armenians, Major 
Lisanevich murdered the Khan and all his family. With that, on 
September 10, 1806, Czar Alexander I issued a decree to appoint 
the son of Khan Ibrahim Khalil—Mehdigulu aga—the Khan of 
Karabakh. The decree read, “All rights resided in Khan Ibrahim 
Khalil shall pass to Khan Mehdigulu. The population shall obey 
the Khan, execute his orders and hold his rule in reverence.”7 
Armenians are not mentioned in this edict as well. The edict 
signed by Emperor Alexander I is an important document that 
clearly identifies the real possessors of Karabakh.
DRAFT TREATY
IN THE NAmE OF ALL-mIGHTY ALLAH
We, namely Khan Ibrahim of Shusha and Karabakh and 
Prince Pavel Tsitsianov, the Infantry General of all-Russian 
troops and Infantry Inspector of the Caucasian Inspection, 
compiled by The Caucasus Archeographic Commission 
[RCAC]), volume 2. 
7 Nagorniy Karabakh: sobitiia, fakty i tsyfry [Nagorno-Karabakh: 
Events, facts and figures] (Baku, 2005), pp. 92-95.
D20E ANAR ISGENDERLI
with all authority and power endued by egregiously 
benign His Imperial Majesty the most merciful and great 
Sovereign-Emperor Alexander Pavlovich and with God’s 
help, concluded, resolved and signed the following conditions 
to initiate acceptance by Ibrahim Khan of Shusha and 
Karabakh, his family, kin and country, of eternal allegiance to 
the All-Russian Empire and its blessed sovereign Alexander 
Pavlovich and his exalted heirs:
ARTICLE ONE
I, Khan Ibrahim of Shusha and Karabakh, in my own name 
and on behalf of my heirs and successors solemnly and everlastingly 
reject vassalage or any other kind of dependence of Iran or any 
other state, declare before the entire world that I do not accept 
any authority but the authority of His Imperial Majesty the Great 
All-Russian Sovereign-Emperor, his exalted heirs and successors, 
make a vow of loyalty to the throne as I am its loyal servant and 
shall, by tradition, take oath hereof on Holy Quran.
ARTICLE TWO
Accepting such sincere vow of His Excellency (Khan), 
His Imperial Majesty takes an imperial oath in his own name 
and on behalf of his successors that they will never refuse His 
Excellency Khan Ibrahim of Shusha and Karabakh and his heirs 
favor and benevolent auspice as his loyal citizens, in witness 
whereof His Imperial Majesty gives his imperial pledge to 
maintain the entirety of the country of His Excellency (Khan) 
and his successors.
D21EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
ARTICLE THREE
In return of such sincere acceptance of the supreme and 
only rule of All-Russian emperors and their successors by His 
Excellency Khan Ibrahim of Shusha and Karabakh, it is ruled 
that the named Khan, then his eldest son, and in this order of 
hereditary seniority in the genus, upon receiving an investiture 
through the Chief Governor of Georgia in the form of an 
imperial muniment granting the title of khan and confirmed 
by the state seal, shall solemnly give an oath of allegiance to the 
Russian Empire and acceptance of the supreme and only rule of 
the All-Russian Emperors over himself and his successors. The 
form of the oath is attached to the treaty, so currently governing 
Khan Ibrahim of Shusha and Karabakh performs this ceremony 
in the presence of the Chief Governor of Georgia and the 
executor of this ruling, the Infantry General Prince Tsitsianov.
ARTICLE FOUR
I, Khan Ibrahim of Shusha and Karabakh, in evidence 
of purity of my intentions and judgment and these of my 
successors about the allegiance to the All-Russian Empire and 
the acceptance of the supreme and only rule of the most serene 
holders of this Empire, pledge not to have relationships with 
adjacent rulers without prior consent of the Chief Governor of 
Georgia, upon arrival of their envoys or receipt of their letters 
of great importance, send them to the Chief Governor and 
request his permission, inform and seek advice about those of 
minor significance from the person designated by the Chief 
Governor of Georgia.
D22E ANAR ISGENDERLI
ARTICLE FIVE
His Imperial Majesty, graciously accepting the 
acknowledgment of his supreme and only rule over the 
dominion of His Excellency Khan Ibrahim of Shusha and 
Karabakh, pledges in his own name and on behalf of his 
successors: 1) to esteem the peoples of this dominion as 
his loyal subjects without any discrimination from other 
subjects of the vast Russian Empire; 2) to uphold invariably 
His Excellency Khan Ibrahim and descendants of his kin 
in the title of Khan of Karabakh; 3) to leave the authority 
over home affairs, law-court and justice, as well as revenue 
from the dominion at full disposal of His Excellency; 4) to 
assign the Russian troops of 500 men with cannons, staff and 
officers to Shusha fortress for protection of His Excellency 
and his family, as well as all his dominions, and in case of 
necessity of greater defense, depending on the situation and 
needs, the Chief Governor of Georgia shall reinforce the 
detachment and protect the dominions of His Excellency 
with the military force as territory owned by the Russian 
Empire.
ARTICLE sIX
I, Khan Ibrahim of Shusha and Karabakh, in sign of my 
faithful zeal, oblige to: 1) purvey required amount of wheat and 
millet grains for the aforesaid troops at a moderate price fixed 
by the Chief Governor of Georgia, wherefore supply of grains 
from Yelizavetpol shall be deemed impeded or impossible at all; 
2) provide billets for the aforesaid troops in the Shusha fortress 
D23EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
at the option of their commander, and supply them with the 
required amount of firewood; 3) make the entrance to Shusha 
fortress from the side of Yelizavetpol more convenient and 
carriageable for carts; 4) in case of the government’s initiative 
to undertake laying of the road from the Shusha fortress to 
Javad, provide workers for this work for the price fixed by the 
government.
ARTICLE sEVEN
In sign of great benevolence and mercy to His Excellency 
Khan Ibrahim of Shusha and Karabakh, His Imperial Majesty 
graciously bestows upon him and his heirs a banner with the 
coat of arms of the Russian Empire, which shall remain with 
them as the sign of the title of Khan and the rule bestowed by 
His Imperial Majesty over the dominion and shall be taken to 
war, if necessary.
ARTICLE EIGHT
I, Khan Ibrahim of Shusha and Karabakh, enjoying the 
highest assent of His Imperial Majesty to utilize my regular 
revenues, pledge to contribute 8,000 gold coins annually to the 
treasury of His Imperial Majesty in Tiflis in two installments, 
with the first installment on the 1st of February and the 
second installment on the 1st of September, making the initial 
installment upon approval of the present treaty by His Imperial 
Majesty. In addition to all oaths of fealty, following the Asian 
tradition, I shall pawn the second son Shukur-Ullah of my eldest 
son Mammad Hasanaga to permanent residence in Tiflis.
D24E ANAR ISGENDERLI
ARTICLE NINE
His Imperial Majesty benevolently bestows daily allowance 
for the grandson of His Excellency, who shall reside in Tiflis, in 
the amount of 10 silver coins of the Russian currency.
ARTICLE TEN
This agreement is concluded in perpetuity and shall not 
undergo any alteration from now to eternity.
ARTICLE ELEVEN
The approval of the present treaty by a letter from His 
Imperial Majesty bearing the state seal shall be delivered in 6 
months from signing, or earlier, if possible.
In witness thereof the underwritten parties signed these 
articles and affixed their seals in the camp of Yelizavetpol 
county, near river Kura, in summer of 1805 AD (1220 
of the Islamic calendar), the 14th day of May (month of 
Safar).8
The second Russian-Persian War ended with the Treaty of 
Turkmenchay signed on February 10, 1828. A month later, 
on March 21, the Russian czar issued an edict to rename the 
annexed Azerbaijani khanates of Erivan and Nakhchivan to 
8 Records compiled by the Caucasus Archeographic Commission, 
volume 2 (Tiflis, 1868), p. 705. 
D25EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
the Armenian province.9 Major General Chavchavadze, the 
prince of Georgia, was appointed governor of the province. 
Chavchavadze’s daughter was married to Alexander Griboyedov, 
the Russian ambassador in Persia and the author of the 
Armenian resettlement plan.
The documents of the Caucacus Archaeography 
Commission implicitly show how many Armenians lived in the 
region prior to the Treaty of Turkmenchay: only 2,500 of total 
12,000 families in the Karabakh khanate; 1,500 out of 24,000 
families in the Shamakhi khanate; and 1/3 of total 15,000 
families in the Shaki khanate were Armenian.10 Catholicos 
Nerses Ashtaraketsi, Colonel Lazarev, and Prince Argutinski 
were the most fervid partisans of Armenian resettlement in 
the South Caucasus, especially in Erivan, Nakhchivan, and 
Karabakh. Another important fact is that in 1840, the Armenian 
province was abolished, and in 1849, the Erivan guberniya was 
created on the former territories of the Erivan and Nakhchivan 
khanates.11
The fifteenth article of the Turkmenchay Treaty regulated 
the resettlement of Armenians from Persian territories to the 
South Caucasus. Although the name Armenian is not worded in 
the treaty, the issue was agreed upon during the negotiations.
9 Polnoie sobranie zakonov Rossiiskoi imperii [Complete collection 
of laws of the Russian Empire], collection 2, volume 3 (St. 
Petersburg, 1830), pp. 272-273.
10 Records compiled by the Caucasus Archeographic Commission, 
volume 10 (Tiflis, 1885), p. 104.
11 V. A. Potto, Kavkazskaya voyna. Persidskaya voyna 1826-1828 gg. 
[The Caucasian War. The Persian War in 1826-1828] volume 3 
(Saint Petersburg, 1911; Stavropol, 2005), p. 591.
D26E ANAR ISGENDERLI
Armenians gained the most from the Treaty of Turkmenchay. 
By signing this treaty, the Russian czarist regime granted a 
homeland to thousands of Armenians scattered around the 
world. The edict signed by Peter I on November 10, 1724, laid 
the ground for Armenian relocation to the Azerbaijani lands 
while the treaty of 1828 further legalized this historical shift.
By the end of the seventeenth century, Armenians, failing 
to receive any support in Europe, sought Russian protection. In 
1701, Israel Ori and Abbot Minas presented Peter I a program 
of thirty-six clauses, which they unsuccessfully tried to submit 
to European rulers. A map presented to the czar depicted lands 
of Erivan and Zangezur distinct from the rest of the region. In 
his missive to Peter I, Israel Ori wrote, “If the imperial troops 
of 20-30 thousand soldiers do not arrive in Shamakhi in the 
soonest time, we will perish and Turks will capture Erivan. 
Erivan is the key to the Muslim lands. Our purpose is to gain 
possession of Erivan. If we are able to seize Erivan, Turks and 
Persians will be powerless to fight against us.”12
Jean-Baptiste Tavernier, the French writer who visited Erivan 
in 1655, writes in his book that the Erivan fortress was populated 
solely by Muslims. The French traveler Jean Chardin, who arrived 
in the city eighteen years later, describes the Erivan fortress as a 
small town in the first volume of his ten-volume collection of 
writings. According to him, there were eight hundred houses in 
the fortress, and the inhabitants were all Turks.13
12 T. Akopian, İstoriya Yerevana [The history of Yerevan] (Yerevan, 
1975), p. 181.
13 I. Mammadov, Tariximiz, torpağımız, taleyimiz [Our history, 
land, and fate] (Baku, 2003), p. 30.
D27EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
Before the Turkmenchay Treaty, Armenian leaders, inspired 
by Czar Peter’s edict, laid various plans on establishment of 
an Armenian statehood. One of the projects envisioned the 
establishment of a joint Armenian-Georgian state led by the 
Georgian king Erekle II with further submission to the Russian 
patronage.14 Another draft called for establishment of an Armenian 
state on the Azerbaijani territories under the auspices of Prince 
Potemkin. These issues greatly preoccupied Empress Catherine 
II. In her letter to General Zubov, who commanded the invasion 
of Azerbaijan, she ordered, “Capture the Mugan plains and 
build a fortress there. May the fortress be named Yekaterinasert 
[Catherine’s heart]. Accommodate 2 thousand Russian troops in 
there. Provide them with vast land plots and arms; marry them 
off with Armenian and Georgian girls.”15 However, Catherine’s 
sudden death in 1796 disrupted the realization of these plans.
The Armenian historian Vardan Parsamian writes, “It is an 
irrefutable fact that prior to the joining of the South Caucasus 
to the Russian Empire Armenians did not populate these areas 
densely.”16
After resettlement on the territory of North Azerbaijan, 
Armenians formed into a nation; and as their potentials and 
protection grew, they began to lay territorial claims against 
Azerbaijan and the Ottoman state.
14 N. Dubrovin, Zakavkaz’e v 1803-1806 godakh [Transcaucasia in 
1803-06] (St. Petersburg, 1866), p. 204.
15 Ibid., p. 195.
16 V. A. Parsamian, Istoriia armianskogo naroda. 1801-1900 gg 
[History of the Armenian people. 1801-1900], book 1 (Yerevan, 
1977), p. 88.
D28E ANAR ISGENDERLI
If before the Turkmenchay Treaty there were 22,500 Armenians 
in the Erivan khanate, 2,150 Armenians in the Nakhchivan 
khanate, and 1,880 Armenians in the Ordubad province, the 
Armenian population was increased up to 669,871 by 1916.17 
In comparison, the Azerbaijani population was 313,176 in 1897 
and 373,582 in 1916. According to the statistical records of 
1828, 96.63 percent of lands in the Erivan khanate belonged 
to Azerbaijanis, and only 3.37 percent of lands were owned 
by Armenians.18 In the course of the Russian-Persian War of 
1826-28, 420 Azerbaijani villages were ruined within the Erivan 
khanate alone. In the period from 1828 to 1871, Armenians 
seized and appropriated 146 villages previously populated by 
Azerbaijanis. Chairman of the Society of Russian Patriots in Tiflis, 
Nikolay Shavrov, testifies, “During 1828-30 we relocated 40 
thousand Armenian families from Persia and 84 thousand from 
the Ottoman territories to Yelizavetpol [present-day Ganja] and 
the most fertile lands of the Erivan guberniya.” Shavrov further 
writes that besides the officially resettled population, tens of 
thousands of Armenian families were moved to the mountainous 
areas of the Yelizavetpol guberniya and the shores of Lake Goycha 
(Sevan). According to Shavrov, the total number of Armenians in 
the South Caucasus in early twentieth century was 1 million 300 
thousand, 1 million of which were immigrants.19
17 N. N. Shavrov, Novaia ugroza russkomu delu v Zakavkaz’e. 
Predstoiashaia rasprodazha Mugani inorodtsam [New threat to the 
Russian cause in Transcaucasia. The forthcoming sale of Mughan 
to aliens] (Baku, 1990), p. 42.
18 Ibid., p. 49.
19 Ibid., p. 93.
D29EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
The main (and undeniable) evidence, which proves 
the invalidity of naming the genuine Azerbaijani provinces 
of Erivan and Nakhchivan the Armenian province by the 
czarist regime in solidarity with Armenians, is that out of 
107,224 people residing in these areas prior to the massive 
Armenian relocation from Persia and Turkey, 76.24 percent 
were Azerbaijanis and 23.45 percent were Armenians. The 
overwhelming predominance of Azerbaijanis in the ethnic 
composition of the local population is an evident fact that 
testifies that this realm historically belonged to Azerbaijanis. 
Mass relocations of Armenians from the Persian and Ottoman 
territories to these areas during and after the Russian-Persian 
War of 1826-28 led to a change in the ethnic balance of the 
population. As per the results of the official desk studies 
conducted in 1829-32 by Ivan Shopen, a Russian researcher of 
French origin, the population increased drastically and reached 
164,450 people or 31,201 families in total. Around 16,100 
(51.53 percent) of all registered families, or 81,749 people 
(49.71 percent), were Muslims (Azerbaijanis); 4,428 families 
(14.19 percent), or 25,151 people (15.29 percent), were 
Armenians who had lived in the area prior to the war; 6,949 
families (22.27 percent), or 35,560 people (21.62 percent), 
were Armenian settlers from Persia; and 3,682 families (11.80 
percent), or 21,666 people (13.17 percent), were Armenian 
migrants from Turkey. Thus, 57,226 Armenians (34.79 percent 
of the entire population of the province), or 10,631 Armenian 
families (34.07 percent), were officially resettled from Persia 
and Turkey in aggregate. The similar process was observed in 
the town of Erivan as well. According to the census taken after 
the Russian takeover of Erivan, the population of the town was 
D30E ANAR ISGENDERLI
composed of 1,807 Azerbaijani families (7,331 Azerbaijanis in 
total, with 3,749 men and 3,582 women) and 567 Armenian 
families, or 2,369 Armenians in total (including 1,220 men 
and 1149 women). Percentage-wise, the population of 9,700 
people in total consisted of 75.6 percent of Azerbaijanis and 
24.4 percent of Armenians.20 As a consequence of large-scale 
Armenian relocations from Persia and Turkey to North 
Azerbaijan undertaken by the czarist regime, Armenians 
greatly increased in number in this town as well. As per the 
desk study conducted in 1829-32, 366 Armenian families, or 
1,715 Armenians (903 men and 812 women), were brought 
from Persia, and 11 families, or 48 Armenians (25 men and 23 
women), were moved from Turkey. These resettlements led to 
growth of the population in the town, which reached 11,463 
people, and changed the ethnic balance in favor of Armenians. 
Thus, the Azerbaijani population decreased to 64 percent while 
the number of Armenians increased and reached 36 percent.21
In the later periods, such alterations of the populations’ 
ethnic composition became more consistent and intentional. 
The edict of June 9, 1849, issued by Czar Nicholas I, 
established the Erivan guberniya on the territories of the former 
Armenian province and Alexandropol (Gumri) uyezd. The 
Erivan guberniya received a territory of 23,194.79 square versts 
20 I. Shopen, Istoricheskii pamiatnik sostoiania Armianskoi oblasti 
(Erivanskoi gubernii) v epokhu prisoedinenia k Rossiiskoi imperii 
[Historical memorial of the situation in the Armenian Oblast’ 
(Erivan guberniya) in the days of accession to the Russian 
Empire] (St. Petersburg, 1852), p. 120.
21 Ibid., p. 121.
D31EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
(or roughly 10,191 square miles). The Caucasus Almanac of 
1917 states that the population of the guberniya was 1,120,242 
people. The population density was 48.3 heads per square verst. 
589,125 (52.6 percent) of them were men and 531,117 (47.4 
percent) were women; 1,014,868 (90.6 percent) were permanent 
residents and 105,374 (9.4 percent) were temporary residents. 
According to the Caucasus Almanac, despite century-long 
slaughters and deportations, the Azerbaijani population was 
373,582 people (or 33.35 percent of the entire population). As 
for Armenians, their number reached 669,871 people (or 59.8 
percent of the population) due to the described resettlement 
waves.22
Touching the issue of Armenian resettlement in the 
South Caucasus, an Armenian historian B. Ishkhanian writes, 
“Armenians lived in different regions of the Caucasus only in 
the recent centuries.”23
The History of the 19th Century, authored by French 
professors Lavisse and Rambaud and translated into Russian 
in 1939, emphasizes that “in the middle of the 19th century 
Armenians were regarded as incomers to the Caucasus.”24
In 1886, out of 326 villages in the Zangezur uyezd of 
Yelizavetpol guberniya, 149 were Azerbaijani, 91 were Kurdish, 
22 RCAC, volume 3 (Tiflis), p. 726.
23 B. Ishkhanian, Narodnosti Kavkaza. (Statistiko-ekonomicheskoe 
issledovanie) [Ethnicities in the Caucasus. A statistical-economic 
reseach] (St. Petersburg, 1916), p. 16.
24 Istoriia XIX veka [History of the 19th Century], edited by 
professors Lavisse and Rambaud. Translated from French, 
volume 8 (Moscow, 1939), p. 298. 
D32E ANAR ISGENDERLI
and only 81 villages were Armenian.25 By 1891, 270,400 people 
(or 41 percent) of the total population of 661,600 residents in 
Erivan guberniya were Azerbaijanis. In 1893, the number of 
Azerbaijanis was 276,000. The next census of 1897 enumerated 
313,000 Azerbaijanis in the guberniya.
The Russian historian Sergey Glinka makes an emphasis 
on the merits of Colonel Lazarev, a Russian officer of Armenian 
descent favored by Ivan Paskevich, Count of Erivan and the 
commander-in-chief of the Russian troops in the Caucasus, in 
resettlements of Armenians to the South Caucasus, including 
the Azerbaijani lands. Glinka wrote, “In August 1827 Paskevich 
marched in Tabriz as the commander of the victorious army. In 
the view of the vigorous contribution of Colonel Lazarev to 
the matter of winning the Armenian population of Tabriz and 
surrounding provinces to the Russian side, Paskevich appointed 
him Commandant of Tabriz. Armenians, received by Lazarev, 
asked him to impart to His Imperial Majesty that they would 
be happy to live and die under his reign. Armenians from the 
town of Khoy came it strong and declared: ‘We would rather 
eat Russian fodder than Persian bread.’”26
In his address to the Armenian population of Persia, Colonel 
Lazarev proclaimed, “You will receive fertile plots to be farmed 
at the government’s expense in the places you choose—Erivan, 
Nakhchivan and Karabakh. You will be exempt from all 
kinds of duties for the following 6 years. In concord with the 
25 N.N. Shavrov, op. cit., p. 49.
26 S. Glinka, Opisanie pereseleniia armian azerbaijanskikh v peredel Rossii 
[Description of the resettlement of Azerbaijani Armenians to the 
territory of Russia] (Moscow, 1831; Baku, 1995), p. 30.
D33EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
Turkmenchay treaty, you may assign trustees in Persia to sell your 
property within 5 years. There [in the Azerbaijani lands] you 
will find a new homeland populated by Christians.”27 Lazarev, 
who took the lead of the Armenian resettlements, admitted 
himself that these lands were granted to Armenians as their new 
home. In his report to Count Paskevich, Colonel Lazarev wrote, 
“Since the 26th of February 1828—the day I took the charge, 
I have received 14,000 rubles in gold coins and 400,000 rubles 
in silver coins. For 2,000 rubles allocated for the Nakhchivan 
branch alone I moved 8,249 Christian families.”28
After 1806, some 500 Azerbaijani families were driven out 
of the Erivan khanate and were forced to leave their motherland 
for Kars.29
As estimated by Shopen, prior to the Russian annexation of 
the Erivan khanate, 2,984 Azerbaijani families lived there. After 
the Russian invasion, the number of the Azerbaijani families 
in the province dropped by 3.5 times, and only 847 families 
remained. 2,137 Azerbaijani families were compelled to move 
to the neighboring Persian and Ottoman territories. By 1832, 
the number of Muslims in the town of Erivan dropped to 7,331 
people. In 1854, only 3,163 Azerbaijanis remained in the town.30 
Alteration of the demographic situation in the South Caucasus 
in favor of Armenians through persuading them to resettle 
in Erivan and Nakhchivan provinces particularly exposed the 
27 Ibid., p. 48.
28 Ibid., p. 57.
29 RCAC, volume 7 (Tiflis, 1878), p. 86.
30 Kavkazskii kalendar’ na 1855 g. [The Caucasus Almanac for the 
year of 1955] (Tiflis, 1855), p. 341.
D34E ANAR ISGENDERLI
czarist policy to colonize the region and create a buffer zone. 
Immediately after the Russian-Turkish War of 1828-29, 23,098 
Armenians were relocated from Persia and 20,324 from the 
Ottoman territory to the former Azerbaijani villages.31
Banishment and forced migration of Azerbaijanis in various 
provinces of North Azerbaijan in the first half of the nineteenth 
century was the direct consequence of the Russian colonization 
policy inculcating ethnic strives and constant conflicts. After the 
Russian Empire took over the Erivan khanate, 2,137 families 
were expelled from this province; 2,306 families from Gazakh 
in 1817-31; 10,334 families from Guba in 1796-1810; 11,478 
families from Shamsheddin in 1804-17; 15,354 families from 
Borchaly in 1804-07; and 1,400 families from Nakhchivan. 
During 1805-13, the number of Azerbaijani families who were 
compelled to leave exceeded 4,840 in Karabakh alone.32
1.2. Armenians under the Ottoman Empire
The condition of the Armenians, who had lived long years 
under the Byzantine rule, was described by the Armenian historian 
Matthew of Edessa (Matevos Urhayetsi): “Armenians remained 
under oppression and yoke. The entire country broke into 
bloodshed.”33 Armenians were pursued for their beliefs; Armenian 
31 S. Glinka, op. cit., p. 103.
32 V.Grigoriev, Statisticheskoie opisanie Nakhichevanskoi provintsii 
[Statistical description of Nakhchivan Province] (St. Petersburg, 
1833), p. 29.
33 Süleyman Kocabaş, Ermeni sorunu nedir ve ne değildir [What is 
and What is not the Armenian question] (Istanbul, 1958), p. 17.
D35EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
patriarchs were exiled from Byzantium. Despite all persecutions, the 
Armenian Church and religion managed to rescue the Armenian 
people and keep their cause in the agenda. After breaking away 
from the Roman Church, Armenians established a new patriarchy 
in Jerusalem in AD sixth century. In AD 993-994, the Roman 
army put Armenians to the sword and subdued the survivors.34
In quest of a refuge from the Roman threat, the Armenian 
Church appealed to a Seljuk sultan, Alp-Arslan, who, in return, 
took Armenians under his auspice and rescued them. Another 
sultan, Melikshah, gave an order to improve the conditions of 
the Armenian Church and monasteries and aid the Armenian 
clergy. Although Armenians, coupled with Byzantians, 
repeatedly levied wars against Turks, Seljuk and Ottoman rulers 
never interfered with their religious creed, customs, traditions, 
lifestyle, or national dignity. An Armenian historian Levon 
Dabaghian wrote, “Armenians owe to Seljuk and Ottoman 
Turks their current existence as a nation. If we were left to the 
mercy of Byzantians or other Europeans, the name ‘Armenian’ 
would be just a word in history books.”35
The Ottoman Empire, which succeeded Seljuks, provided 
all conditions for Armenians to live in peace and properity. 
After relocating the capital to Bursa, Sultan Orkhan Bey gave 
shelter to Armenians and let them live in Anatolia as an ethnic 
group. After Istanbul was conquered, the Armenian patriarchate 
moved there.
34 Ibid., p. 24.
35 L. Dabagian, Voprosy istorii [Questions of history] (Moscow, 
1929), p. 22.
D36E ANAR ISGENDERLI
In the fourth decade of the seventeenth century, the 
Ottoman Empire was on the path of gradually losing its 
earlier power. A portion of Armenians entered Catholicism 
under pressure of the Roman Church. In 1840, the British 
acquired permission to build an Armenian Protestant Church 
in Jerusalem. In 1846, the Armenian protestant community 
was established in Istanbul upon British insistence. In the 
nineteenth century, while Gregorian, Protestant, and Catholic 
Armenians of Turkey whirled in religious and sectarian strives, 
some of the western states and czarist Russia nursed schemes 
for parceling the country and took solid steps to revive the 
Armenian chauvinism.
The Edirne Peace Treaty of 1829 between the Ottoman 
Empire and Russia did not fully satisfy the Russian pretensions. 
Nevertheless, article 14 of the peace treaty legalized resettlements 
of the Armenian population in the South Caucasus, including 
the Azerbaijani lands. Relocation of tens of thousands of 
Armenians from the Ottoman state to the Azerbaijani lands 
intrigued Russians to contemplate the establishment of West 
Armenia, a state within the Ottoman territory. However, the 
defeat in the Crimean War of 1853-56 prevented Russia from 
the realization of these plans. The allies of the Ottomans in 
the Crimean War, Great Britain and France, sought to gain 
influence in the region with the help of Armenians.
In March 1878, in his appeal to Sir Austen Henry Layard, 
the British ambassador to Istanbul, the Armenian patriarch, 
Nerses Varjapetian, proclaimed, “A year ago we did not have 
any complaints against the Ottoman governance. But the 
recent Russian victories have changed the situation. Now we 
also desire to have independent West Armenia. If you do not 
D37EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
help, we will have to seek aid from Russians.” When Layard 
asked where and exactly on which territories they planned to 
create West Armenia, the patriarch mentioned the provinces of 
Van, Sivas, Diyarbekir, and Cilicia. Although the British envoy 
adverted to the fact that Armenians did not prevail in any of 
those provinces, he could not overpersuade the patriarch.36
In April 1878, Varjapetian wrote a letter to the British 
foreign secretary Lord Salisbury, where he put his purpose 
much more explicitly: “It is no longer possible for the 
Armenians and the Turks to live together. Only a Christian 
administration can provide the equality, justice and the 
freedom of conscience. A Christian administration should 
replace the Muslim administration. Armenia (Eastern 
Anatolia) and Kilikya are the regions, where the Christian 
administration should be founded . . . This is the desire of the 
Armenians of Turkey.”37
In 1877 -78, the region witnessed another Russian-Turkish 
War. This war ended with victory of the Russians, who 
initiated negotiations of the truce conditions. Scattered 
around the world, Armenians besought Alexander II to take 
the so-called West Armenia from Ottomans and annex the 
region to Russia. The oddest aspect was that most of the letters 
of that kind were written and sent from within the Russian 
Empire—Tiflis, Ganja, Baku, and other provinces. Armenians 
from the Ottoman territory invoked in their letters, “As western 
36 Süleyman Kocabaş, op. cit., p. 59.
37 Zapisi grafa N. P. Ignat’eva o San-Stefano [Notes of Count N. P. 
Ignatiev on San-Stefano] (St. Petersburg, 1896), p. 204.
D38E ANAR ISGENDERLI
Christians, we, Armenians, wish to gain independence with the 
help of Russia.”38
Some of the clauses, which raised disputes during the 
peace talks between the Ottoman and Russian delegations, 
concerned the Armenians populating the Ottoman territories. 
As per Article 16 of the peace treaty, the Ottoman government 
was obliged to start immediate reforms in the provinces 
populated by Armenians and ensure their security. Article 25 
implied completion of the reforms in those provinces prior to 
withdrawal of Russian troops within six months.39 By Article 27, 
the Ottoman government vouched not to prosecute Armenians 
who had supported the Russian army during the war.40 Hence, 
the Armenian factor became the major bargaining chip in the 
hands of czarist Russia, and the Western nations exploited to 
exert pressure on the Ottoman government. In accordance 
with the Treaty of San Stefano, due to inability of the Ottoman 
Empire to pay the imposed reparation, it was forced to withdraw 
from the provinces of Kars, Ardahan, Batum, Alashkerd valley, 
and Beyazid county in favor of Russia.41 The czarism resolved 
to grant guberniya-level self-rule to Armenians who were 
close to realizing their old-time reverie of establishment of an 
independent state on the Ottoman territories. Nevertheless, 
the political jealousy of the western governments toward 
the provisions of the Treaty of San Stefano destroyed their 
plans. In fact, the European ruling regimes were not so much 
38 Ibid., p. 205.
39 Ibid., p. 206.
40 Ibid. 
41 Ibid.
D39EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
disappointed with the Ottoman defeat as unwilling to put up 
with the growing political influence of Russia in the Balkans. 
This caused the calling of a conference in Berlin in summer 
of 1878 with participation of Austro-Hungarian, German, 
British, French, Italian, and Ottoman delegations. After long 
debates, the parties agreed to replace Armenian-related Article 
16 of the San Stefano Treaty with Article 61, which implied 
immediate withdrawal of the Russian troops from so-called 
West Armenia.42
It is an undeniable fact, which needs to be brought to light, 
that Armenians had never constituted majority on the territories 
they inhabited. There was no Ottoman, Persian, or Russian 
province where the Armenians had ever exceeded one-third of 
the entire local population. In fact, the region had been always 
dominated by Turks, Kurds, and other ethnic groups.43
Prior to the Congress of Berlin, the Armenian delegation 
invoked aid from every court and cabinet in Europe. After failing 
to gain Italian, French, and British governments over to their 
cause, the Armenian delegates headed for Germany. The Congress 
chairman apprised Otto von Bismarck of the willingness of the 
Armenian delegation to receive his audience. Bismarck responded 
in a harsh manner: “I would not exchange a dead Pomeranian for 
all Armenians.” Attempts of the delegation to obtain audience 
with the German kaiser Wilhelm I failed as well. When the head 
of the Armenian mission was asked which language they would 
speak to the Congress participants, he replied, “The language 
42 Pravitel’stvenny vestnik [The government bulletin] (St. Petersburg, 
1878), p. 45. 
43 Justin McCarthy, Caroline McCarthy, op. cit., p. 18.
D40E ANAR ISGENDERLI
easily understood by everyone: by weeping and shedding tears.” 
The Armenian mission to Europe proved futile.
Dissatisfied with such a twist of events, Armenians saw 
the only solution to the Armenian cause through rebellion 
and terror against the Ottoman state. Numerous committees, 
organizations, and societies—calling for the solution of the 
Armenian cause through violence—spawned in large cities of 
Europe, Asia Minor, the Caucasus, and Russia. The Hunchak 
and Dashnaktsutiun parties set about terrorist activities. During 
1878-84, Armenians attempted two armed insurrections 
in Zeitun. Other armed uprisings against the Ottoman 
government were undertaken in Samsun (1884), Zeitun 
(1895), and Van (1896).44 Despite pressures from Europe and 
Russia, the Ottoman government managed, although with 
great difficulties, to suppress the mutinies. Unable to achieve 
their goals in Anatolia, the Armenian gangs reached out for 
the South Caucasus. In pursuit of a quicker resolution of 
the Armenian cause under the Russian auspices, hundreds of 
thousands of Armenians resettled from the Ottoman provinces 
to the Azerbaijani territories. Consequently, the number of the 
Armenian population in the South Caucasus surged from 51,530 
during 1812-26, when they constituted only 9.37 percent of the 
total population, to 784,346 in 1897.45 According to an official 
44 Y. D. Lazarev, Prichiny bedstvii armian v Turtsii [Reasons of 
Armenian miseries in Turkey] (Tiflis, 1899), p. 93.
45 A. D. Eritsov, “Dannye ob armianskom naselenii v Rossii” 
[“Data on the Armenian population in Russia”], The Bulletin of 
The Caucasus Branch of the Imperial Russian Geographic Society, 
volume 1 (Tiflis, 1881), pp. 92-93. 
D41EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
record, in 1829-32, the composition of the population of the 
Erivan and Nakhchivan provinces underwent sharp alterations 
under the Russian rule. A huge number of native Muslim 
families were forced to emigrate from these provinces to Persia 
and Turkey. The abandoned houses were occupied by 35,000 
Armenians from Persia and 22,000 from Turkey. Here are some 
figures: there were 49,875 Muslims in Erivan province prior to 
the Russian aggression, 20,073 local Armenians, and 45,200 
resettled Armenians. 17,138 Muslims and 2,690 Armenians 
had lived in Nakhchivan province prior to immigration of 
10,670 Armenians. Ordubad district had been inhabited by 
7,247 Muslims and 2,398 local Armenians, while the number 
of Armenian resettlers here was 1,340.46 To put the plan into 
action, Armenians engaged in squeezing the local Azerbaijani 
population out of the native lands and bringing in Armenian 
immigrants. The process picked up speed at the dawn of the 
twentieth century. An Azerbaijani novelist Mammad Said 
Ordubadi wrote, “During 1905-06 Armenians ruined and 
razed over 200 Muslim villages in Erivan and Yelizavetpol 
guberniyas alone.”47
Dashnaks’ endeavor to create an Armenian polity from the 
Black Sea to the Caspian received yet wider scope on the eve of 
World War I. The then commander of the Third Ottoman Army 
46 Grazhdanskoie upravlenie Zakavkaz’em ot prisoedineniia Gruzii 
do namestnichestva Velikogo Kniazia Mikhaila Nikolaevicha 
[Civil governance in Transcaucasia from Georgia’s accession 
to vicegerency of Grand Prince Mikhail Nikolayevich] (Tiflis, 
1901), p. 229. 
47 M. S. Ordubadi, Qanlı illər [The bloody years] (Baku, 1991), 
p. 69.
D42E ANAR ISGENDERLI
Enver Pasha, after a meeting with Armenian leaders in Erzurum 
became convinced that in the event of war Armenians would 
take Ottomans in the rear. The reason was obvious: by giving 
its consent to the establishment of an Armenian autonomy 
on the Ottoman territories, the czarist regime managed to 
enlist Armenians from those areas to fight against Turks. The 
arrival of Czar Nicholas II in the Caucasus not long before 
the outbreak of World War I with a proposal to Armenians 
to collaborate with Russians against Ottomans yet more 
exacerbated the situation. The czar concluded his speech with 
the words, “May the ships, sailing under the Russan flag, move 
freely through Bosporus and Dardanelles. May the Armenian 
people establish an independent state on the Ottoman territory 
aided by the people of Russia. You shall, finally, gain liberty 
and justice. I believe in fidelity of Armenians, a blissful future 
shall come for the Armenian people. I assure you that your 
dreams will come true!”48 This biased and instigating speech 
secured Armenian collaboration with the Russians in the war 
against Turkey. The Armenian troops received the blessing of 
the Armenian Church to prepare for invasion and depopulation 
of the Turkish provinces.
After the czar’s address, many Armenians joined the 
Russian army to intrude the Ottoman provinces or sold their 
belongings and properties to get enlisted in voluntary Armenian 
detachments. Armenians were actively involved in slaughters 
of Turkish civilians; since Armenians were familiar with the 
48 Erich Feigl, A myth of Terror. Armenian Extremism: Its Causes and 
Its Historical Context, Russian edition (Baku, 2000), p. 37. 
D43EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
terrain, they served as guides for the Russian troops and were 
engaged in the organization of sabotages.49
On November 1, 1914, the Russian army crossed the 
Ottoman border in the Caucasus region. Both sides suffered 
heavy casualties in the battles for Kars, Ardahan, and Batum. 
Intervention of the Russian army in East Anatolia triggered 
mass killings of Turkish civilians by Armenians. The Armenians 
enlisted in the Russian army were joined by local Armenians to 
launch carnage of hundreds of thousands of civilians and oust 
them from their homeland. In January 1915, the Russian troops 
and Armenian detachments moved in Sarigamish. The next year, 
they occupied Erzurum in February, Isfahan in March, Trabzon 
in April, Khoy and Dilman in May, Arzinjan in June, and Mush 
in August. After plundering Muslim villages, Armenians set them 
on fire and sabered the population without distinction. Civilians 
were huddled into houses and mosques and then burned alive. 
Brutal aggressors buried the elderly and children alive, ripped 
up bellies of pregnant women to take out and strangle unborn 
babies, and made mothers eat the flesh of their children. In a 
letter addressed to the American general James G. Harbord, 
Kazim Karabekir Pasha wrote, “I encountered horrifying scenes 
in the towns we liberated. I did not see anyone alive in those 
towns. Children had been bayoneted. Seniors and women had 
been herded into basements and burned alive; juniors were 
hewn asunder or hung. The tragedy of my compatriots hurts to 
the very roots of human being.”50
49 Ibid., p. 59.
50 Kazım Karabekir, Erzincan ve Erzurum kurtuluşu [Liberation of 
Erzinjan and Erzurum] (Ankara, 1990), p. 89. 
D44E ANAR ISGENDERLI
During the war, every Armenian soldier was supplied with 
instructions from the Dashnaktsutiun Party. The instructions 
read,
Armenians called to arms by the mobilization 
proclamation of the Ottoman Sultan should not succumb 
to the call and must prevent other people around them 
from joining the army.
— Armenians drafted into the army shall desert the 
colors by any means and join voluntary Armenian 
detachments;
— As soon as the Russian troops cross the border, 
all Armenian armed groups must join the Russian 
army and attack the Ottoman forces;
— All Muslims in the enemy’s rear over the age of 
two should be murdered by all means;
— All possessions and belongings of Muslims should 
be seized or burned;
— Armenians should burn all houses, sowing fields, 
churches and charities they intend to abandon, 
and proclaim from pole to pole that this was done 
by Muslims;
— Willfully stir up the official governing circles, 
set ambushes and kill Ottoman officers and 
gendarmes;
— Murder Ottoman soldiers, who return wounded 
from battlefield;
— Compel civilians to leave their towns and 
villages;
D45EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
— Arm all Armenians by producing, supplying and 
importing bombs and arms;
— cast the blame for Armenian-arranged sabotages 
and massacres on Muslims and seek publicity of 
the events abroad;
— perform espionage on the Ottoman territories in 
favor of the allied nations.51
The Armenian violence against the local population made 
the Ottoman government take defensive countermeasures. In 
mid-May 1915, the Armenian population of Van, Bitlis, and 
Erzurum was put off from combat areas and neutralized. These 
measures prevented Armenians from helping Russian and British 
troops in fighting against Ottomans. In parallel, the military 
command of the Ottoman government ordered Turks and other 
Muslims to abstain from any kind of violence against Armenians. 
On January 30, 1919, London-based the Times reported, “The 
Ottoman government established a special commission to 
deal with the issue of future return of the relocated Armenian 
population and with their property rights. The Commission was 
engaged in conducting census of the Armenian population. The 
papers of the Commission repeatedly mention that the Armenian 
population will be returned to their homes after the war.”52
Armenian nationalists insisted that during World War I, 
over 1 million Armenians were killed in the Ottoman provinces. 
51 J. Malevil, Armianskaia tragedia 1915 goda [The Armenian 
tragedy of 1915] (Baku, 1990), p. 40. 
52 Times, January 30, 1919. See  “Armyanskiy genotsid,” mif i realnost 
[“Armenian genocide,” myth and reality] (Baku, 1992), p. 71. 
D46E ANAR ISGENDERLI
To prove this, they adduced an argument that the number of 
Armenians residing on the Ottoman territory prior to the war 
was 2.5 million. However, as per the official prewar statistics 
of the Ottoman government, there were 1.3 million Armenian 
residents on the Ottoman territory at that time. Only half of 
this population lived in the combat areas. During the war, half 
a million Armenians left Turkey for the Caucasus and other 
regions, 150,000-200,000 emigrated to West Europe and 
the United States, and some 200,000 are estimated to die of 
various reasons. Apart from casualties in the warfare, this figure 
includes those who were missing or died during relocations or 
of hunger and cold. In effect, the situation was completely 
divergent. As noted by the Times, “annihilation of 2 million 
Turks in wartime on the Ottoman territories is an undeniable 
truth.”53
Armenian ideologists attempted to convince the 
international community that on April 24, 1915, the Ottoman 
minister of interior, Talat Pasha, allegedly issued a written 
directive legalizing the murder of Armenian population on 
the state level. However, these ideologists failed to produce 
the original document since such a paper had never existed.
A British journalist, Robert Scotland Liddell, who closely 
studied the events in the South Caucasus in 1918-20, writes 
of the Armenian propaganda: “Armenians are always in quest 
of fighting and present this as oppression in their propaganda. 
In fact, this is an earned punishment. A murdered Armenian is 
very valuable for Dashnaks. Such cases of murder can greatly 
benefit the propaganda.” Scotland Liddell quotes Nuri Pasha 
53 Erich Feigl, op. cit., p. 57. 
D47EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
as a reference: “No matter when and how Armenians die, 
they lift up their heads from graves and cry: ‘I am a victim of 
a mass murder.’”54
In 1920, the wide-scale publicity of the plans of the West 
European governments to split the Ottoman state coincided 
with publication of Aram Andonian’s delusive book titled 
Reminiscences of the Armenian Genocide, which was translated 
into several languages. Aram Andonian claims that at the time 
of the British offensive on Aleppo, he met an Ottoman official, 
Naim Bey, from whom he received the ciphered directive of 
the minister of interrior, Talat Pasha, to launch massacres of 
Armenians. The English edition of the book includes forty-eight 
“official Ottoman documents” while the French translation has 
deviations both in content and printing of the documents. 
Andonian’s Reminiscences also include fourteen photos; however, 
when requested, the author failed to produce the originals, 
claiming that he had lost them. Absence of the phrase “In the 
Name of Allah” in the documents’ headers, which is essential 
for a Muslim government, and the use of the Roman calendar 
instead of the Muslim calendar confirm that the documents are 
nothing but counterfeit. Nevertheless, despite the loose ground 
under the book, it continues to stay in focus since it serves the 
interests of a number of outside actors.55
A thorough inspection of classified correspondence of the 
Ottoman leadership initiated by the Paris Peace Conference 
of 1919 did not find any document or order concerning an 
54 The State Archives of the Republic of Azerbaijan (SARA), col. 
894, list 10, file 81, sheet 10.
55 Erich Feigl, op. cit., pp. 80-81.
D48E ANAR ISGENDERLI
Armenian carnage. On the contrary, the European officials 
dispatched to Turkey found dozens of orders and directives 
issued by the Ottoman government to provide security of the 
relocating Armenian residents.
An American historian Stanford J. Shaw writes, “The 
Russian Army of the Caucasus also began an offensive towards 
Van with the help of a large force of Armenian volunteers . . . 
They reached Van on May 14 and organized and carried out 
a general slaughter of the local Muslim population during the 
next two days . . . An Armenian state was organized at Van 
under Russian protection. An Armenian legion was organized 
‘to expel the Turks from the entire southern shore of the lake 
in preparation for a concerted Russian drive into the Bitlis 
vilayet.’ Thousands of Armenians from Mus and other major 
centers in the east began to flood into the new Armenian 
state, including many of those, who broke away from the 
deportation columns as they passed the vicinity on their 
way to Mosul. By mid-July there were as many as 250,000 
Armenians crowded into the Van area, which before the crisis 
had housed and fed no more than 50,000 people, Muslim and 
non-Muslim alike.”56
By mid-July 1915, Armenians committed countless 
crimes in these provinces. The Ottoman counteroffensive 
in late July pushed joint Russian-Armenian forces back; 
local Armenians began leaving the area together with the 
troops. Some 200,000 Armenians made their way toward 
56 Stanford J. Shaw, History of the Ottoman Empire and Modern Turkey, 
vol. II, pp. 316-317.
D49EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
the South Caucasus accompanied by the Russian army. On 
several occasions, the resettling Armenians were attacked 
by vengeance-driven Kurds who had also suffered from 
Armenian-initiated killings.
A more or less unbiased insight of the Armenian-Ottoman 
relations during and after World War I is given in The Bristol 
Papers housed in the manuscript division of the Library of the 
U.S. Congress. Admiral Mark Lambert Bristol served as the 
commander of the U.S. Naval Detachment in Turkish waters 
and as the U.S. high commissioner to Turkey. In this capacity, 
he witnessed firsthand the Turkish War of Independence and 
the formation of the Turkish Republic and the early years of 
its existence. His papers, consisting of some 33,000 items, 
include reports, diaries, correspondence, and copies of official 
dispatches, telegrams, and appointment sheets. On December 
15, 1920, Bristol had a visit from Edward Fox, who provided him 
with additional details on the situation in Kars. In Bristol’s War 
Diary for this date, the following summary of his conversation 
with Edward Fox, the American district commander at Kars, 
is given:
The Turks marched into Kars and the Armenians ran 
away without firing a shot except from two or three places 
on the hill in the beginning, and this firing soon ceased. 
Many of the Armenians threw away their guns, stripped 
off their uniforms and hid in the houses, especially in 
the Near East Relief orphanages and hospitals with the 
children. The Turks were very badly clothed and therefore 
every Armenian soldier they captured they stripped and 
took the clothes for themselves. There were no massacres 
D50E ANAR ISGENDERLI
except certain Armenians were killed and this was reported 
to be for crimes committed.57
Professor Justin McCarthy’s meticulous and objective 
research concludes, “We now know from reliable statistics that 
slightly less than 600,000 Anatolian Armenians died in the 
wars of 1912-22, not 1.5 or 2 million, as is often claimed . . . 
Civil war, forced migration of both Muslims and Armenians, 
inter-communal warfare, disease, and, specially starvation are 
listed in the documents of the time as causes of death . . . The 
statistics tell us that 2.5 million Anatolian Muslims died as 
well, most of them Turks. In the Six Vilayets, the Armenian 
homeland, more than one million Muslims died.”58
The above facts suggest that it was not Armenians but Turks 
and other Muslim population who suffered genocide during 
World War I in the territory of the Ottoman Empire. After 
failing to accomplish their ambitious plans in the Ottoman 
territories, the Armenian armed gangs withdrew to the South 
Caucasus to launch massacres of the Muslim population in the 
south, west, and north provinces of Azerbaijan.
57 The Bristol Papers: The War Diary of the U.S. Admiral Mark 
Lambert Bristol, Library of the U.S. Congress.
58 Justin McCarthy, “The Anatolian Armenians 1912-1922,” 
Proceedings of Symposium on Armenians in the Ottoman Empire 
and Turkiye (1912-1922) (Istanbul: Bogazici University 
Publications, 1984), p. 23.
D51E
CHAPTER 2
FROm FEBRUARY 
REVOLUTION TO THE 
COLLAPsE OF THE 
TRANsCAUCAsIAN sEIm
2.1. The special Transcaucasian Committee and the 
Transcaucasian Commissariat
THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION overthrew the house of Romanov, which had reigned for more than 
three hundred years, and paved the road for self-determination 
in the Southern Caucasus. The military operations between 
Russia and the Ottoman Empire on the Caucasus Front had 
an influence on the political and socioeconomical conditions 
in Azerbaijan, bolstered the national-democratic process, 
reinforced the idea of sovereignty, and, finally, strengthened the 
desire for independence.
Soon after the February Revolution, on March 3, the members 
of the Russian State Duma from the South Caucasus initiated 
the foundation of the Special Transcaucasian Committee in 
Tiflis. This committee included deputies from the key nations 
of the region. V. Kharlamov was appointed the chairman; M. 
Papajanov, M. Jafarov, K. Abashidze, and P. Pereverzev became 
D52E ANAR ISGENDERLI
the committee members.59 The Provisional Government of 
Russia vested the committee with plenary powers in the South 
Caucasus. In fact, the Special Transcaucasian Committee 
started to function as an administrative body of the provisional 
government. However, the committee was discredited among 
the local population due to unequal representation and an 
inconsistent agrarian policy. It failed to function as a powerful 
state entity.
In early March 1917, the provisional government 
established the Executive Committee of Public Entities as its 
highest authority in Baku. It was composed of representatives 
of Councils (or Soviets) of Workers’ Deputies, members of 
the city duma, and public organizations. Azerbaijanis in the 
executive committee were represented by Mammad Hasan 
Hajinski and Mammad Emin Rasulzade.60
Like other industrial cities of Russia, Baku also began to 
host Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies. On March 
7, 1917, Bolsheviks formed the Baku Soviet of Deputies 
consisting of fifty-two members. It is significant that there were 
no Azerbaijanis among the members of the Soviet.61 Stepan 
Shaumian was elected the chairman of the Baku Soviet in his 
absence. Unlike other cities of the South Caucasus, the Soviet 
had a strong position in Baku.
The provisional government put the integrity of Russia 
in the core of its nationality program. The most influential 
parties—the Cadets, the Socialist-Revolutionaries, and 
59 The Almanac of Azerbaijan Republic for 1920, p. 8. 
60 Ibid., p. 21.
61 Ibid., p. 23.
D53EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
the Mensheviks—entrusted the resolution of ethnic 
self-determination issues to a Constituent Assembly, yet to be 
convened, and declared that they would defend the principles 
of ethnic-cultural autonomy. After centuries of Russian rule, 
the Muslim peoples of the old empire had a different agenda. 
The slogan National-Territorial Autonomy for Nations within 
Russia was proclaimed and propped by democratic forces in 
the All-Russian Muslim Congress held in Moscow from May 1 
through May 11, 1917. One of the major issues discussed at the 
Congress was the future method of governance in Russia.62
The Musavat Party, freed to act after the February 
Revolution, stood out among the political forces in Azerbaijan. 
The Musavat backed the idea of national territorial autonomy for 
Azerbaijan within federative Russia and suffrage for Azerbaijani 
citizens from the age of twenty. In October 1917, the Musavat 
was strengthened by merging with the Turkic Federalist Party 
(Turk Edemi-Merkeziyyet). The demand for a wide national 
and territorial autonomy for Azerbaijan within democratic 
and federative Russia was one of the essential elements of the 
Musavat’s political program.63
By fall 1917, the national-democratic forces increased their 
political influence in Azerbaijan and laid claims to establishment 
of a nation-state. Along with other nations under the Russian 
dominion, Azerbaijanis cherished hopes of realizing the dream 
of an independent nation-state at the Constituent Assembly.
The Bolshevik Revolution in October 1917 strengthened 
independent aspirations among the minority nations in Russia. 
62 Caspii newspaper issue 84 (April 16, 1917). 
63 Ibid. 
D54E ANAR ISGENDERLI
The hopes for liberty were nourished by the fundamental 
approaches declared by Bolsheviks during their first days in 
power. The Decree on Peace, the Declaration of Rights of Peoples 
of Russia, and the Appeal to All Muslim Working Classes of 
Russia and the East furnished legal guarantees for the nations of 
the former empire to secede and establish independent states.64 
But soon, it appeared that these documents had been adopted 
by Bolsheviks solely for propaganda purposes and had no real 
implication.
In accordance with Shaumian’s plot, the Baku Soviet’s 
Executive Committee did all it could to hinder the development 
of democracy in Azerbaijan. For example, it kept the date of 
elections to the Baku Soviet secret until just before they were 
to be held. The goal was to prevent the increasing influence of 
the nationalist parties among the society and undermine their 
participation in the elections. Despite these hindrances, the 
Musavat heavily prevailed over the Socialist Revolutionaries 
(SR), Mensheviks, Bolsheviks, and the Armenian Dashnaks 
and gained an outstanding victory in the elections to Baku 
Soviet on October 22, 1917.65 After the elections, the 
Musavat took an active part in the authority-forming process 
in Azerbaijan.
On November 11, 1917, the key political forces of the South 
Caucasus—Georgian Mensheviks, Musavat, Dashnaktsutiun, 
and right-wing Socialist Revolutionaries—held a meeting in 
64 Vserossiiskoe uchreditelnoe sobraniie (1917 qod v dokumentax 
i materialax) [The All-Russian Constituent Assembly (1917 
documents and records)] (Moscow-Leningrad, 1930), p. 54. 
65 Almanac of Azerbaijan Republic for 1920, p. 19. 
D55EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
Tiflis and decided not to recognize the Bolshevik government 
of Russia. The parties came to an agreement to form a new 
Independent Transcaucasian Government (Transcaucasian 
Commissariat) until resolution of the authority-related issues 
at the All-Russian Constituent Assembly. The members 
of the new government were announced on November 15 
in Tiflis to include D. Donskoi (Commissar on Military 
Affairs), Fatali Khan Khoyski (Commissar of Education), S. 
Alexeev-Meskhiev (Commissar of Justice), Mammad Yusif 
Jafarov (Commissar of Commerce and Industry), Khudat Bey 
Melikaslanov (Commissar of Roads and Communications), 
Khalil bey Khasmammadov (Commissar of State Control), 
A. B. Neruchev (Commissar of Agriculture), Kh. Karchikian 
(Commissar of Finance), A. Ohanjanian (Commissar of 
Public Welfare), and A. Ter-Ghazarian (Commissar of Food 
Supplies).66 Georgian Menshevik E. P. Gegechkori became the 
head of the government. Thirty-four deputies were elected to the 
All-Russian Constituent Assembly from the South Caucasus, 
including twelve Muslims. The Transcaucasian Commissariat 
became a stepping-stone on the path to independence. The 
executive authorities of the new government proved powerless 
to stabilize the situation in the South Caucasus. All three 
nations and parties of the region formed their own national 
factions based on their representation in the commissariat. The 
Azerbaijani faction was established in late November on the 
initiative of M. E. Rasulzade. The decision-making process of 
the commissariat implied initial discussion of issues in meetings 
66 Ibid., p. 3.
D56E ANAR ISGENDERLI
of the factions. Only after that could final decisions be made, 
an essentially unworkable system.
As World War I continued and internal dissention 
abounded, the Transcaucasian Commissariat, ostensibly 
acting as an authority of the provisional government in 
the South Caucasus, set the preservation of the territorial 
integrity of the region as the foremost goal of its foreign policy. 
However, the commissariat’s foreign policy became a bone of 
contention among the national factions; discord was gradually 
aggravated.
The place of the Transcaucasian Commissariat in the 
war between Ottomans and Russians was uncertain since the 
commissariat had no troops to defend itself. On the other 
hand, the factions of the commissariat had distinct views on 
what position to take toward the Ottoman Empire: the Muslim 
faction opposed fighting against the Ottomans, the Georgians 
considered it acceptable to come to an agreement with Turks, 
but the Armenians could not make any decision in this regard. 
In these circumstances, an opportune moment arrived for 
Russia, which was interested in stopping military operations 
in the Caucasus and looked for mediators. Eventually, on 
December 5, 1917, an armistice was signed between the 
Transcaucasian Commissariat and the Ottoman Empire in 
Erzincan. The terms of the armistice remained obligatory for 
both parties until conclusion of a peace treaty. By signing the 
Erzincan armistice with the Transcaucasian Commissariat 
and not with Soviet Russia, the Ottoman Empire indirectly 
recognized it as an official party. After the Erzincan truce, 
Russia’s Caucasus Front disintegrated. Russian troops withdrew 
from the occupied lands of Eastern Anatolia. While retreating, 
D57EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
the uncontrolled Russian army handed the majority of its arms 
over to Dashnak military units; these weapons were later used 
to attack Azerbaijani and Anatolia Turks.67
On December 19, the Transcaucasian Commissariat voted 
for demobilization of the Russian army in the Caucasus and 
formation of national troops. Armenians were first to form 
an army, which consisted of three infantry divisions, cavalry 
brigades, and territorial regiments. It was easier for Armenians 
and Georgians to form national armies since the Russian 
army had earlier incorporated many Armenian and Georgian 
volunteer units on the Caucasus Front. The majority of soldiers 
released on the Transcaucasian Front were Armenians; besides 
selling arms, they also joined the newly formed Armenian army. 
The Armenian National Council was quite well-off to buy arms 
in large quantities from demobilized Russian soldiers.68
In contrast, the Muslim National Council encountered 
great difficulties in attempting to form a national army. 
Muslims had a disadvantage compared to the Armenians and 
Georgians: first, there were no Azerbaijanis in the Caucasus 
Army. Although the 1874 general conscription was legally 
applied to the population of the South Caucasus in 1886, the 
Azerbaijanis were not drafted into the Russian army because 
the czarist government distrusted Muslims. Instead, in 1887 
67 H. Baykara, Azərbaycan istiqlal mübarizəsi tarixi [History of 
the struggle for independence of Azerbaijan] (Istanbul, 1975; 
reprinted: Baku, 1992), p. 58.
68 S. E. Sef, Kak bol’sheviki prishli k vlasti v 1917-1918 gg. v Bakinskom 
raione [How Bolsheviks came to power in 1917-1918 in Baku] 
(Baku, 1927), p. 16. 
D58E ANAR ISGENDERLI
the goverment imposed conscription of wealth on Azerbaijanis, 
deliberately leaving them unengaged in the military service.
The Russian army also did not have a separate Muslim 
unit. It was impossible to form an Azerbaijani national army 
based on a core of ex-Russian soldiers. The Azerbaijani political 
leaders, who had envisaged problems in creating an Azerbaijani 
army, had earlier appealed to the Provisional Government of 
Russia with a request for establishment of a national army. 
However, the appeal was denied. After the respective decision 
of the Transcaucasian Commissariat to create national forces, 
the Muslim National Council initiated gatherings of Muslim 
servicemen in Ganja, Baku, Lankaran, and Tiflis.
Radical actions in the process of forming of Azerbaijani 
national units, such as the disarming of Russian soldiers 
in the Shamkir railroad station in early January 1918, 
gave rise to anxiety among leadership of the Baku Soviet, 
the Armenian National Council, and certain circles of the 
Georgian society. However, the decision on disarmament 
of Russian soldiers returning from the front line had been 
made by the Transcaucasian Commissariat. Its decision to 
retain arms within the borders of the South Caucasus was 
approved by all three national councils. The Transcaucasian 
Commissariat demanded from the headquarters of the South 
Caucasus Front to deliver all military equipment, supplies, 
and weapons to the newly formed national councils. The 
Georgian leadership of the Transcaucasian Commissariat 
refused to let Russian troops enter Tiflis and suggested 
that they set out for Baku through Ganja and then move 
toward Russia. The Transcaucasian Commissariat counted 
on voluntary handover of arms from some of the Russian 
D59EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
detachments moving through Azerbaijan to the members of 
the Muslim National Council in Shamkir and Deller railroad 
stations. In the beginning, the process of disarming, led by Dr. 
Khudadat Rafibeyov and Aslan Sefikurdski, went smoothly. 
After being disarmed, the soldiers were entrained and sent 
to Baku. However, after January 9, the troops refused to 
surrender their weapons. The conflict ignited from a quarrel 
between Georgian Abkhazava, who accompanied the troops 
from Tiflis, and Magalov, commander of the Muslim corps. 
Russian soldiers went out of control and launched fire from 
the trains, burning hundreds of Azerbaijani villages and 
killing the civilian population.
2.2. The Transcaucasian seim
By early 1918, the Transcaucasian Commissariat had 
completely lost its credibility in the region and was compelled 
to dissolve itself. The All-Russian Constituent Assembly was 
to open on January 5, 1918. However, delegates from the 
South Caucasus were unable to travel to Russia due to closure 
of the roads. Soon, it became clear that Russian Bolsheviks 
had imposed a ban on the work of the Constituent Assembly. 
In these circumstances, the deputies of the assembly from the 
South Caucasus convened in Tiflis on February 14, 1918, 
to announce the establishment of the Transcaucasian Seim, 
which assumed the supreme authority over the region. The 
Seim resolved to increase the number of deputies to the Seim 
in accordance with the ratio of votes previously received by 
each party at the elections to the All-Russian Constituent 
Assembly. On February 23, 1918, the Transcaucasian 
D60E ANAR ISGENDERLI
Seim, composed of factions led by the three major parties 
(Musavat, Menshevik, and Dashnaktsutiun), opened its 
first session. The Transcaucasian Seim included forty-four 
representatives of Azerbaijani political parties.69 Unlike the 
Georgian and Armenian factions, the Muslim faction was 
marked by disunity. At a time when massacres of Turks by 
Dashnak-Bolshevik gangs necessitated firm measures from 
the Azerbaijani representatives, they proved unable to act.
Contrary to the Armenian and Georgian deputies, the 
Azerbaijani members of the Seim had a belligerent position 
toward Shaumian’s Baku Soviet and fully supported the Ottoman 
policy in the Caucasus. On April 7, the Azerbaijani factions of 
the Seim except Hummet gathered to hold a comprehensive 
discussion of the dramatic situation in Azerbaijan. The 
speakers accused the government in Tiflis, composed mainly of 
Mensheviks, of acting in concert with Baku Bolsheviks, refusing 
to supply the small troop dispatched to Baku with necessary 
arms and ammunition and conducting secret negotiations 
with Vladimir Lenin. They called for immediate actions and 
agreed to summon a joint meeting of the Transcaucasian Seim 
together with other factions where they would announce 
the resolute position of the Muslim factions in the issue of 
self-determination of the Caucasus and demand resignation 
of Muslim ministers. Aslan Sefikurdski, leader of the Muslim 
Socialist Coalition, noted in his speech delivered at the Seim, 
“If the Transcaucasian government launched an offensive 
on Baku, the March massacres would not have happened. 
We plead with the Transcaucasian government to help us 
69 The Almanac of Azerbaijan Republic for 1920, p. 31.
D61EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
defend ourselves and defeat bolshevism. If the Transcaucasian 
government exists, we demand from it to support our rightful 
cause. If the government does not take decisive actions against 
this tragedy, we will wipe them out ourselves. Our history 
witnessed enormous bloodshed; this page of the history will 
be written with blood as well.”70 Mammad Emin Rasulzade 
was also very critical of the government: “If from this moment 
on the Transcaucasian Government and Transcaucasian Seim 
fail to satisfy the demands of the Socialist Coalition, it would 
be unacceptable for us to remain calm and work together.”71 
The ultimatum of the Azerbaijani delegates led to a stir in the 
Seim.
By the end of 1917, Germany and its allies forced Russia 
to retreat and abandon a part of her territory. On March 3, 
1918, Soviet Russia concluded the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk with 
Germany and signed away West Ukrainian and West Belarusian 
lands in favor of Germany; Russia also agreed to withdraw from 
Kars, Ardahan, and Batum and cede these territories to the 
Ottoman Empire. By signing this treaty, Russia was forced to 
renounce the Decree No. 13 On the Establishment of Turkish 
Armenia in the territory of the Ottoman Empire, signed earlier 
by Lenin on January 11, 1918. On April 10, the Transcaucasian 
delegation declared readiness to accept the conditions of the 
Treaty of Brest-Litovsk and continue negotiations on this 
basis. But this position led to acute disputes in the Seim: The 
Georgian deputies insisted on mobilization of all forces to 
continue the war against Ottomans and appeal for Russia’s help. 
70 SARA, col. 970, list 1, file 1, sheets 19-22. 
71 SARA, col. 970, list 1, file 1, sheets 2-24.
D62E ANAR ISGENDERLI
The Armenian faction’s position was to continue the war until 
victory and employ all means to defeat the Ottoman State.
The Armenians shifted the blame for the retreat of the Seim 
forces on the Azerbaijani delegates. The Trabzon Conference 
between the Ottoman authorities and the Transcaucasian 
Seim, which had begun on March 14, was interrupted upon 
the Armenian and Georgian demands. At the conference, 
the Transcaucasian Seim attempted to add several provisions, 
including restoration of the Russian-Ottoman prewar borders 
and granting of an Armenian autonomy within the territory of 
the Ottoman Empire in the negotiated peace treaty. However, 
the leader of the Ottoman delegation, the minister of foreign 
affairs Husein Rauf Bey, refused to accept these conditions. 
Turkey insisted on the recognition of the Brest-Litovsk Peace 
Treaty and the immediate withdrawal from Kars, Ardahan, 
and Batum. The Ottomans also demanded that the Seim break 
away from Russia and declare independence in order to be 
legally recognized as a party to the negotiations.
On April 14, the Georgian and Armenian delegates 
interrupted the Trabzon negotiations and declared the country 
in a state of war with Turkey. However, the joint Armenian and 
Georgian forces failed to repel the attack of the Ottoman army. 
The next day, April 15, the Ottomans captured Batum and 
began to move north toward Poti. Under these circumstances, 
the Armenian-Georgian majority in the Seim had no choice 
but to declare independence of the Caucasus and fully accept 
the conditions of the Brest-Litovsk Treaty. Events aggravated 
the divisions within the Transcaucasian Seim. The Armenian, 
Georgian, and Azerbaijani delegates in Batum arranged 
separate meetings with the Ottoman mission. In the meeting 
D63EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
with the Ottomans, the Azerbaijani delegates made fruitless 
attempts to talk them out of holding Batum. A Dashnak leader, 
Alexander Khatisov (Khatisyan), sent a representative to Rauf 
Bey to request a tête-à-tête meeting. As a precondition for the 
meeting, Khatisov demanded the return of Armenians who 
had left Ottoman territory and the establishment of Armenian 
autonomy there. In return for this concession, he offered his 
assistance to exert pressure on Georgians on the issue of Batum. 
However, Huseyn Rauf Bey rejected the proposal and refused 
to meet.72 On April 22, the Seim declared establishment of the 
Transcaucasian Federative Democratic Republic.
The arrival of Enver Pasha, the Ottoman minister of war, 
in Trabzon soon after closing of the Trabzon parley turned into 
a remarkable event. Enver Pasha’s position on the future of the 
South Caucasus entailed accession of the Muslim uyezds of 
Akhalkalaki and Akhalchiki to Turkey and the establishment 
of a federation or a confederation of Azerbaijan, Georgia, and 
Armenia, governed by the Transcaucasian Seim, in a close 
alliance with the Ottoman Empire. In case of a failure of 
the South Caucasian nations to unite in a federation, Enver 
Pasha’s fallback position was to arrange an alliance between the 
Ottoman Empire and Azerbaijan, which had common borders 
with each other, on the model of Austria-Hungary.73
In a meeting with Enver Pasha, the member of the Seim 
M. H. Hajinski inquired, “What is your opinion on the 
72 Dokumenty i materialy po vneshnei politike Zakavkaz’ia i Gruzii 
[Documents and records on the foreign policy of Transcaucasia 
and Georgia] (Tbilisi, 1969), p. 86.
73 SARA, col. 970, list 1, file 1, sheet 30.
D64E ANAR ISGENDERLI
establishment of independent Armenia?” Enver Pasha replied, 
“Turkey is not against an independent Armenian state, 
provided that Armenians abandon their intrigues against Turks 
in support of the British and Russian policies.”74
Declaration of an independent Democratic Republic of 
the South Caucasus did not change the situation in Azerbaijan. 
Bolsheviks in the east and Armenian units in the west of 
Azerbaijan launched mass killings of the local population. The 
Azerbaijani delegation had great expectations of the Batum Peace 
Conference, to be seen below, to stop the massacres. It was clear 
that the only way to liberate Baku from the Bolshevik forces and 
put an end to Dashnak atrocities was to request help from the 
Ottoman Empire. In a preconference speech, the member of the 
Muslim faction, Nasib Yusifbeyli, gave an objective evaluation 
of the grave situation in Azerbaijan. Yusifbeyli contended, “In 
such serious circumstances we have no choice but to appeal for a 
foreign aid. I am the most zealous defender of our independence, 
but at present we should rejoice that the help comes from our 
friend and brother—Turkey. Our neighbors may not like this, 
but we have no other choice . . . We cannot cripple ourselves just 
to please the others. Nevertheless, we have no right to give up the 
idea of independence of Azerbaijan.”75
Contentions among the three South Caucasian nations 
prevented unification in an independent common state. 
Deputies from Dashnaktsutiun officially offered a deal to the 
Muslim faction: they undertook to eliminate the Baku Soviet 
in exchange for an agreement “to keep Armenian military units 
74 SARA, col. 970, list 1, file 1, sheet 31.
75 SARA, col. 970, list 1, file 1, sheet 32.
D65EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
in Baku and form a multi-ethnic government in Baku rather 
than a purely Muslim government.” The Muslim members of 
the Seim flatly rejected this offer and declared that the future 
government in Baku would remain undivided.76 Khoyski 
proposed to lay the following conditions before Dashnaks: the 
authority in Baku should be surrendered to Azerbaijanis, Muslim 
military should be brought in to support the government, and 
the disarmed Armenian detachments should withdraw from 
the city. It was decided to protract the negotiations for tactical 
and political reasons and prevent any information leakage to 
Baku or the media.77
The talks between the Transcaucasian Republic and the 
Ottoman Empire resumed on the May 11, 1918, in Batum. 
The delegation from the South Caucasus included forty-five 
members and was led by the prime minister and the minister of 
foreign affairs Akaki Chkhenkeli. Rasulzade and Hajinski were 
vested with casting votes along with another four delegates. The 
Ottoman delegation was headed by the minister of justice, Halil 
Menteşe, and included, among others, the commander in chief 
of the Ottoman armies on the Caucasus Front, Mehmet Vehib 
Pasha. A German delegation led by General Otto von Lossow, 
the military attaché to Turkey, was present at the conference 
with observer status. The Turkish party initiated discussion of 
the draft treaty Peace and Friendship between the Ottoman 
Empire and the Confederative Republic of Transcaucasia. The 
document included some new requirements and proposals by 
the Ottomans that caused disagreement among the delegation 
76 SARA, col. 970, list 1, file 1, sheet 36.
77 SARA, col. 970, list 1, file 1, sheet 38.
D66E ANAR ISGENDERLI
of the South Caucasus. The Azerbaijani delegates defended the 
Turkish proposals; they believed that annexation of the entire 
territory of Akhalkalaki and Ahyska uyezds and parts of Surmeli, 
Alexandropol, and Echmiedzin uyezds (where Armenians 
constituted a significant portion of the local population) by the 
Ottoman Empire would strengthen Azerbaijan’s position in the 
South Caucasus. Appeals from the Caucasian Turks for unity 
under the Ottoman rule, continuing murders of Azerbaijanis 
by Armenians, imminence of occupation of Ganja by the 
Baku Soviet troops, and pro-Turkish feelings were the decisive 
factors for support of the Ottoman position by the Azerbaijani 
delegates.78
The political strife in the course of the Batum Conference 
later continued within the Transcaucasian Seim. Conflict 
within the Seim escalated for a number of reasons: proposals of 
the South Caucasian delegation were rejected by the Ottomans, 
whose troops were marching toward Armenia; Halil Bey Menteşe 
refused German mediation, and the German delegation left 
Batum; and the Muslim faction threatened to secede from the 
Seim in case of failure of the Transcaucasian government to 
take measures to oust Shaumian’s regime from Baku.
These events signaled the approach of a crucial stage in the 
history of the South Caucasus. The Transcaucasian delegation, 
seeking a way out of the situation, shared the opinion that 
potentials for unification under a single government had been 
exhausted. Georgians, offered with the opportunity to establish 
78 Şahin Ergün, Trabzon ve Batum konfransları ve anlaşmaları 
(1917-1918) [Conferences and treaties of Trabzon and Batum 
(1917-1918)] (Ankara, 2002), p. 96. 
D67EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
a unified state with the Azerbaijanis, rejected the proposal and 
decided to build an independent Georgian state under German 
protection. At the conference, the German envoys confidentially 
met with the Georgian delegation and promised military and 
economic aid. As they agreed, three thousand German troops 
entered the Georgian port of Poti at the time of the conference 
in Batum. In the meantime, on May 17, the Ottoman army 
pushed through and occupied Gyumri.
The Georgian faction, substantially aided by the Germans, 
decided to leave the Transcaucasian Federative Democratic 
Republic and declare independence. In these circumstances, 
the Muslim faction of the Seim held an extraordinary meeting 
on May 25, 1918, in the former Governor’s Palace of Tiflis. 
The official statement of the faction touched upon the changes 
in the political situation in the South Caucasus and announced 
that the Georgian faction was conducting private talks in 
Batum and preparing to declare independence of Georgia. 
Besides the Azerbaijani deputies, the chairman of the Seim, 
Nikoloz Chkheidze, and Seim members Irakli Tsereteli and 
Evgeni Gegechkori were also present in the meeting. Tsereteli 
was first to take the floor: “The socio-democratic faction 
and, in general, all Georgian deputies of the Seim have come 
to a conclusion that the attempts to unite the nations of the 
South Caucasus under the slogan of independence completely 
failed. The fact of collapse of the Transcaucasian Government 
is evident. The lack of unity was clearly manifested during 
the negotiations with Turkey. At present, we have no another 
option but to declare the independence of Georgia.”79 The 
79 SARA, col. 970, list 1, file 1, sheet 43A.
D68E ANAR ISGENDERLI
chairman of the Seim, Chkheidze, expressed his deep regret 
for the downfall of the Seim, which was to ensure unity of the 
Transcaucasian nations. Khoyski replied that if this was a will of 
the Georgian people, then Azerbaijanis had no right to hamper 
it; and under these conditions, Azerbaijanis had no choice but 
to make the same decision.80 After the Georgian delegation left 
the meeting, Khoyski stated that he had earlier spoken to Kh. 
Karchikian, a member of the Seim. From their conversation, 
it became clear that if Georgia was to declare independence, 
Armenia would follow the same path. After long discussions, 
the meeting resolved that if Georgia declared independence, 
Azerbaijan would declare independence as well.81
The complicated situation in Azerbaijan forced the national 
democratic forces, which were not satisfied with a role of a 
passive observer, to take decisive measures. Azerbaijan counted 
on the Ottomans to help.
The last meeting of the Transcaucasian Seim was held on 
May 26. The Georgian deputies left the Seim and declared 
independence of Georgia. The Georgian faction laid the entire 
blame for the dissolution of the Transcaucasian Republic upon 
the Muslim faction. The stance of the Georgians was that they 
would not work with the Muslim faction in the Seim since 
the latter allegedly held a pro-Turkish position. The member 
of Transcaucasian Seim, Shafi Rustambeyov, entirely rejecting 
these arguments of the Georgian faction, said, “We consider that 
there are no convincing and objective grounds for separation at 
the current difficult and responsible moment of joint political 
80 SARA, col. 970, list 1, file 1, sheet 45. 
81 SARA, col. 970, list 1, file 1, sheet 44.
D69EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
existence of Transcaucasia, and factors presented by Georgian 
delegates are quite lame.”82
The day after the collapse of the Transcaucasian Seim, on 
May 27, its Azerbaijani members held another extraordinary 
meeting in Tiflis to discuss the daunting situation in the region. 
The meeting was chaired by M. Y. Jafarov. Representatives 
of the Musavat, the democratic group of nonpartisans; 
the Muslim Socialist Block, Ittihad; the Muslim Social 
Democrats; and the Hummet (Mensheviks)—all former Seim 
members—took part in the meeting. The meeting was opened 
by Nasib Yusifbeyli, member of the Transcaucasian delegation 
in the peace negotiations with the Ottoman State in Batum. 
Yusifbeyli reported that the Ottomans were determined to 
support the independence of the Transcaucasian Republic and 
were ready to do their best for the strengthening, widening, and 
flourishing of the young statehood. He voiced the position of 
the Turkish delegation that unity and solidarity of the nations 
of the South Caucasus were the main guarantee of flourishing 
Transcaucasian statehood. “We have to cede some land to 
Armenians to achieve this goal.”83 Following Yusifbeyli’s report, 
the meeting unanimously passed a resolution to declare the 
Muslim faction as an Interim National Council of Muslims of 
the South Caucasus. 84
Mammad Emin Rasulzade, who was at the time in Batum 
holding peace talks with the Ottomans, was elected the 
chairman of the National Council by secret ballot; H. Aghayev 
82 SARA, col. 970, list 1, file 1, sheet 45.
83 SARA, col. 970, list 1, file 1, sheets 46-47.
84 Ibid., sheet 26.
D70E ANAR ISGENDERLI
and M. Seyidov were elected vice chairmen. M. Mahmudov 
and R. Vekilov became secretaries of the Council. F. Khoyski 
was unanimously elected the chairman of the government.85
The meeting decided to send a delegation composed of 
Yusifbeyli, Shafi bey Rustambeyov, and Khosrov Pasha Sultanov 
from Tiflis to Ganja in order to form the Interim National 
Council and inform of its duties.
85 Ibid., sheet 27.
D71E
CHAPTER 3
mAssACREs OF TURks AND  
OTHER NATIONALITIEs
THE DECLARATION OF independence in 1918 enabled Azerbaijan to investigate crimes against Turks 
and other Muslim population in their own homeland. One 
of the significant decisions of the newly formed government 
was the establishment of an Extraordinary Investigation 
Commission on June 15, 1918, to investigate crimes committed 
by Dashnak gangs. M. H. Hajinski, the minister of foreign 
affairs, noted, in his speech at the meeting of the government, 
that for four months, Armenian extorters had been committing 
atrocities against the civilian Muslim population, taking 
their lives and belongings. Hajinski stated that as a result 
of misinformation, nations of Europe had a wrong image 
of the ongoing processes and that these factors necessitated 
the establishment of a special commission. He argued that 
the entity should be vested with extraordinary authorities. 
Documents to be collected by the commission should be 
translated into the Azerbaijani, Russian, English, French, 
and German languages.86 Lawyer Alakbar Khasmammadov 
was appointed the chairman of the investigation commission 
(later the chairman of the Azerbaijani Chamber of Appeals), 
86 SARA, col. 1061, list 1, file 95, sheet 2.
D72E ANAR ISGENDERLI
Ismayil Shahmaliyev and Andrey Novatsky became members 
of the Ganja District Court, Nasreddin Sefikurdski was 
appointed the assistant public prosecutor of the Ganja District 
Court, and Nikolay Mikhailov and Mirza Javad Akhunzade 
from the Ganja Migration Office were also included in the 
Commission.87
Though the Extraordinary Investigation Commission was 
formed within the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the commission 
was attached to the Ministry of Justice by the decision of 
Prime Minister Khoyski on September 22, 1918. The assistant 
public prosecutor of Baku District Court Alexander Kluge, 
the member of the grand jury Mammadkhan Tekinski, the 
investigator for particularly important cases of the Ganja 
District Court Mehiyeddin Shahmaliyev, the member of the 
Baku Guberniya District Court Hidayet Sutanov, members 
of the grand jury Aley Litovsky, Cheslav Klossovsky, lawyer 
Abbasali Haji Irzayev, and the member of Baku District Court 
B. Yusifbeyov sat on the commission at various times.88
The Extraordinary Investigation Commission exerted its 
best efforts to investigate grievous crimes of Dashnak gangs till 
April 1920. Hundreds of survivors were interrogated; numerous 
material evidences and photo-documents were collected.
An information sheet drawn up by a member of the 
commission, Klossovsky, on August 27, 1919, confirmed 
that the documented evidence of crimes committed by the 
Armenians against the Turks and other Muslims comprised 
thirty-six volumes on 3,500 sheets. The documents that 
87 SARA, col. 1061, list 1, file 5, sheet 1.
88 Ibid., sheet 2.
D73EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
proved the violence against the Muslim population of Baku 
and its suburbs filled six volumes (740 sheets in total). Four 
volumes (or 340 sheets) of evidence were collected on atrocities 
in Kurdemir and other villages of the Goychay uyezd, seven 
volumes (or 925 sheets) on the Armenian crimes in the town 
and uyezd of Shamakhi, two volumes (or 80 sheets) on the 
destroyed villages of the Zangezur uyezd, and three volumes (or 
45 sheets) of documents on massacres in the town and uyezd 
of Guba.89
The bourgeois-democratic revolution in Russia dethroned 
the house of Romanov on February 17, 1917, and led to the 
establishment of a provisional government. The provisional 
government appealed to all nations of Russia and declared that 
with the end of the Great War, it would consider the issue of 
national self-determination. However, due to the Bolshevik 
takeover of the power in October 1917, the plan never 
materialized. Bolsheviks began restoration of the former empire 
under the ideology of the establishment of worker-peasant 
authority.
In late 1917 to early 1918, Baku became an arena of 
the open fight of Dashnak-Bolshevik groups against the 
Azerbaijani leaders. In December 1917, Stepan Shaumian, 
who was appointed an Extraordinary Commissar of the 
Caucasus by Vladimir Lenin, chairman of the Russian Council 
of People’s Commissars, arrived in Baku from Tiflis together 
with Grigory Korganov’s Military Revolutionary Committee. 
Shaumian was fervent in keeping soldiers, returning from the 
Caucasus Front, in Baku instead of sending them to Russia. All 
89 SARA, col. 100, list 22, file 791, sheet 132.
D74E ANAR ISGENDERLI
these issues yet more escalated the situation in the city. Joint 
Bolshevik-Dashnak forces, fearing the increasing influence 
of the Musavat that was at the head of the Azerbaijani 
national movement, declared Baku the heart of the struggle 
between revolution and counterrevolution. The Baku Soviet, 
dominated by the Bolsheviks and Dashnaks, had twenty 
thousand troops called Red Army in its disposal.
3.1. The massacres in Baku
The political situation in Baku was very strained in March 
1918. The victory of the Musavat in the elections to the Baku 
Soviet seriously dismayed both Bolsheviks and Dashnaks. 
The Musavat came out as the most influential political party 
in the South Caucasus and began to struggle for the political 
authority and territorial sovereignty of Azerbaijan. Bolsheviks, 
under the leadership of Shaumian and together with the leaders 
of the Armenian National Council and the Dashnaktsutiun, 
launched a hostile campaign against the Musavat. Shaumian 
obtained information on the poorly armed and outnumbered 
Azerbaijani national movement in Baku and commenced 
preparations for a massacre “to teach a lesson to the Muslims.”
On March 29, 1918, Bolsheviks disarmed a small Muslim 
crew onboard the steamship Evelina in Baku; the incident was 
exploited to start an ethnic massacre against Azerbaijanis.
Earlier that month, on March 17, a small group from 
the Muslim Division—forty-eight servicemen—had brought 
the body of Mahammad Taghiyev (son of an oil baron, Haji 
Zeynalabdin Taghiyev), who died from negligent handling of 
a weapon, to Baku. The arrival of the armed soldiers caused a 
D75EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
stir among the Bolsheviks. The group was planning to return 
to Lankaran on the Evelina after the funeral. Upon departure 
of the steamship, it was held back by the armed Bolsheviks 
who requested everyone onboard to disarm. When the soldiers 
onboard refused to surrender, the Bolsheviks fired rifles and 
machine guns on the vessel. The incident ended with the 
disarming of the Azerbaijani servicemen by the Bolsheviks.
The next day, on March 31, at four in the afternoon, a 
delegation from several Azerbaijani parties appeared before the 
Executive Committee of the Soviet and asked for arms for the 
Muslims. Prokofy Japaridze, the chairman of the Executive 
Committee of the Baku Soviet, asked if this request could 
be considered an ultimatum, and the delegation declared 
that they had no other interest than to cool the passions of 
the Azerbaijani masses. Japaridze assured the Muslim leaders 
that he would take the matter to the Military-Revolutionary 
Committee of the Caucasian Army and support the granting 
of arms to the Muslims.90
The following day, Armenian soldiers appeared in the 
southern part of the city. They began digging trenches and 
erecting barricades from sand and stones. The same day, the 
former mayor of Baku, Ter-Mikaelian, came to the meeting of 
Azerbaijani parties held in the building of the Muslim Charity 
and declared on behalf of the Armenian National Council and 
the Dashnaktsutiun Party that in case of a Muslim uprising 
against the Bolsheviks, Armenians would join Azerbaijanis in 
dislodging the Bolsheviks from the city. Yet on March 31, early 
90 Ronald Grigor Suny, The Baku Commune, 1917-1918: Class and 
Nationality in the Russian Revolution, p. 217.
D76E ANAR ISGENDERLI
in the morning, the Muslim quarters of the city underwent 
attacks. The Muslims had been betrayed by the Armenian 
leaders. On the eve of the carnage, all Armenians who lived 
in the Muslim neighborhoods had moved to the Armenian 
quarters of the city. However, other Christian residents, namely 
Russians and Georgians, stayed in the Muslim quarters.
The slaughters in Baku had been elaborated by the 
Dashnaktsutiun and the Armenian National Council at the 
end of 1917. The Armenian leadership made repeated attempts 
to instigate Azerbaijanis to an armed confrontation with 
Bolsheviks; the goal was to physically annihilate the Muslim 
population. Killings and wrecking in the Muslim quarters 
were committed by the organized Armenian military units in a 
prearranged and coordinated manner. On January 6-9, 1918, 
Azerbaijani troops disarmed Russian detachments returning 
from the Caucasus Front at Shamkir railroad station near 
Ganja. Despite the fact that the Azerbaijani troops were guided 
by a special directive of the Transcaucasian Commissariat, the 
detachment commanders refused to surrender their weapons 
under the influence of Bolshevik propaganda. The confrontation 
escalated to a clash of arms with dead and injured on both 
sides. The incident was utilized by Shaumian, who laid the 
entire guilt on the Azerbaijani troops and attempted a mass 
slaughter. However, he was forced to forgo the idea in the view 
of unfavourable balance of forces.
In the early evening of March 31, a Revolutionary Defense 
Committee was formed to coordinate the operations against the 
Azerbaijanis. The committee’s membership included Shaumian, 
Japaridze, Korganov, Sukhartsev, Sahakian, Melik-Eolchian, and 
Dr. Narimanov. In its first proclamation, the committee declared 
D77EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
itself “the highest military-political organ” in Baku, accountable 
only to the Soviet.91 As soon as the conflict between the Soviet 
forces and the Muslims began, the Armenian community declared 
its neutral position in this confrontation. Clearly, the side that 
could win the Armenian military units over to its cause would have 
the preponderance of strength and could be assured of victory.92 
Tactically, the Dashnaktsutiun Party and the Armenian National 
Council rejected alliance with the Musavat. The Armenian 
National Council held negotiations with the Soviet leaders and 
drew their forces to the Armenian quarters of the city.
Involvement of the Armenian military units initiated by 
Shaumian, the head of the Baku Soviet, yet more widened the 
scope of the massacre. Under the pretext of protection of the 
Bolsheviks, Armenian military units began to slaughter the 
Azerbaijani population. It is noteworthy that both the Baku 
Soviet troops consisted of Armenians. The Dashnaks in the 
Soviet, Sako Sahakian, Arakelian, and others flatly opposed the 
admittance of Muslim workers to the Bolshevik detachments. 
While they prevented the Azerbaijanis from forming a national 
army, the Dashnaks conducted their Armenian nationalist policy 
under the veil of the Soviet ideology and prepared for massacres 
against the Azerbaijani population of Baku, Shamakhi, and 
other provinces of Azerbaijan. The Armenian National Council 
had a special role in these atrocities. The February Revolution 
of 1917 enabled Armenian political organizations to establish 
Armenian National Councils driven with anti-Azerbaijani 
91 Izvestiia, no. 64 (286) (April 2, 1918); cited in Suny, op. cit., p. 
218.
92 Arev, no. 63 (April 10, 1918); cited in Suny, op. cit., p. 218.
D78E ANAR ISGENDERLI
agenda in Baku, Ganja, Shusha, Nakhchivan, Julfa, Ordubad, 
and Zangezur. These councils were utilized as a political tool to 
propagandize and mobilize the Armenian population.
The right wing of the Armenian National Council in Baku 
published a twice-weekly newspaper Nashe Vremya with financial 
support of the Armenian bourgeois class. The newspaper was 
notable for its extreme chauvinistic position, slanderous and 
subversive campaigns against the Muslim population, and 
justifying the crimes committed by the Dashnak gangs.
In early March 1918, the Armenian National Council in 
Baku issued an appeal “to Armenian fighters” where it called the 
zinvors (i.e., members of Armenian terrorist groups) for armed 
struggle against the “eternal foe,” referring to Turkic population.
When the ethnic conflict ignited in Baku, the Armenian 
National Council initially announced its neutrality and 
noninvolvement. However, when the situation changed in favor of 
the Baku Soviet, the council transferred its troops at the command 
of the Revolutionary Defense Committee. Azerbaijanis underwent 
attacks and lootings in Shamakhi, Goychay, Ganja, Nukha, Gazakh, 
Lankaran, Salyan—in short, in all provinces of Azerbaijan.
A. N. Kvasnik, a Jewish resident of Baku and an eyewitness 
of the events, testified during interrogation by the Investigation 
Committee: “The events in Baku on March 17 through March 
21 [by Julian calendar] of this year can be described with a quiet 
conscience as a violent attempt upon Muslims committed by 
Armenians with the purpose to annihilate Muslims first of all 
in Baku, and then in other places, to loot their properties and 
to seize their belongings.”93
93 SARA, col. 1061, list 1, file 95, sheet 2.
D79EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
The unbridled and savage Armenian gangs used the most 
brutal methods to kill Azerbaijani civilians. Alexander Kluge, 
member of the Extraordinary Investigation Commission, wrote 
in a report titled “On the Case of Violence against the Muslim 
Population of Baku,” “Well-armed and trained Armenian 
soldiers attacked using numerous machine-guns . . . Armenians 
were braking in the Muslims’ houses, killing and cutting them 
into pieces by swords and daggers, stabbing with bayonets, 
throwing children into burning houses, ruthlessly tossing up 
infants, whose parents had been already murdered, on the tips 
of bayonets; they killed all.” Besides killing the Muslims, the 
Armenian bashers ruined their properties and carried away 
valuable belongings.94 Later, fifty-seven corpses of Muslim 
women and girls were found commonly buried at one site 
alone; their ears and noses were cut, and abdomens were torn. 
When the Armenians had no time to kill women, they tied 
them to one another by their braided hair and carried them 
away on carts, crippling the women by beating them with the 
butts of their rifles.95
Based on the documents of the investigation commission, 
approximately eleven thousand Azerbaijanis were killed in 
Baku in March of 1918. Bodies of many people were missing; 
according to witnesses’ testimonies, Armenians threw corpses 
into burning houses, the sea, and wells to cover up the crimes.96 
94 State Archive on Political Parties and Public Movements of the 
Republic of Azerbaijan (SAPPPMRA), col.277, list 2, file 16, 
sheet 20.
95 Ibid., sheet 18.
96 Ibid., sheet 18.
D80E ANAR ISGENDERLI
Jewelry and possessions to the tune of four hundred million 
rubles were confiscated from the Azerbaijani population of 
Baku. Many shrines and historical sites were ruined. The Tezepir 
Mosque was damaged by long-range shellfire. The Ismailiyye 
Building, one of the finest examples of Muslim architecture in 
the city, was burnt down.97
This barbarism is described in the papers of the investigation 
commission: “On March 18, 1918 [by the Julian calendar] an 
Armenian officer with three Armenian soldiers entered the 
building of the Ismailiyye Muslim Charity from the blind 
alley between the building and the editorial office of Kaspii. 
Soon fire and smoke appeared in the windows of the building. 
Ismailiyye, the pride of Baku Muslims and one of the most 
charming landmarks of the city, was destroyed by fire. There 
was nobody to put out the fire, because Muslims could not 
leave their houses due to the risk to be killed by machine-gun 
fire.”98 That officer responsible was a notorious leader of the 
Dashnaktsutiun Party, Tatevos Amirov.
Looters burned the buildings of the editorial office of 
Kaspii, the Dagestan hotel, and the Iskenderiyye and Ismailiyye 
buildings.99 Azerbaijanis were not the only people that were 
massacred; other Muslims of the Caucasus were abused as 
well. The Baku Muslim Charity and the Caucasus Muslim 
Committees were headquartered in the Ismailiyye building; all 
their funds and documents were kept there, and the building 
was also utilized as the place for meetings and assemblies 
97 Ibid., files 13-16, sheets 25-26.
98 Ibid.
99 Ibid., sheet 18.
D81EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
of Muslims. The editorial office of Kaspii, besides its main 
function, also published books in the Azerbaijani language. 
Five thousand copies of the Quran had been kept in the 
building prior to the fire; they were burned to ashes along with 
the building.100
Armenian intellectuals and youth were engaged in the 
March massacres side by side with the well-trained military 
units. This is witnessed in the documents compiled during the 
investigation: “Representatives of all classes of the Armenian 
people felt obliged to take part in this ‘war.’ Engineers, doctors, 
and clerks were among them; in short, all strata of the Armenian 
society were performing their ‘civic duty.’”101
On March 24, ten armed sailors, led by the pilot Rozenblum, 
were sent to Kazim Akhundov, the second in command of the 
steamship Nikolai Buniatov, to solicit protection of the hillside 
quarters of Baku—Chenberekend. The next day, on March 
25, Akhundov ordered the sailors to collect corpses from the 
Nikolayevskaya Street. They alone collected the bodies of 3 
Muslim schoolboys and 11 schoolgirls, 1 Russian woman and 8 
Russian men, 3 Muslim boys aged three to five, 19 female Persian 
nationals, and 67 Azerbaijanis of various trades who had been 
slaughtered with swords or stabbed with bayonets. In addition, 
6,748 corpses of Azerbaijani men, women, and children were 
brought to the old quay of the Vulkan Company.102 Akhundov 
testified that he took his comrade, fitter Vladimir Sokolov, to a 
brickyard (Kerpich-khana) where they took three photos. The 
100 SARA, col.100, list 3, file 91, sheet 7.
101 SARA, col.100, list 2, file 650, sheets 9-10.
102 SAPPPMRA, col.277, list 3, file 15, sheet 20.
D82E ANAR ISGENDERLI
first photo was of a female corpse: the woman had a bullet 
wound on the head, five bayonet wounds on the body, and a 
sword wound on the right collarbone. There was a child on her 
right breast, still alive. The infant, who was trying to suck his 
mother, had a bayonet wound on the leg. In the second photo, 
a two-year-old child was nailed to the wall. It is clearly seen 
from the nail head that it had been hammered into the boy 
with a stone left nearby. The third photo was of the corpse of a 
teenage girl with clear marks of a group rape.103 At the entrance 
of the fourth house, Akhundov and Sokolov encountered a 
terrible sight: on the floor of a large room, there were corpses 
of a twenty-two- to twenty-three-year-old woman, two elderly 
women, a girl and a boy aged eight or nine, and an infant. 
The infant’s limbs had been chewed by dogs. Sokolov, deeply 
troubled by the scene, was not able to take any photos.104
Looters had no pity even for the people they personally 
knew. For example, on March 20, Stepan Lalayev, with a group 
of Armenian soldiers, broke into the house of Dr. Beybala 
Sultanov and killed him with a handgun. Then Lalayev went 
down to the yard and shot a Muslim yard keeper, his wife, and 
his two-year-old son. A group of some thirty armed Armenians 
broke into the apartment of Mashadi Ahmed Rahim-Oghlu and 
took away valuables in the amount of 34,840 rubles. Mashadi 
Ahmed identified his neighbors—tailor Hayk and shopkeeper 
Yekhush—among the criminals.105
103 SARA, col.100, list 3, file 16, sheet 14.
104 Ibid., sheet 15.
105 SARA, col.100, list 4, file 10, sheet 4.
D83EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
The tragic events in Baku caused serious damage to the 
city. The outbreak of an epidemic killed thousands of people, 
and water and food supplies were interrupted. Grocery stores 
and bazaars were empty. All the remaining food was taken 
away by looters. Press headlines—Population Suffers from 
Hunger—clearly depicted the situation.106
The first book on the 1918 massacres of Azerbaijanis was 
written by Mahammad Muradzade and published in 1919 in 
Baku.107 Muradzade himself was an eyewitness and a survivor 
of Armenian savageries. The author described the massacres, 
using his family as an example, and gave a clear picture of 
Armenian vandalism and ferocity in Baku and in provinces of 
Azerbaijan. The author writes, “A heartbreaking scene, which I 
witnessed, still continues to arise in my mind. That day I saw 
several men carrying a short ladder on their shoulders with a 
corpse wrapped in a colorful carpet. That corpse was my poor 
father’s—the figurative victim of the March days. During those 
days even this sight was envied by many. The bodies of many 
martyrs were missing after the massacre. Mothers and sisters 
were bitterly grieving. That day more than half of Baku was 
mourning. Many families were slaughtered with poisoned 
daggers without mercy even for infants. There was no house 
where cry and wail were not heard.”108
The population of the cul-de-sac, a typical street in the 
Muslim quarters where the author lived, turned to Jews for 
106 Ibid., sheet 3.
107 M. Muradzade, Mart Hadise-I elimesi [The March events] (Baku, 
1919; 1996).
108 Ibid., pp.27-29.
D84E ANAR ISGENDERLI
help. As a matter of fact, the Jewish population gave a helping 
hand and saved the lives of thousands of Muslims during the 
massacre in Baku. The majority of witnesses who testified before 
the investigation committee were Jews. The author, sheltered 
by a Jewish family by his father’s request, gives the following 
description of the events: “It was nearly one o’clock. A clatter 
and then several shots sounded on the roof. At this point I saw 
my younger brother running towards us and shouting. Suddenly 
someone furiously knocked at the door and windows, and then 
I heard several rifle-shots. My father’s voice no longer came 
through.”109 The Dashnak detachments besieged the Muslim 
quarter and began to slaughter the population without any 
distinction. Not only men but also women were taken hostage. 
By doing this, the Dashnaks openly expressed hatred toward 
Azerbaijanis: “The thugs led away two female hostages like an 
animal flock. Then the other mobsters ransacked and looted 
the houses and the yards. They questioned the Jews about the 
Muslim abodes and attempted to enter into the house. The 
Jews refused to let them in and said the house belonged to them 
and there were no Muslims inside; they said that Muslims had 
lived next door, pointing at our house, but all of them had been 
killed an hour ago. Our abandoned house, which had already 
been looted once, was plundered again by these gangsters.”110 
Besides slaughtering Muslims, the Dashnak-Bolshevik gangs 
herded those whom they had not been able to kill into public 
buildings and abused them.
109 Ibid., p. 16.
110 Ibid., pp. 20-21.
D85EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
According to the author, on the third day of the massacre, 
Jewish children began to scurry through the quarters to find 
out who was still alive. When they returned, they described 
what they had seen. News spread that “martyrs lied in bloody 
deathbeds, scattered along streets like fish dumped on the shore. 
Vampires of the neighboring nation [Armenians] searched, 
found and killed Turkic-Muslim children, who had been hiding 
in nooks. They intruded into Russian and Jewish dwellings 
and forced the inhabitants to surrender Muslims on pain of 
death.”111 The author has a description of the role of the Jewish 
youth in sheltering of Azerbaijanis: “Several Jewish youngsters, 
formerly enlisted in the old Russian army, took up arms and 
claimed that there were no Muslims in the neighborhood and 
that they had been appointed by the commander to defend 
several houses from criminal intrusion; they kept alert against 
any infringement. These young men defended their families 
from assaults and rescued us from the arms of death.”112
The Bolshevik-Dashnak alliance led by Shaumian claimed 
that the total death toll during the March events was only three 
thousand. According to Muradzade, all streets of Baku were 
packed with bodies: “Rumble of carts, rushing to clean the 
streets from countless corpses after the 2-day war, set the city 
in anxiety.”113
After the Bolshevik invasion in 1920, not only was this 
tragedy forgotten, but it was also described as a civil war where 
nationalists were viewed as the main culprits of the hostilities. 
111 Ibid., p. 23.
112 Ibid.
113 Ibid., p. 24.
D86E ANAR ISGENDERLI
Shaumian and other bloodthirsty authors of the massacre were 
proclaimed national heroes; the central streets of Baku, where 
the majority of Azerbaijanis had been slaughtered, were named 
in the honor of these criminals.
Another eyewitness of the events, Boris Baikov, who lived in 
Baku from 1895 to 1919 prior to emigrating to Berlin, described 
the March massacres in his Memories of the Revolution in 
Transcaucasia. In his book, Baikov expressed his position on the 
situation in the South Caucasus prior to the March events and 
wrote that the collapse of czarism in February 1917 cleared the 
way for independence of the South Caucasian nations. At that 
time, Armenians, Georgians, and Azerbaijanis sought self-rule 
within the borders of Russia. On the other hand, every political 
force in Russia had its own distinct view on the problem of 
independence of these nations. The Bolsheviks’ declaration on 
granting rights to nations for their self-determination remained 
only a slogan. In reality, the Bolsheviks struggled to preserve 
the former Russian borders and fill them with a new content. 
The October Revolution cleared all doubts and confirmed the 
Bolsheviks’ intentions. Baikov wrote, “The entire oil [supply] 
in Czarist Russia was supplied from Baku. The main bulk of 
the oil was forwarded by sea and through the Volga River to the 
Russian cities. Trade ships resumed operations in the middle 
of March, when it began thawing. The Bolsheviks’ primary 
concern was to occupy Baku in the short run.”114
The author continued, “The Bolsheviks did not keep back 
their intentions. They began to accumulate military units 
and arms from Transcaucasia in one place. The Caspian Fleet 
114 Baikov, op. cit., p. 119.
D87EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
was controlled by the Bolsheviks.”115 Baikov argued that the 
Bolsheviks possessed enough force to seize power in Baku, but 
this task would be hampered if Dashnaks joined forces with the 
Musavat. However, the Bolsheviks were sure that the Dashnaks 
would not support the Musavat on the issue of power. Baikov 
writes, “The sitting of the city Duma was held on March 24, in 
the evening. At 7 p.m. the meeting was disrupted by the news 
that the Bolsheviks’ attempt to disarm the steamship Evelina 
at its departure for Lankaran led to a skirmish. At 11 p.m. 
the Muslim troops on the ship surrendered their arms to the 
Bolsheviks.”116
A few days before the massacre, the Armenian National 
Council officially declared that in case of a conflict between 
Muslims and Bolsheviks, Armenians would maintain neutrality. 
But on the next day, when Bolsheviks refused to return the 
arms to Muslims, the dubious behavior of the Armenians gave 
rise to a concern. The author wrote, “I lived in the downtown, 
therefore no action escaped my notice. On March 24 at 4 
p.m. the Bolsheviks and the Musavatists began negotiations 
on return of arms. We thought that the talks took a normal 
course. But an hour later, at 5 p.m., the Muslim quarters on 
the hill-side underwent shell-fire from the sea. Terrible fights 
started in the city.”117 As the author describes, “The city went 
through hell during those four days. On the first day the 
Muslims overpowered [their attackers], but on the next day, the 
Bolsheviks outbalanced them and began an unequal battle.” 
115 Ibid., p. 120.
116 Ibid.
117 Ibid., p. 122.
D88E ANAR ISGENDERLI
Baikov emphasizes the critical moment in the fighting: “The 
Armenian National Council tried to protect the Armenian 
population from the battle. But the Dashnaktsutiun Party 
rendered a decision on engagement of the Armenian troops 
on the Bolsheviks’ side. On the second day the course of the 
battles changed and the majority of Armenians began to fight 
against Muslims.”118
According to the author, there was a confrontation between 
the Armenian National Council and the Dashnaktsutiun Party 
on the issue of involvement in the massacre. Except Baikov, 
none of the authors who wrote on the subject paid attention 
to this issue. The author described the hostilities: “Fire was 
everywhere. Artillery of the Bolsheviks reduced the city to the 
ruins. The Juma mosque was damaged, the Ismailiyya building 
was set on fire, the printing house of the Kaspii newspaper was 
destroyed. The Muslims fled the city en masse. The helpless 
Muslims left their homes and tried to hide in back streets 
and alleys to stay alive. But none of them could survive the 
shell-fire.”119
Baikov brought further facts not described by other 
authors: “The crimes against the Muslim population had a 
great influence on the personnel of the two Russian infantry 
regiments [at that time deployed in Baku], which numbered 
roughly 8,000. The Bolsheviks kept these regiments in Baku 
by force. The regiment commander demanded from Shaumian 
and other Bolsheviks to stop fighting that day [on April 1], 
otherwise they threatened to engage on the Muslims’ side. 
118 Ibid.
119 Ibid., p. 121.
D89EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
The Bolsheviks were compelled to stop hostilities after this 
demand.”120
Baikov did not disclose his thoughts in regard to Shaumian’s 
Bolshevik government formed after the massacre but noted that 
a warrant officer, Avakian, appointed the city commandant, 
was a drug addict and mentally deviant. According to Soviet 
historians S. Sef and Y. Ratgauzer, Avakian demonstrated 
particular brutality toward the Muslim population of Baku, 
confiscated property of well-to-do townsmen, and spent day 
after day in drunkenness.121
Another appealing account of the March days is given by a 
French historian, Henry Barby.122 According to Barby, “7,000 
Muslims and 3,000 Bolsheviks and Armenians were killed in 
the March massacre of 1918.”123 Although his death toll for 
Muslims is not fully accurate, it only slightly deviates from the 
real figures. From Barby’s description of the subsequent events, 
it is seen that the author had done quite an extensive research 
on the subject: “The Bolshevik leaders Shaumian, Fioletov, 
Japaridze were arrested [in late July to early August 1918]. 80 
million rubles in gold coins were found on the ship among 
Shaumian’s luggage.”124
120 Ibid.
121 S. E. Sef, Bor’ba za Oktyabr v Baku [Struggle for October in Baku] 
(Tbilisi, 1930)
  Y. Ratgauzer, Revolutsiya i grazhdanskaya voina v Baku [The revolution 
and civil war in Baku. Part One. 1917-1918] (Baku, 1927).
122 Henry Barby, Le debacle russe: les extravagances Bolcheviques et 
l’epopee Armenienne (Paris, 1921).
123 Ibid., p. 65.
124 Ibid., p. 94.
D90E ANAR ISGENDERLI
An American historian, Firuz Kazemzadeh, also conducted 
a comprehensive study on the 1918 genocide of Azerbaijanis. 
The 345-page work published in 1951125 is distinguished by an 
abundance of sources.
Kazemzadeh looked predominantly into the essence of the 
tragedy and wrote that no matter who started shooting first, it 
was the biggest tragedy of the period. At the time of publication 
of the book, Soviet historians claimed that there had been a 
civil war in Baku in 1918 but avoided to give any figures on 
human losses. They refused to confess that thousands of elderly, 
youth, and children had undergone fiendish tortures and been 
murdered.
In the chapter devoted to the massacres of Muslims in 
Baku, the author writes, “On 9th March, 1918, there arrived 
in Baku the staff of the Azerbaijani Savage Division. Its 
Commander, General Taleshinskii, was arrested by the Soviet. 
The Muslim masses were excited. Meetings were held in the 
mosques, in which orators called on the people to offer armed 
resistance to the Soviet. Shaumian could have prevented 
much bloodshed, had he been less impulsive and stubborn. 
Only a few days before the arrival of General Taleshinskii 
and his staff, he had received a telegram from Lenin . . . The 
telegram shows that Lenin, with his genius for appreciating 
people, felt the rashness of Shaumian. Lenin’s advice about 
diplomacy was nothing but a warning to be more careful and 
less provoking.”126
125 F. Kazemzadeh, The Struggle for Transcaucasia (1917-1921) (New 
York, 1951).
126 F. Kazemzadeh, op. cit., p. 67.
D91EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
According to Kazemzadeh, the release of Talyshinski might 
have closed the incident. Kazemzadeh describes the situation 
in Baku on the eve of the events: “Trenches were being dug, 
barricades erected, and preparations made for real warfare. 
For a few hours the city was quiet, as nature often is before a 
storm. When the Soviet realized that a fully fledged civil war was 
approaching, it looked around for allies, knowing full well that 
its own forces were insufficient against the Azerbaijani masses 
led by the Musavat.”127 Suny, Swietochowski, Baikov, and other 
foreign historians argued that without alliance, the Soviet would 
certainly lose in the confrontation with the Musavat, which, at 
that time, enjoyed wide popular support. The leader of the Baku 
Mensheviks, Aiollo, declared that they would support the Soviet. 
The SRs pledged themselves to fight against Pan-Islamism and 
the “socialists a l’orientale.” Even the Cadets (right-wing liberals) 
promised to support the Bolsheviks as the champions of the 
“Russian cause.”128 Therein, the plans of the Dashnaktsutiun 
Party and the Bolsheviks complemented each other.
Kazemzadeh continues, “In that bloodthirsty episode, which 
had such fatal effects upon the Muslims, the principal part was 
played by the Armenians, who were then in Baku, clustering as 
elsewhere around their nationalist party [Dashnaktsutiun] . . . 
The truth is that the Armenians, under the guise of Bolshevism, 
rushed on the Muslims and massacred during a few frightful 
days more than twelve thousand people, many of whom were 
old men, women, and children.”129
127 Ibid., p. 71.
128 Baikov, op. cit., p. 122. Cited in F. Kazemzadeh, op. cit., p. 72.
129 F. Kazemzadeh, op. cit. p.73.
D92E ANAR ISGENDERLI
As confirmed also by the evidences collected by the 
Extraordinary Investigation Commission, “the March Events, 
as this episode became known to history, touched off a series 
of massacres all over Azerbaijan. The brutalities continued for 
weeks. No quarter was given by either side: neither age nor sex 
was respected. Enormous crowds roamed the streets, burning 
houses, killing every passer-by who was identified as an enemy; 
many innocent persons suffering death at the hands of both 
the Armenians and the Azerbaijanis. The struggle which had 
begun as a political contest between the Musavat and the Soviet 
assumed the character of a gigantic race riot.”130
After the massacre, all parties tried to justify themselves. 
The Armenian archbishop Bagrat denied involvement of 
Armenians in the March incidents in the document presented 
to General Harbord, the head of a U.S. delegation (the 
American Military Missions to Armenia, known as the Harbord 
Commission) that visited Baku in fall 1919. Bagrat eclipsed 
Shaumian, claiming that three hundred Armenians and only 
seven hundred Muslims were killed during the massacres in 
Baku. “Bagrat stated that the battle was waged by the Musavat 
and the Soviet, while the Armenians remained neutral. It is 
true, he continued, that some Armenian soldiers took part in 
the fighting, but those were only isolated individuals for whom 
the Armenian National Council could not be held responsible. 
The Archbishop placed the entire guilt upon the Musavat, 
which, according to the letter, was a helper of the Turks.”131
130 SARA, col.100, list 3, file 791, sheet 8; F. Kazemzadeh, op. cit. 
p.73.
131 F. Kazemzadeh, op. cit. p.82.
D93EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
Seyid Jafar Pishavari, the chairman of the 1945-46 
National Government of South Azerbaijan and an eyewitness 
of the clashes, wrote in his memoirs, “I saw the savageries of 
the Dashnaks, who killed and burned many innocent people, 
and especially neutral South Azerbaijanis in the caravanserais 
on March 18, 1918 [Julian calendar]. The crimes, committed 
by the Dashnaks without any reason and only because of spite 
and hatred, distressed everyone. All streets, shops, houses—the 
entire city was in blood and had been looted. The Armenians 
murdered Azerbaijani Turks and took women as prisoners.”132
After getting hold of absolute power in Baku and a 
number of uyezds, the Bolsheviks started the process of 
general nationalization to strengthen their positions. The 
Bolsheviks achieved integration of the Armenian troops to 
avoid confrontation with the Armenian National Council and 
the Dashnaktsutiun Party. On the other hand, the Armenian 
leaders, exhausted in the struggle with the Musavat and fearing 
the approach of the Ottoman forces, agreed to incorporate 
their forces into the Red Army. The Armenians, thus united 
by the Soviets, guaranteed their claim for power and prepared 
for further linkage with Andranik’s detachments banished from 
the Ottoman territory. On April 25, 1918, the Bolsheviks 
formed the Baku Soviet of People’s Commissars to formalize the 
monopoly of power. The Soviet was composed of the Bolsheviks 
and their supporters and declared itself the single authority over 
the entire region of Baku and its population of one million. 
The Baku Soviet spent a portion of the fifty million manats 
132 S. J. Pishavari, Seçilmiş əsərləri [Selected works] (Baku, 1965), 
pp. 297-298.
D94E ANAR ISGENDERLI
that had been extorted from local tycoons for development of 
the oil industry. During the period in power from April 25 to 
July 31, 1918, the Bolsheviks arranged shipping of tons of oil 
from Baku to Russia.
The period of the Azerbaijani history between 1917 and 
1920 was researched by another American historian, Ronald 
Grigor Suny. His book, The Baku Commune 1917-1918,133 
provides a comprehensive insight into the March events.
The author describes the Dashnaktsutiun politics prior 
to the March massacres: “The Dashnaks . . . denied that the 
Armenians were conspiring against the Moslems in league with 
any third group. As late as March 23, just a week before the 
‘March Days,’ the central committee of the Dashnaktsutiun 
threatened to take the disciplining of such rumormongers into 
his own hands. The proclamation was indicative of the tense 
atmosphere in which the population of Baku lied, cut off as 
it was by Moslems from Tiflis and the north the Caucasus. 
Unexplained shootings occurred daily; and a duel between 
the Moslem forces, still weak and underequipped, and the 
well-armed soviet and Dashnak forces was expected to break 
out at any moment . . . The Armenians knew that their national 
hero, General Andranik had evacuated Erzurum on March 11 
[1918]” 134 and was preparing to attack Karabakh.
Suny’s account of the bombing of the Muslim quarters is 
different from other versions: “At ten in the morning on April 
1 the Committee of Revolutionary Defense sitting in the Hotel 
133 R. G. Suny, The Baku Commune 1917-1918: Class and Nationality 
in the Russian Revolution (Princeton, 1972). 
134 Ibid., p. 214.
D95EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
Astoria on Morskaia Street, decided that the situation called 
for the use artillery against the Moslem quarter. A leaflet was 
issued: In view of fact that the counterrevolutionary party 
Musavat declared war on the Soviet of Workers’, Soldiers’ and 
Sailors’ Deputies in the city of Baku and thus threatened the 
existence of the government of the revolutionary democracy, 
Baku is declared to be in a state of siege. Bombing of the 
Azerbaijanis’ quarter was begun immediately. The Moslems 
had not expected the heavy guns to be used and with them 
against them the rebels could not hold out for long.”135
Narimanov gives the following account: “At eleven in 
the morning the influential Moslem Ismayil bey Safataliyev 
telephoned Dr. Narimanov and pleaded with him to find a way 
to stop the fighting, which threatened to destroy the Moslem 
quarter and kill innocent bystanders. An hour later out of the 
Moslem fortress in the center of the old city came Agu-Dzhafat 
[or Aga-Javad] with a similar plea. N. Narimanov telephoned 
Dzhaparidze and relayed the pleas of the Moslems. Dzhaparidze 
was unwilling to stop the shelling of the Moslem quarter until 
a delegation from the rebels appeared before the Committee of 
Revolutionary Defense.”136
Touching upon the question of the ultimatum by the 
Committee of Revolutionary Defense delivered to the Muslim 
delegation, Suny wrote that the head of the Baku Soviet was loath 
to stop the massacre. In the afternoon on April 1, the Muslim 
135 Ibid., p. 221.
136 Ibid., p. 221, lib. cit.: Nariman Narimanov, Stat’i i pis’ma s 
kratkim biografcheskim ocherkom [Nariman Narimanov: Articles, 
letters, and short biography] (Moscow, 1925), pp. 5-6.
D96E ANAR ISGENDERLI
delegation led by A. Topchubashov arrived at the Astoria. The 
committee presented them with an ultimatum and demanded 
that representatives from all Muslim organizations sign the 
document before the shelling stopped. After some discussion, 
the Muslims decided to capitulate to the committee’s demands. 
At about four o’clock, the protocol was signed and artillery 
bombardment halted. Individual shooting continued, however, 
during the negotiations.137
Suny also described the events at the time of issuing of 
the ultimatum: “Before the ultimatum was signed the Soviet 
forces advanced slowly, aided by artillery-fire, along Armenian 
Street, taking Vorontsov Street and the Metropole Hotel. By 
midday the Moslem headquarters in the Ismailie Building on 
Nikolaevskaia Street were captured, and Soviet trenches had 
been advanced as far as Bazzar Street . . . The Armenian soldiers 
became more brutal as resistance subsided. For a day and a half 
they looted, killed, and burned in the Moslem quarter. They 
were indiscriminate in their vengeance, killing even Moslems 
who were pro-Bolshevik.”138
That period of the history of Azerbaijan was studied by 
a well-known Western scholar Audrey L. Altstadt. Her book, 
The Azerbaijan Turks: Power and Identity under Russian Rule, 
published in 1992, gets to the roots of the problem. Altstadt, 
unlike most of other foreign authors, traveled to Azerbaijan both 
in the Soviet times and when Azerbaijan became independent; 
she was an eyewitness of many events and processes from the 
ground.
137 Ibid., p. 221.
138 Suny, op. cit, pp. 223-224.
D97EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
Altstadt also mentioned that besides disarming Russian 
soldiers in Ganja, Azerbaijani Turks also disarmed Russian 
troops in January 1918 at Shamkir station less than forty 
kilometers west of Ganja.139 According to Naghi Keykurun 
Sheykhzamanli, former minister of National Security of 
Azerbaijani Democratic Republic, the Russian soldiers attacked 
as one contingent, coming forward ostensibly to surrender 
their weapons: “Our people’s forces seeing Russian treachery 
counterattacked; fighting continued until nightfall . . . the 
Russians started throwing their weapons and surrendering. The 
next day, those Russians were put on trains and sent back to 
Russia. The weapons were distributed to those who had none. 
We were not jubilant because of causalities.”140 Altstadt writes, 
“Numerous Russian causalities and mutual distrust between 
the two communities contributed to the final rupture of 
already strained relations between Musavatists and Bolsheviks. 
It would be the Baku Azerbaijanis who would pay the price in 
the ‘March days.’141 In January 1918 all political forces but the 
Musavat desired to gather around the Soviet. The Dashnaks, 
the Cadets, the Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks, 
who opposed the Musavat’s independence claims, supported 
the idea that ‘the Bolshevik government is better than the 
Musavat.’” For this reason the Azerbaijani National Council was 
139 Audrey L. Altstadt, The Azerbaijan Turks: Power and Identity 
under Russian Rule, p. 85.
140 N. Keykurun, Azerbaycan istiklalı mücadelesi hatiraları [Memoirs 
of the struggle for independence in Azerbaijan] (Istanbul, 1964), 
pp. 21-22.
141 Audrey L. Altstadt, op. cit., p. 85. 
D98E ANAR ISGENDERLI
losing power to the Soviet. Altstadt supported the conclusions 
of Suny and Swietochowski on the armed conflict: “The 6,000 
men of the Baku Soviet faced an estimated 10,000 Azerbaijani 
troops. The Dashnaks, with 4,000 well-armed and experienced 
troops, joined to the Soviet force. The next day, on 19 March/1 
April, Bolsheviks decided to use artillery against Azerbaijani 
residential quarters. Shelling forced immediate capitulation and 
the acceptance of Soviet’s ultimatum.”142 After the Azerbaijani 
representatives accepted the terms, the Dashnaks took to 
looting, burning, and killing in the Muslim sections of the city. 
Thousands of Azerbaijani Turks fled the city.143 Those who 
could not leave were doomed to be slaughtered. The British 
vice-consul in Baku, Major Ranald MacDonell, wrote, “Not 
a single Musulman of any importance remain[ed].”144 “The 
exodus shifted the demographic picture even further in favor of 
nonnative elements. The Baku branch of the National Council 
was disbanded. The Azerbaijanis, from those ‘March Days’ until 
the following August, would play no political role in Baku. 
There was no obstacle to soviet control over Baku. On the 9 
April, all ‘bourgeois’ newspapers were shut down. Armenians 
had charge of trade, finance and food supplies.”145
Altstadt also did not consider the March massacres as the 
closing point of the events in the South Caucasus. She arrived 
142 Ibid., p. 87.
143 Ibid., p. 89.
144 MacDonell’s report to the War Office (December 5, 1918) cited 
in The British Archive Records on the Azerbaijani Democratic 
Republic (Baku 2008), pp. 67-75.
145 Audrey L. Altstadt, op. cit., p. 86.
D99EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
at a conclusion that the Baku Soviet of People’s Commissars 
was extraneous to the Azerbaijani people. The author accepted 
the formation of the Azerbaijani Democratic Republic in 1918 
as a great political event.
Richard Pipes also wrote on the 1918 massacre and drew 
inference that the Bolsheviks intentionally accumulated the 
soldiers who were returning from the Turkish and Persian fronts 
in Baku to commit unseen crimes.146 The circumstances are also 
described in The History of Azerbaijan’s Independence Struggle 
by Huseyn Baykara: “Many groups of the armed Russian and 
Armenian soldiers returning from Turkish and Persian frontlines 
were billeted in Baku. First Shaumian used pro-Bolshevik Russian 
soldiers, and then he drew in Armenian soldiers due to their 
hatred of the Turks and Muslims.”147
The UK National Archives hold enough records on the 
1918 genocide of the Muslim Turks by the Armenian-Bolshevik 
forces. Some striking examples are provided below.
It is a fact that many rich and influential Armenians who 
lived outside of the southern Caucasus rendered support to the 
massacres against the Muslim population. In one case, a group 
of wealthy Armenians appealed to Charles Marling, the British 
ambassador to Tehran, to render financial aid to Andranik, the 
author of ferocities against the Muslim Turks in Nakhchivan, 
Erivan, Zangezur, Karabakh, and in other provinces of 
146 Richard Pipes, The Formation of the Soviet Union: Communism 
and Nationalism 1917-1923 (Cambr.,1964), p. 201.
147 Hüseyin Baykara, Azerbaycan istiklal mücadelesi tarihi [History 
of the struggle for independence of Azerbaijan] (Istanbul, 1975; 
reprinted: Baku, 1992), p. 256.
D100E ANAR ISGENDERLI
Azerbaijan. Notwithstanding the numerous requests and 
telegrams by the Armenians, the British headquarters refused to 
aid Armenians directly but offered one million rubles through 
the Russians.148
The news of the British financial assistance to the Armenians 
caused a great discontent among the Muslims in Ganja and 
Baku. When the information about the next allocation in the 
amount of two million rubles to the Armenians reached the 
members of the Ganja branch of the Azerbaijani National 
Committee, they arranged inspection of all trains from Baku 
to Tbilisi to prevent the transfer of money. In many cases, 
Fatali Khan Khoyski personally supervised such searches. 
Upon receiving British aid, the Armenian regiment attacked 
several Kurdish villages and slaughtered their population. After 
this incident, Lieutenant Colonel Pike, the head of the British 
mission in Tbilisi, put a veto on financial aid to the Armenian 
detachments.149 During the 1918 March massacres of the 
Muslim Turks, R. MacDonell, the former British vice-consul 
in Tehran, was in Baku and witnessed the Armenian-Bolshevik 
unification. According to MacDonell, the massacre “poured oil 
on the flames” of hatred among the Caucasian Muslims toward 
the British. MacDonell, a witness of the carnage, voiced his 
148 The report of the former British vice-consul to Tehran, then the 
British official in Tbilisi and Baku—Ranald MacDonell on the 
events within and outside of Azerbaijan prior to the arrival of the 
British troops led by General Dunsterville in Baku, September, 
1917-August, 1918. See Azərbaycan Xalq Cümhuriyyəti. Böyük 
Britaniyanın arxiv sənədləri [The British archive records on the 
Azerbaijani Democratic Republic] (Baku, 2008), p. 19.
149 Ibid., p. 20.
D101EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
protest before the Armenian National Council and declared 
that by uniting with the Bolsheviks (in fact, the majority of 
the Bolsheviks were Armenians) against the Muslims, they 
had made the biggest mistake in their history, and the entire 
responsibility for the consequences should be born by the 
Dashnaktsutiun.150
On July 20, 1918, the commander in chief of the British 
military in India confidentially reported to London that the 
Armenians had undermined their work among Tatars (meaning 
the Azerbaijani population). In the report, he noted that the 
Tatars had become assured that the British had been pursuing 
a deliberate anti-Muslim policy due to mass killing of Tatars by 
Armenians.151
The geography of the slaughters committed by the 
Armenian military against the Muslim Turks was not limited to 
the territories of Turkey and Azerbaijan. The classified telegram 
sent on December 22, 1918, by Percy Cox, the British acting 
minister in Tehran, to London confirms that the Council of the 
Muslim Republics of the Caucasus, which functioned in Tabriz, 
pleaded with the Spanish consul to inform the governments of 
the Great Britain and the United States of the Armenian-led 
massacres of the Caucasian Muslims.152
An envoy of the British Foreign Office, who had been 
an eyewitness of the massacres of the Azerbaijani Turks in 
Baku, wrote in his “Memo on Situation in Baku” (dated June 
11, 1918) that the Armenians joined with the better-armed 
150 Ibid.
151 Ibid., pp. 20-21.
152 Ibid.
D102E ANAR ISGENDERLI
Bolshevik troops and utilized them in the fight against Tatars 
(Azerbaijanis). Baku became an arena of heavy battles. The 
crews on the gunboats joined the Bolsheviks and fired on the 
Muslim quarters of Baku. The Bolsheviks and the Armenians 
eventually prevailed.153 In a report on the visit to Azerbaijan, 
the British ambassador Oliver Wardrop wrote that Azerbaijanis 
informed him that the local Armenians, supported by the 
Bolsheviks, had murdered many Muslims. The ambassador 
concluded that Shaumian was a pseudo-Bolshevik.154
George Milne, the commander in chief of the British armies 
in Salonica, reported to the chief of General Staff on April 
6, 1919, “Before occupation of Baku [British troops entered 
Baku on November 17, 1918] two Turkish regiments defended 
Shusha from attacks of Andranik’s army. Now the Armenians 
have captured the city and killed the Turks. The government 
does its best to ensure law and order. One battalion of British 
soldiers is required to enforce law. The Baku Armenians create a 
particularly unpleasant situation. The impoverished Armenians 
joined the Bolsheviks and the underground Dashnaktsutiun. 
They have no other goal than to take revenge on the Tatars 
[Azerbaijanis].”155
On October 21, 1918, the Persian Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs appealed to the British diplomatic in connection with the 
massacres of the Muslim-Turkic population by the Armenians. 
153 Ibid.
154 Azərbaycan Xalq Cümhuriyyəti. Böyük Britaniyanın arxiv sənədləri 
[The People’s Republic of Azerbaijan. Archive records of Great 
Britain] (Baku 2008), p. 24.
155 Ibid., pp. 21-22.
D103EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
The appeal read, “The Armenians slaughtered and plundered 
the Muslims of Erivan, Nakhchivan, Kars and other provinces. 
Irrespective of their intentions, the Armenians committed all 
kinds of crimes against Muslims. The Muslim families were 
dispersed, innocent men and children were murdered, women 
were humiliated, their belongings were taken away and the 
villages were destroyed.”156 The Persian Foreign Ministry also 
requested the British government to give instructions to restrain 
the Armenians, to prevent crimes and violence, and to protect 
the civilians.
Oliver Wardrop, the British commander in chief in the 
Caucasus, also writes on the Armenian ferocities in his report 
(1919): “The Armenians have recently destroyed 60 Muslim 
villages in Yeni Beyazit, Alexandropol, and Erivan.”157
3.2. The shamakhi massacres
The old Azerbaijan town of Shamakhi also underwent 
terrible lootings and other atrocities. The Armenian savageries 
in the town of Shamakhi and the homonymic uyezd are 
described on 925 sheets of investigational materials arranged 
in seven volumes.
A. Khasmammedov, the chairman of the Extraordinary 
Investigation Committee, wrote in a report to the Minister 
of Justice that the town consisted of two parts—upper, or the 
Armenian part, and lower, or the Muslim part. The uptown 
was predominantly populated by Armenians, Molokans 
156 Ibid., p. 22.
157 Ibid., p. 23.
D104E ANAR ISGENDERLI
(Russian sectarians), and partially by Muslims while the lower 
quarters were exclusively populated by Muslims. The Muslim 
population dominated in the Shamakhi uyezd. Armenians and 
Molokans lived only in six villages. In the past, Muslims lived 
in concord with Armenians and Molokans, had never afflicted 
them, and always tried to keep friendly neighboring relations. 
During the widespread hostilities between Armenians and 
Muslims in many cities and villages of the South Caucasus 
in 1905, Shamakhi was one of the rare places where no such 
incidents occurred.
On March 18, 1918 (Julian calendar), the Armenians 
mobbed into the Muslim quarter shouting “We have waited 
for this day for 12 years. This is not 1905, when [czar] Nikolai 
helped you. Now there is no one to help you. Call your Saint 
Hezret Abbas to save yourselves.”158 When a Russian doctor, 
Sazanov, who lived in Shamakhi, accused the Armenians of 
ruthless crimes against the Muslims on the night of March 19, 
1918, the Armenians replied, “We have no compassion for the 
Muslims, all of them must be annihilated.”159
The Armenian hostilities against the Azerbaijanis in 
Shamakhi had begun yet before World War I. The Armenians 
demonstrated arrogance toward Azerbaijanis and openly insulted 
their national and religious dignity.
After the February Revolution of 1917, the Armenians 
became more brusque. After the abolishment of the czarist 
authorities in Shamakhi, the Armenians covertly captured 
158 SARA, col.1061, list 1, file 108, sheets 8-10.
159 Ibid., sheet 13.
D105EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
the armory without informing the uyezd Commissar or the 
Muslim National Council. The Armenians brought weapons 
and ammunition from various sources to their villages and 
distributed among the population. The arms were mainly 
brought by the Armenian soldiers returning from the war. 
Some of them carried up to three rifles. This activity put the 
Azerbaijanis on alert. The Azerbaijanis, both in the town and 
the villages, saw the Armenians taking up arms quickly.
Armenian soldiers from other uyezds of the South Caucasus 
began to accumulate in Medrese village located five miles away 
from the town. In early March, word leaked out that Armenian 
detachments of approximately three thousand soldiers armed 
with rifles and machine guns arrived in Shamakhi from Baku. A 
delegation from Shamakhi, which included both Muslims and 
Armenians, was sent to meet the units. The meeting took place 
in a Molokan village of Gozlu-Chay (Khilimli). The units were 
asked to give up their arms to the Shamakhi garrison. However, 
the Armenian commanders refused to yield and declared that 
their intention was to clean the uyezd from robbers, put an end 
to anarchy, and reinstate normal conditions. They also promised 
to bypass the town of Shamakhi and head for the Medrese village. 
On March 15, when the troops were passing by the town, they 
opened fire at the Muslims. Soon skirmishes pervaded the entire 
town, resulting in a number of dead and injured from both sides. 
Toward evening, the shooting gradually ceased. That day, the 
local Armenian bishop gathered his priests from all Armenian 
villages of Shamakhi to take a collective oath to live in peace and 
keep the law. When villagers from Kurdemir proposed to the 
Armenian leaders to live in concord and awakened to the oath 
taken by the Armenian priests, the Armenians responded, “The 
D106E ANAR ISGENDERLI
Muslim clergy may heal the breach with the Armenian priests, 
but the Armenian people want to fight with Muslims and the 
British will support them in this cause.”160
In the morning of March 18, 1918, the Azerbaijani 
population of Shamakhi woke up to the sound of shooting: the 
Armenians had surrounded the southern part of the town. The 
Muslim quarters were fired by cannons and machine guns from 
the south and rifles from the uptown Armenian quarters in the 
north. The attack was quite unexpected for the Muslims, who 
trusted in the vow taken by the Armenian bishop Bagrat on the 
cross and the Bible that the Armenians would always live in peace 
and friendship with the Azerbaijanis and would never take up 
arms against them. The Azerbaijanis, unprepared for the assault, 
attempted to defend themselves, but they eventually were forced 
to yield under the pressure of cannonade and machine gun fire. In 
a few hours, the Armenians intruded into the Muslim-populated 
Piran-Shirvan quarter on the boundary between the Azerbaijani 
and the Armenian parts of the town. They began to loot and burn 
houses and slaughter innocent people. The best-furnished houses 
of the town, which belonged to the wealthy and well-known 
Muslims, were put on fire. The mansions of the uyezd’s mufti, 
the Shikhaliyevs, the Hasanovs, the Jabrailovs, Huseynbeyov, 
Alimirzayev, Efendiyev, the Babayevs, the Maharramovs, the 
Veysovs, Boyuk bey Huseynov, Haji Vahab Alekberov, and others 
were among the destroyed property.161 
The Armenians shot without distinction at men, women, 
and children running out of burning houses. The Armenians 
160 SARA, col.1061, list 1, file 110, sheet 10.
161 SARA, col.1061, list 1, file 90, sheet 9.
D107EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
broke into the houses, plundered, killed, and then burned 
the dwellers. In the evening, the Muslims sent a delegation to 
the Armenians to solicit a truce. The mission failed and the 
Armenians did not stop the violence. Fire spread through 
all quarters, and the next morning, the town was in ruins. 
There were heaps of corpses in the streets. The Armenians 
had murdered the Azerbaijanis with unheard and unthinkable 
cruelty. Remains of women who had been tortured and killed 
were all over. Their breasts had been cut, abdomens had been 
torn—they had undergone the cruelest tortures. Children had 
been nailed alive on the ground. The Armenian ferocities in 
Shamakhi continued for several days.162 When the Armenians 
heard of the approaching Azerbaijani units from Ganja, they 
retreated to Gozlu-Chay. However, the Armenian forces still 
outnumbered the Azerbaijani troops. For this reason, the 
Azerbaijani units were forced to leave Shamakhi after four days. 
The Azerbaijani soldiers helped the majority of the Muslim 
population leave the town. In a hurry, people were not able to 
take even the most necessary things. At the same time, many 
residents—especially the poor, the sick, the elderly, and the 
children—were unable to leave the town. On the third day 
after the withdrawal of the Azerbaijani troops, the Armenian 
gangs again invaded the town. The atrocities repeated with a 
yet greater cruelty; the Armenians were merciless in punishing 
the remaining people. All of the Azerbaijani quarters were 
reduced to ashes. All mosques of the town, including twelve 
neighborhood mosques and the eight hundred-year-old 
162 SARA, col.1061, list 1, file 40, sheet 8.
D108E ANAR ISGENDERLI
Juma mosque, which was the most significant piece of local 
architecture, were burned along with other sacred places. All 
Azerbaijani quarters of the town were razed to the ground. No 
house remained unharmed.163
The Azerbaijani nation lost some of its most respected 
public figures, well-known not only in Shamakhi but in the 
entire country, during the first and second Armenian attacks 
on the town. The Armenians killed the akhund of the town 
Haji Jafargulu with particular cruelty. They first pulled his 
beard, fractured his teeth, gouged his eyes, and cut the ears 
and the nose. Judge Teymur Bey Khudaverdov, a member of 
the first Russian State Duma from Shamakhi, Muhammad 
Aliyev, Hajibaba Abbasov, Ashraf Hajiyev, Haji Abdul Khalil 
Ahmedov, Haji Abdul Huseyn Zeynalov with his three brothers, 
Haji Israfil Mammadov, Mir Ibrahim Seyidov, Haji Ibrahim 
Salamov, Agha Ahmed Ahmedov, Haji Abdul Gasim Gasimov, 
Eyyub-Agha Veysov, Zeynab Khanum Veysova, Ali-Abbas 
Bey Ibrahimbeyov, Alakbar Gadirbeyov, Abdur-Rahim Agha 
Aghalarov, Mehiyyeddin Efendizade, Zakariyye Efendi Mehdi 
Khalil Oghlu, Ziyeddin Abdullayev, Haji Molla Hasan Zeynalov 
and his wife, Mahmud Haji-Agha Oghlu, his wife and son, and 
other respected people of the town were brutally killed.164
The Armenians also killed or burned alive many women 
and children who had taken refuge at Haji Jafargulu’s house 
and courtyard. The members of the Extraordinary Investigation 
Commission found a lot of human bones at the crime scene. 
In summer 1918, after pushing Armenians out of Shamakhi, 
163 SARA, col.1061, list 1, file 49, sheet 9.
164 SARA, col.1061, list 1, file 113, sheet 13.
D109EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
Turks gathered and buried the bodies of the victims of the 
massacre. The report prepared in October-November 1918 
showed that a number of bodies continued to remain unburied 
in the mosque’s yard. In addition, many bones were found in 
other burned mosques and houses.165
The records of the commission described the ruins of several 
mosques and a number of houses and shops; they also included 
forty-five photos of mortal remains. According to another 
record, one of the Armenian leaders, in a conversation with his 
pals, boasted that during the Shamakhi massacre, he raped and 
then shot ten Muslim girls with his personal handgun.166
A scrutiny confirms that both Armenian attacks on Shamakhi 
were based on detailed plans elaborated by Dashnaks. The 
raids were led by Stepan Lalayev, Gavril Karaoglanov, Arshak 
Gulgangian, Mikael Arzumanov, Karapet Karamanov, Sedrak 
Vlasov, Samvel Doliev, the Petrosiants, the Ivanovs (father and 
son), barber Avanesov, Agamalov from Shusha, and others. 
These names were verified during interrogations of hundreds 
of witnesses and victims who managed to survive and testified 
to the Armenian leaders’ direct involvement in killings and 
lootings. The victims testified that the former assistant chief 
of the uyezd, Gavril Karaoglanov, the patron of the Shamakhi 
Armenian church, Mikael Arzumanov, a well-known merchant, 
E. Ivanyants, and barber Samvel Doliev, were the initiators 
and executors of these massacres. The Armenians robbed the 
possessions of the Azerbaijanis in the amount of over one billion 
manats in the town of Shamakhi alone.
165 SAPPPMRA, col.277, list 2, file 16, sheet 18. 
166 Ibid., sheet 18. 
D110E ANAR ISGENDERLI
A. Novatsky, the member of Extraordinary Investigation 
Commission, prepared a report based on numerous material 
evidences and witness testimonies, where he proposed to open 
a criminal case against those who committed crimes, murdered, 
and plundered the Azerbaijani civilians.167 The Extraordinary 
Investigation Commission followed the proposal and decided 
to open criminal cases against the chief organizers of the 
massacres and launch a criminal investigation.168 Besides the 
town, eighty-six surrounding Muslim villages were also subject 
to treacherous and surprise attacks by the Armenians.
At dawn of March 18, along with the main offensive on 
Shamakhi, the Armenian gangs unexpectedly attacked the 
village of Engekharan located three miles away form the town. 
The investigation material on the Armenian atrocities in the 
defenseless village includes a list of 237 villagers torturously 
killed by the Armenians; the list was compiled based on the 
witnesses’ testimonies.169 The Armenian attackers beset the 
village, killed and looted the population, burned the houses, 
and took captives. The captured children were taken to the 
Azerbaijani village of Melem and kept there. The Armenians 
took eighty-eight men to the Molokan village of Chukhuryurd. 
Short of the village, they entered a garden and shot twelve 
captives. The rest were taken to the Armenian headquarters 
in the Medrese village. On the way to Medrese, they killed 
two more villagers. Only seventy-four Azerbaijanis reached 
Medrese alive. Soon after the arrival of the Azerbaijani troops 
167 SARA, col.1061, list 1, file 108, sheet 10.
168 Ibid., sheet 5.
169 SARA, col.1061, list 3, file 40, sheets 3-4.
D111EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
from Ganja, relatives of the captives from Engekharan went 
to Medrese to find out about the prisoners. Near the village, 
they saw that all captives had been killed and their corpses 
had been defaced. Ears, noses, arms, and legs were torn apart. 
There were scorches on chests of many bodies. This fact proves 
that the Armenians had made fire on the victims’ chests when 
they had still been alive. Besides those who were murdered 
directly, many Engekharan villagers who managed to run from 
the massacre died of starvation, cold, and diseases. As per the 
commission’s report, the population of Engekharan halved 
within those few days.170
A report submitted to the Extraordinary Investigation 
Commission on April 3, 1919, by the police chief of the 
Shamakhi uyezd included a list of villages ruined by the 
Armenians in the three police districts: nineteen villages in the 
Gebristan district, forty-one villages in the Medrese district, 
and twenty-six villages in the Kashun district (eighty-six 
villages in total).171 The final report drafted for fifty-three 
villages included the death toll (including men, women, and 
children) and the total damage inflicted on each village of 
the Shamakhi uyezd. The report was based on comprehensive 
investigations (witnesses’ testimonies, interrogation protocols 
of victims, official data on the number of population and 
the value of their properties, lists of dead and injured, etc.) 
carried out for each village by the Extraordinary Investigation 
Commission. The body count and the amount of damage in 
some of these villages are given below.
170 SARA, col. 1061, list 1, file 90, sheet 9.
171 SARA, col. 1061, list 1, file 85, sheets1-3.
D112E ANAR ISGENDERLI
Table 1. Losses in selected villages of the Shamakhi uyezd as 
the result of Armenian massacres in March 1918 172
Villages
Death toll among Azerbaijanis Material damage,
in million manats
Total Men Women Children
1 Nevahi 925 555 260 140 60
2 Yehyaly 922 360 412 150 22
3 Gubaly 
Baloghlan
533 250 150 135 90
4 Kalva 500 250 150 100 24
5 Aghsu 500 200 300 - 36.5
6 Tirjan 360 300 40 20 -
7 Baghirly 370 80 150 140 12.5
The investigational reports drafted for other villages reflect a 
similar aftermath of the massacres. All reports were signed and sealed 
by the members of the Extraordinary Investigation Commission. 
Pursuant to the investigation materials, the Armenians killed 
8,027 people in fifty-three villages of Shamakhi, including 4,190 
men, 2,560 women, and 1,277 children; the gross total amount 
of damages in these villages was 339.5 million manats in then-year 
values.173 The Armenian atrocities against the Azerbaijanis, their 
property, cattle, and croplands were an actual case of genocide.
3.3. The Guba massacres
In accordance with a prefabricated plan, the 
Dashnak-Bolshevik forces were to enter the Guba uyezd after 
172 SARA, col. 1061, list 4, file 41, sheet 10.
173 SARA, col.1061, list 2, file 85, sheet 14.
D113EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
occupation of Shamakhi. The Armenians of Khachmaz were 
informed of this and received additional arms and ammunition. 
Calling the massacres of the Muslim population of Guba since 
the beginning of 1918 a tragedy does not fully express the 
essence of the events. The torturous killings of thousands of 
civilians—including women, children, and elderly—were a 
catastrophe. The tragedy in Guba had a pure political motive. 
Bolshevik soldiers took part in the massacres side by side with 
the Armenian Dashnak troops. The Armenian tormentors 
seized the occasion and skillfully exploited the anarchy in the 
country to launch a vast massacre in Guba.
The tragedy in Guba was featured by extensive advance 
preparations by the Dashnaks. An interethnic conflict was 
planned to serve as a pretext for much wider massacre. Members 
of the Dashnaktsutiun sent telegrams abroad, claiming that the 
Armenians were oppressed by the Muslims in Azerbaijan. The 
cables sent by the Guba residents M. Kasparov, H. Hayrapetov, A. 
Mukanian, and A. Bogdanov assured that the Muslims feuded with 
the local Armenians, had launched ethnic massacres, destroyed 
the Armenian and Russian villages, and burned the churches.
Guba was subject to the Armenian violence for three 
times. The major assault against the province was led by David 
Gelovani with two thousand soldiers and Sturua, who claimed 
to be a Bolshevik, with one thousand troops. The assault was 
preceded by an attack of some two thousand Armenian soldiers 
led by Muradian. These troops were comprised of the soldiers 
of the Dashnaktsutiun, which had posed as the closest ally of 
the Russian Czarism during World War I. These troops were 
backed by the local Armenian gangs in the number of three 
hundred gunmen led by Avakov and Vartan.
D114E ANAR ISGENDERLI
In the beginning, apart from some one hundred soldiers 
in Gelovani’s disposal in Guba, he received additional 
reinforcement from Khachmaz. Gelovani writes, “A group 
of 150 soldiers exclusively comprised of Armenians and led 
by Lieutenant Aghajanian, and 2 cannons from Khachmaz 
came to our relief.”174 Appearance of Gelovani and his troops 
in Guba, his request for reinforcement, and the arrival of 
a solely Armenian unit points to the fact that the ethnic 
hostility against the Muslims in the northern provinces of 
Azerbaijan had been arranged in advance. Thus, in early 
March 1918, the wealthy Armenian families sold their 
property and hastily left Guba. When they were inquired 
about the reason, they replied, “Something is expected 
between Muslims and us, that’s why the Committee has 
called us back.”175
Upon arrival in Guba, Gelovani released up to two hundred 
Armenian military prisoners from jail. As it proceeds from the 
papers of the Extraordinary Investigation Commission and 
witnesses’ testimonies, the prisoners were the Armenian soldiers 
who had initiated violence in the region earlier that year. A 
reputed religious figure educated in the Ottoman Empire, 
Mohub-Ali Effendi, who resided in the Kuzun village of Gusar 
together with Hatam Serkarov, a resident of Jaghar village, 
invoked the local population to rise against the Dashnaks, and 
with a support from Lezgins of South Dagestan, they rebuffed 
the aggressors. Muradian managed to escape together with 
some one hundred soldiers, but up to two hundred Dashnaks 
174 SARA, col.879, list 10, file 54, sheet 30.
175 SARA, col.879, list 13, file 40, sheet 21.
D115EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
were taken captives and imprisoned in a jail in the Guba prison 
at the direction of Mohub-Ali Effendi.176
While being banished from Guba, Gelovani blustered to 
return with trained Armenian punitive detachments. Indeed, 
ten days after his threats, the Armenian troops armed with 
cannons and machine guns were dispatched from Baku to 
Guba.
A gang led by Amazasp began to burn the town all the 
way from the town gates to the distant hillside quarters. The 
Dashnaks shot everyone on their way—making no distinction 
of age or sex—stabbed the wounded with bayonets, and poked 
out the victims’ eyes. Those who missed a chance to run and 
hide in the nearby forest made unsuccessful attempts to hide 
in their houses. They were forced out of their houses; some of 
them were killed right away and the rest taken to the square. 
Hundreds of people were murdered within several hours.
A number of documents and witnesses’ testimonies fortify 
the fact that the Dashnak leaders skillfully utilized Bolshevik 
soldiers. One of the witnesses writes, “The Dashnaks went 
out of control and we had to fight with them on an unequal 
footing. During a day-long battle we lost 200 men and had to 
retreat to the Digah village with only 40 men. Amazasp was 
maddened, but he also became more careful. He gathered all 
inhabitants of the town in the square and declared that he 
was the Erzurum Armenian who had decapitated thousands of 
Turks, burned and destroyed more than 200 Turkish villages: ‘I 
fought against Turks for a long time, and defended the interests 
of the Armenian people. This is the reason I came here. If you 
176 SARA, col.970, list 8, file 43, sheets 13-14.
D116E ANAR ISGENDERLI
make a stand, I will kill all of you to the last man.’”177 The 
massacres arranged by the Dashnak-Bolshevik gangs in Guba 
proved to be fiercer than in other provinces. Another witness 
testifies, “Amazasp called Harun Hayrapetov, an Armenian 
from Guba who acted as a guide for the Dashnaks, and told 
him something. Harun took a piece of paper out of his pocket 
and began reading. That was a list of 26 rich people of Guba. 
Amazasp sent some of his armed soldiers for those people. 
When the soldiers returned only with 6 people, the Dashnak 
commander threw a fit. 4 of these people were women and 
the other 2 were teenagers. Amazasp ordered to cut off the 
heads of the teenagers. The women were made to drink their 
blood. When they wailed and pounced at the Dashnaks, the 
soldiers stabbed them with bayonets and chopped them in 
two with swords. When howling grew in the square, Amazasp 
aligned the soldiers and ordered to open fire at the unarmed 
and innocent people. Hundreds of men, women and children 
were killed. It was hard to realize that a man could be so cruel 
against a human being. ‘I will drink your blood,’ said Amazasp 
and ordered to burn the property of the people from that list. 
With such behavior he proved that he was the cruelest man 
and blood-sucker.”178
Amazasp was tasked by Shaumian to kill all the Muslims in 
Guba and devastate their towns and villages. Then the massacre 
should have been explained as a conflict between the Shiites 
and the Sunnites.
177 SARA, col.879, list 10, file 34, sheets 14-15.
178 SARA, col.970, list 8, file 113, sheets 6-7.
D117EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
According to the investigation papers, the number of the 
Dashnak-Bolshevik troops that arrived in Guba on May 1, 
1918, exceeded five thousand. This made it possible to easily 
slaughter the unarmed civilians. It is enough to say that almost 
four thousand people were killed within two days to illustrate 
the scale of the violence in Guba. This figure equaled to 
one-fifth of the population of Guba.179
Harun Shahbali-Oghlu, an eyewitness of the massacre, 
remembers the following: “The Armenians killed so many 
people that the streets of Guba turned into a river of blood. 
When they prepared to shoot all of the 2,000 captives on 
the square, a man approached their leader. They said he was 
a commissar. They talked briefly and the soldiers were again 
ordered to lower their arms. Women and children were 
weeping. A husky Armenian with five other men came up to 
the crowd and began to pick young and attractive women. They 
took more than fifty women away. When one of their brothers 
protested, they shot him. His body was thrown on the ground 
and his eyes were gouged out. An Armenian, with the hands in 
blood, threw the eyes to the crowd. The people howled. The 
Dashnaks began to beat the people with buttstocks cussing in 
the Armenian language. Then they stabbed an old man, who 
had come forward, with a bayonet. It was a repulsive sight.”180
Another witness bears out the slaughter: “The Armenians 
brought mullahs to the central square in Guba. The mullahs 
were the most respectable elders of the uyezd. They had been 
thrashed. Amazasp called a local Armenian, Harun, well-known 
179 SARA, col.970, list 59, file 20, sheets 14-55.
180 SARA, col.970, list 10, file 114, sheet 4.
D118E ANAR ISGENDERLI
to everyone. Harun translated the order into the Azerbaijani 
language: ‘Split into two rows, Sunnites and Shiites, and stand 
face-to-face!’ The crowd obeyed. The distance between the 
rows was about 20-30 yards. Then they brought two rifles and 
said that they would kill them anyway: ‘Those who want to 
survive have to do what we say. The Sunnites and the Shiites 
will shoot at each other by turn. We shall leave in peace those 
who survive.’ The first two men were drawn forth and given 
rifles. One of them was a Lezgin, Muhammed, another was 
a Shiite elder, Mashadi Mir-Sadig. Neither of them wanted 
to take the Armenian rifles. The soldiers hit their heads with 
butts and made them take the rifles. They aimed the rifles at 
one another. Everyone was stunned. Muhammed, who was 
comparatively younger, suddenly turned back and killed one 
of the Dashnaks. In the scuffle Mashadi Mir-Sadig also killed 
one Armenian. Hundreds of people who attempted to run 
were killed with machine-guns. The majority of them were 
women and children. Muhammed was quartered: first they 
dismembered his arms, and then his legs. His head was cut off 
and raised up on the tip of a bayonet so that everyone could 
see it. Mashadi Mir-Sadig’s eyes were gouged out, his arms 
and neck were fractured. That day the Dashnaks destroyed 
the mosque and killed more than 20 mullahs both from the 
Sunnites and the Shiites.”181 A. Novatski clarified the details 
and emphasized that the Dashnaks burned twenty-six mosques 
merely in Guba, Gusar, and Khachmaz to offend the religious 
dignity of the Muslims.182
181 SARA, col.879, list 10, file 96, sheets 35-36.
182 Ibid., file 114, sheets 10-11.
D119EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
The Dashnaks completely demolished a number of 
Muslim shrines and burned thousands of books on Islam, 
Oriental history, and literature. The Armenians made a 
bonfire out of 1,300 books when they burned the medrese of 
Abdur-Rahim Effendi in central Guba. An influential religious 
leader, Ibrahim Aydemirov, who was an eyewitness of the 
events, remembers, “There were 6-7 hundred year old books 
in the Digah Mosque written in the Albanian and the Arabic 
alphabets. Besides burning the books, the Armenians blew up a 
rock with Albanian inscriptions on it in a shrine located a mile 
away from the Mosque.”183
More than sixteen thousand people were killed in total by 
Amazasp’s gang in Guba during the first five months of 1918. 
According to different sources and witnesses’ testimonies, the 
death toll included approximately 12,000 Lezgins and over 
4,000 Azerbaijani Turks and Muslim Tats. Within few months 
the allied Dashnak-Bolshevik units devastated 162 villages in 
Guba; 35 of them were razed to the ground and were never 
inhabited again.184
The Armenian gangs did not confine their crimes solely 
to Muslims; the Jews of Guba became their victims as well. 
Investigations revealed that the Armenians killed up to three 
thousand Jews in Guba during 1918-19. Recent studies have 
elucidated the names of eighty-one of the Jewish victims.185
183 Ibid. 
184 SARA, col.879, list 10, file 45, sheets 10-11.
185 R. Mustafaev, Marshy Smerti. Prestuplenia armianstva protiv 
yevreiskogo naroda [Marches of death. Armenian crimes against 
the Jewish nation] (Baku, 2008), p. 26. 
D120E ANAR ISGENDERLI
According to the records of the Extraordinary Investigation 
Commission, the majority of casualties among the Jews were 
children, elderly, and women. Amazasp was at the head of the 
Jewish blood purge. The bodies of the killed Jews were thrown 
into the Shimi ravine.186 Those who managed to escape the 
slaughters and leave the town fled to Khachmaz and then to 
Derbent. But not all Jews were fortunate to get away. From 
hearsay, the list of the Jews killed by Amazasp and his gang was 
kept in the local synagogue.187
The discovery and archeological examinations of mass 
grave sites in Guba in 2007 confirmed that the people buried 
there had been tortured prior to being killed. These mass graves 
proved to be the result of the 1918 genocide against Azerbaijanis 
and other ethnic groups in Guba.
In the Kurdemir village of the Goychay uyezd, Dashnaks 
burned 56 houses and shops, 127 mansions, and 2 mosques; 
they also plundered the house of the local imam. His precious 
collection of Quranic commentaries, or tafsirs, was put on 
fire. Quran itself was desecrated. Jengi (Chayly), Garavelli, 
Garabujag, Mustafany, Khalil-Gasimbey, Arab-Mehdibeyli, 
Sadaly, and other villages of the Goychay uyezd were completely 
ruined.188
The chairman of the commission, Khasmammadov, wrote 
to the Minister of Foreign Affairs that there was enough 
factual material on the Dashnak-Bolshevik atrocities in Baku, 
Shamakhi, Guba, Goychay, and Javad for the Azerbaijani 
186 Ibid., pp.27-28.
187 Ibid., p. 32.
188 SARA, col.970, list 10, file 52, sheets 18-19.
D121EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
delegation to take to the Paris Peace Conference. Besides, 
the commission possessed documents on the carnage in the 
Lankaran uyezd launched by the armed units of the Armenian 
colonel Avetisov, the hostilities directed by Colonel Illarinovich 
in the Javad uyezd, and other massacres in the Erivan guberniya 
and in four uyezds of the Ganja guberniya—Jabrayil, Javanshir, 
Shusha, and Zangezur.189
3.4. The Lankaran massacres
In mid-March, the Bolshevik units were sent from Baku 
by sea to disarm the Muslim Savage Division in Lankaran. 
The operation was spearheaded by the Armenian National 
Council. The Bolshevik soldiers destroyed and plundered 
every Muslim village on their way. Astara was destroyed by the 
Bolshevik gunfire; the majority of people were forced to leave 
their houses. The villages between Gizilaghaj and Lankaran 
on the Caspian shore were exposed to bombardment from the 
steamship Alexander Jandar. The massacres were launched in 
January and peaked in March.190
Before the liberation of Baku by the Ottoman army, the 
Armenian units numbering two thousand soldiers arrived in 
Lankaran and ruthlessly punished the local population. They 
insulted Muslims in eateries, refused to pay for meals, and made 
them dig trenches to defend from the Ottoman army. The 
Armenian soldiers entered the mosques during the Muslim holy 
month of Muharram and interrupted the religious rites. On 
189 SARA, col.100, list 2, file 791, sheet 2.
190 Ibid., sheet 1.
D122E ANAR ISGENDERLI
several occasions, when the Muslims gathered in mosques for 
religious ceremonies, the Armenians broke into the mosques to 
burgle the people. The Armenian criminals destroyed hundreds 
of dwellings and killed thousands of guiltless people in the 
uyezd. From January 1918 until suppression of the so-called 
Molokan Revolt in August 1919, roughly two thousand people 
were murdered in the province.191
3.5. The Zangezur massacres
During 1918 -20, Zangezur was one of the provinces of 
Azerbaijan that suffered the most from Armenian ferocities. 
The Dashnak aggression hampered the links between the uyezd 
and Shusha and partially blocked communication with Jabrayil. 
The local Muslim population was surrounded by armed gangs 
in the Armenian villages and well-trained Armenian troops 
under the command of Andranik. Following the order of the 
Armenian government, Andranik and his troops marched into 
Azerbaijani territory and required the Muslims either to yield to 
Armenian rule or leave Zangezur, claiming that the uyezd was 
part of Armenia’s territory. When the Muslim villagers refused 
to obey, the Armenians initiated wide-scale massacres.
As described in the papers of the Extraordinary Investigation 
Commission, all Muslim villages in the first police district, 
most of the villages in the second police district, and a number 
villages in the third, fourth, and fifth police districts of Sisian 
province were ruined. Some of the villages were razed to the 
ground, and the lands under these villages were turned into 
191 SARA, col.100, list 2, file 85, sheets 6-7.
D123EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
plowed field by the Armenians. More than fifty thousand 
Muslims took refuge in the fourth police district and in the 
Jabrayil uyezd.
A report by the commission stated that 115 Muslim 
villages in the Zangezur uyezd were reduced to the ground by 
the Armenians; the names of the ruined villages are provided 
therein. The casualties suffered by Azerbaijanis in Zangezur 
uyezd are laid out in the commission’s papers: 3,257 men, 2,276 
women, and 2,196 children were murdered, and 1,060 men, 
794 women, and 485 children were injured in 115 villages. 
The total casualties in Zangezur alone summed up to 10,068 
people. The report maintained that even these shocking figures 
do not fully depict the Armenian savagery in the region and 
suggests that not all Muslim victims were included in the lists 
since it had been extremely difficult to identify all of them at 
the time of the wide-scale turmoil.192
In the Vagudu village, over four hundred Azerbaijanis 
rushed into a mosque in search of protection, thinking that 
the Armenians would not lay hands on a place of worship. But 
the Armenian vandals surrounded the mosque and threw hand 
bombs inside, and then they set the mosque on fire and burned 
people alive. Corpses of children, cut in two, were scattered 
on the streets of the Sheki village. During the bashing of 
Irmishli village, the Armenians stabbed infants with bayonets 
and raised them aloft, and then they quartered their bodies. 
The Armenians demanded that the Muslim villagers in Agudi 
convert to Christianity; Agudi’s women who refused to change 
their faith were disgraced.
192 SARA, col.894, list 4, file 65, sheet 3.
D124E ANAR ISGENDERLI
The Armenians sabered nine bedridden Muslims in the 
Chullu village. In the Baghibeyli village, an Azerbaijani family 
of seven was taken out of their house and burned alive by the 
Armenians. Arms, legs, heads were chopped away, and bodies 
were defaced so badly that it was impossible to identify the 
dead.193 These episodes were realized in Zangezur under the 
direct command of Andranik during summer and fall of 1918.
Over one hundred Muslim villages in Zangezur were 
shattered. Tens of thousands of cattle and hundreds of thousands 
of sheep and goats were driven away. Gardens, cornfields, and 
pastures were burned; the entire economy of the province was 
wrecked. The population suffered roughly one billion manats 
of material losses.
In November, the Armenian gangs launched military 
operations against the Muslim villagers of Okhchu, Atgiz, 
Shabadan, and Piravdan. From December 1919, Armenians 
intensified their attacks against the Muslim population of 
Zangezur.194
The atrocities of the Armenian nationalists in Zangezur 
became more severe in the beginning of 1920. The Armenian 
Republic was the sole initiator of all incidents in Zangezur since 
January 1920. The main goal was to ethnically cleanse Zangezur 
from the Muslims and extend the Armenian jurisdiction over 
the uyezd under the auspices of the Paris Peace Conference. 
Over ten thousand regular troops of the Ararat Republic were 
involved in the ethnic cleansing operations hand in hand with 
the Armenian gangs.
193 SARA, col.894, list 8, file 44, sheet 3.
194 SARA, col.894, list 4, file 65, sheet 8.
D125EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
From January 1920, the reports on the massacres in 
Zangezur received by the parliament and the government of 
the Azerbaijani Republic and the party leaders were more and 
more alarming.
A telegram addressed to the Parliament of Azerbaijan on 
January 21, 1920, by a member of the Parliament, Jalil Sultanov, 
read, “It has been four days now since the Armenian gangs 
along with the regular army have been attacking Zangezur 
using artillery and machine-guns . . . We suffer great casualties. 
The people flee in fear in search for protection . . . On behalf of 
the miserable population of the uyezd I plead with you to stop 
protesting on paper and take active measures. Please save one 
of the most gorgeous places in Azerbaijan from being totally 
obliterated. Karabakh will be next to share Zangezur’s fate. You 
will be held liable for loosing these lands before the Azerbaijani 
people and Azerbaijan.”195
On January 22, the Jabrayil School supervisor, Huseyn 
Akhunzade, sent a wire to the Parliament: “Since morning of 
January 19 the Armenian armed forces have been keeping the 
Muslim villages along the front from Zangezur and Khojahan to 
Galadere under artillery and machine gun fire. Six villages are totally 
ruined, nine villages are in fire. The Armenians have no mercy for 
women or children and cruelly kill the Muslims and destroy their 
villages. The Muslims have no protection against the aggressors and 
can survive only by fleeing and leaving their property behind.”196
The Azerbaijani population was driven to despair by the 
carnage initiated by the Armenian nationalists in Zangezur 
195 SARA, col.895, list 1, file 299, sheet 20.
196 Ibid., sheets 31-33.
D126E ANAR ISGENDERLI
and the inadequate response by the authorities. On January 
23, 1920, Huseyn Akhundzade sent another wire with the 
following message: “Please accept my sincere condolences for 
the Zangezur Muslims. No matter how loud the Zangezur 
population cried, nobody heard them, their wail could not 
get across the Zangezur mountains, valleys and hamlets. Old 
women were disgraced, headless bodies of innocent infants 
stained with their blood are scattered in fields. Young women 
are taken captive and dishonored by the Armenians. Only few 
men remain in Zangezur able to stand against the Armenians. 
But they are also desperate. We appeal to our fellow believers 
and call them to respond to our pleas for help to stop the killing 
of our brothers, sisters, and innocent children.”197
Jalil Sultanov writes in his third telegram sent on January 
23 to the Parliament directly from the battlefield: “The 
Zangezur uyezd was evened with the ground by the regular 
army, which arrived from Erivan with ten cannons and 
numerous machine-guns. There are roughly 10,000 soldiers 
in the regular Armenian army. The population, desponded to 
receive aid from the Government, appeals to all Azerbaijani 
Turks. According to the information received, tomorrow 
Armenians will attack the Jabrayil uyezd from Zangezur. Their 
goal is to join with the Karabakh Armenians and subsequently 
interrupt our communication with Nakhchivan, and thus solve 
both Karabakh and Nakhchivan issues once and for all. It is 
high time to stop protesting on paper and expose the real face 
of the Armenian traitors, who have annihilated over 200,000 
Muslims of Zangezur. I beg you to take urgent measures to 
197 Ibid., sheets 8-12.
D127EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
rescue at least the Shusha and the Jabrayil uyezds. Every minute 
counts. Delay in this matter equals to crime and betrayal of the 
nation and the motherland.”198
In August 1918, the massacres of the Azerbaijanis in the 
Igdir and the Echmiedzin uyezds were arranged under the 
command of General Dro (Drastamat Kanayan). By his order, 
more than sixty Muslim villages were destroyed and burned. 
The population suffered extreme cruelties.
The units under Andranik attacked Aghbulag, Ardanish, 
Beriyabad, Emirkheyir, Yanigtepe, Golkend (Kara-Koyunlu), 
Toghluja, Chaykend, Jivikhly, Jil, Shorcha, and other villages 
of Chemberekend province and cruelly tortured and killed 
the people, destroyed the villages, looted the possessions of 
the Muslims, and slashed with sabers the women, the elderly, 
and the children who had failed to run away. Though the 
Azerbaijanis comprised the majority in Echmiedzin in 
1918, most of the villages in the province were subject to 
atrocities by the Armenians. As a fact, the Ayarly village 
underwent an absolute genocide in 1918. Most of the seven 
hundred villagers were tortured and killed, and the rest were 
expulsed from their dwellings and were destined to die in the 
mountains.199
The population of another Azerbaijani village, 
Garghabazary—some eight hundred people—underwent 
tortures and was murdered by the Armenian military. The 
village was pillaged, destroyed, and burned. The Gemerli village 
did not escape disaster as well. Approximately five hundred 
198 Ibid., sheets 18, 22, 26. 
199 Ibid., sheet 20.
D128E ANAR ISGENDERLI
Azerbaijani villagers were killed by the Armenian military, 
and the rest had to leave their dwellings. The majority of 
Azerbaijanis in Yukhary Garkhun, Yukhary Turkmenli, Kichik 
Zeyve, Kurekenli, Mammadabad, Molla Dursun, Haji Gara, 
Hajilar, Haramly, and other villages of Echmiedzin was forced 
to run in order to survive the genocide.200
In 2004, the Republican Party of Armenia published the 
booklet Garegin Nzhde i ego uchenie (Garegin Nzhde and his 
teaching) dedicated to the events that occurred in Erzurum, 
where the Armenian barbarism is acknowledged as well: “During 
the 2 years of ceaseless fighting the Syunik government lost only 
several dozens of fighters, while the enemy had 15,000 dead. 
About 200 villages of the Turks and the Tatars [Azerbaijanis] 
were returned to the Armenian peasantry.”201
3.6. The Erivan massacres
Up to 200 Azerbaijani villages in the Erivan uyezd were 
laid flat prior to March 1918; 62 Azerbaijani villages in 
the Echmiedzin uyezd were leveled with the ground before 
September 1919. All villages but a few in the Zengibasar (the 
Erivan uyezd) and the Vedibasar provinces were shattered, and 
the population was cruelly killed; those who remained alive fled 
in search of shelter. The fleeing families took refuge in Persia, 
Turkey, and other provinces of Azerbaijan.202
200 Ibid., sheets 31-33.
201 Garegin Njde i ego uchenie [Garegin Nzhde and his teaching] 
(Yerevan, 2004), p. 8.
202 SARA, col.895, list 1, file 299, sheets 8-12. 
D129EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
The Vartanly village in the Gugark province lived through 
a similar tragedy: In mid-April, the Armenian troops assembled 
the Azerbaijani peasants in a hut under the pretext of holding a 
meeting. Around 120-150 people were forced into the hut. Priest 
Vahan opened the meeting and spoke of friendly coexistence 
of the two communities in the same village. Suddenly, several 
armed Armenians entered and took the priest out. Then they 
locked the door and threw a thatch dipped in oil into the hut 
from the roof. The people—including children, elderly, and 
women—screamed louder as they were getting stifled from the 
smoke; many of them fainted, and the rest rushed to punch the 
door. The unarmed people resisted in vain.203
In 1918, the Armenian military forces carried out an ethnic 
cleansing of Azerbaijanis in the Kotayk district located in 
northeast of Erivan. Prior to the 1918 massacres, Azerbaijanis 
constituted majority of the district residents. However, 
by that time, Azerbaijanis had been torturously expelled 
from Avdallar, Artiz, Ashaghy Gakht, Bashkend, Bozkosa, 
Gayakharaba, Garachala, Garachorek, Gizgala, Gurbaghaly, 
Damagirmez, Dellekli, Ekerek, Zer, Yelgovan, Yellije, Kamal, 
Kenkhan, Kerpijli, Goykilse, Gulluje, Nurnus, Okhchu 
Galasy, Tezeharab, Chobangorukmez, and other villages of the 
district. The majority of the exiled population was killed by 
Andranik’s gangs and troops of the Dashnak government.204 
In April 1920, the Azerbaijan newspaper reported, “Not a 
single Azerbaijani family remains in the Goyche province. At 
present, 84 Muslim villages rest in ruins in the Yeni Beyazid 
203 SARA, col.894, list 1, file 201, sheet 18.
204 Ibid., sheets 30, 31, 32.
D130E ANAR ISGENDERLI
uyezd, 22 of them have been destroyed in April. Over 15,000 
families from Dashkend, Goshabulag, Sariyagub, Bash 
Shorcha, Ashagy Shorcha, Soghangulu-aghaly, Aghkilse, Zod, 
Gulu, Aghaly, Boyuk Garagoyunlu, Kichik Garagoyunlu, 
Zerzibil, Edli, Inekdagh, Garaiman, Kesemen, Bashkend, Bala 
Merze, Shishgaya, Bash Haji, Geribgaya villages have fled for 
safety and left their possessions behind. Now Armenians have 
taken over their property valued at hundreds of millions or 
even billions [of manat].”205 Most of the population of West 
Azerbaijan—the present territory of the Republic of Armenia 
with roughly 565,000 people—were cruelly killed or ousted 
from their homeland as a result of the genocide executed by 
Andranik’s brigandish troops and the Dashnaks in 1918-20.206
An Armenian historian, Z. Korkodyan, wrote in his book 
titled The Population of Soviet Armenia in 1831-1931 that a little 
more than ten thousand Turks (Azerbaijanis) remained in the 
area by 1920 when Soviet rule was established in Armenia.207 211 
Azerbaijani villages in the Erivan guberniya and 92 Azerbaijani 
villages in the Kars province were looted, ruined, and burned 
in 1918. One of the numerous appeals of the Azerbaijanis 
of Erivan mentioned that 88 villages were destroyed, 1,920 
households were burned, and 132,000 Azerbaijanis were killed in 
Erivan—the historically native province for Azerbaijanis—over 
a period of several months. The violence initiated by the 
Armenian punitive forces and the policy of “Armenia without 
the Turks,” then pursued by the Dashnak government, led to 
205 Ibid., sheet 33.
206 Ibid., sheet 34.
207 Ibid., sheet 38.
D131EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
drastic decrease in the number of the Azerbaijani population 
in the Erivan guberniya from 375,000 in 1916 to 70,000 in 
1922.208
Hovhannes Katchaznouni, one of the leaders of the 
Dashnaktsutiun Party, writes, “We were officially at war with 
Azerbaijan, because we were actually fighting with them in 
Karabakh. There were often clashes in Gazakh too. Inside 
the country, at certain places like Aghbaba, Zod, Zengibasar, 
Vedibasar, Sherur-Nakhchevan, Zangezur etc. many bloody 
battles were fought with the native Muslim inhabitants.”209
The leader of the Dashnak government admitted that 
hostilities of all kinds were launched against the Muslims in the 
above provinces. Hovhannes Katchaznouni writes, “We were 
not able to establish order by means of administrative methods, 
in the Muslim regions; we were obliged to use arms, send 
troops, demolish and massacre . . . In important points such as 
Vedibasar and Şarur-Nakhichevan we were not able to establish 
our authority even with arms; we lost and receded.”210
The invasion of Baku by the Eleventh Red Army on April 
27 and subsequent subjugation of all other parts of Azerbaijan 
thwarted the accomplishment of the mission of the Azerbaijani 
government on ensuring territorial integrity of the country. A 
number of territories, including Zangezur, were annexed to 
Soviet Armenia. The massacres of the Muslim population in 
208 Ibid., sheet 31.
209 H. Katchaznouni, The Armenian Revolutionary Federation 
(Dashnagtzoutiun) Has Nothing to Do Anymore (New York: 
Armenian Information Service, 1955).
210 Ibid.
D132E ANAR ISGENDERLI
1918-20 thus proved to be a policy of genocide deliberately 
planned and executed by the Dashnaktsutiun toward the 
establishment of Great Armenia.
3.7. The massacres in maku, khoy, and Urmia
The people of Maku, Khoy, and Urmia still keep memory of 
the slaughters carried out there by the Dashnaks in conjunction 
with the Aisors in 1918, when South Azerbaijan (now in Iran) 
had already been conquered by the Russian army. During 
the lurid events remembered as the Urmia Tragedy, Muslims 
suffered heavy casualties, and the majority of captives were 
young Muslim women.211 The Armenians of Urmia plotted to 
create a state of Free Armenia with the support of the Russian 
occupation army in South Azerbaijan. Upon withdrawal from 
South Azerbaijan, the Russian army handed much of their 
weapons to the Armenian units so that they could effectively 
pursue their goal. Despite ethnic and religious differences, 
Muslims had always demonstrated a kind attitude toward 
Armenians who had been living comfortably in Azerbaijan for 
centuries. Nevertheless, thousands of Urmians were tortured 
and murdered for reasons unclear to them.212
In March 1918, Russia withdrew from World War I, and its 
uncontrolled troops began to leave the Caucasus. The Armenians, 
who had massacred the population of South Azerbaijan, also fled 
Urmia assisted by the Russians. Approximately ten thousand 
211 M. Mammadzade, Ermənilər və İran [Armenians and Persia] 
(Istanbul, 1927; reprinted: Baku, 1993), p. 9.
212 Ibid., p. 22.
D133EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
people left the province in a hurry, taking their most valuable 
belongings with them. That was the eventual outcome of the 
Armenian aggression in South Azerbaijan.213
Aisors, the Assyrian tribes that settled in northwest Iran 
who had been living side by side with Azeri Turks and enjoyed 
their benevolence, were engaged in atrocities against Muslims 
as well. Urmia, Khoy, Tebriz, Selmas, and other provinces 
of South Azerbaijan witnessed terrible crimes committed by 
Armenian and Aisor gangs. The Armenians were led by Agha 
Petros. The Aisors’ commander was Marsimon.214
Once, Armenian criminals killed 1,500 Azerbaijanis 
overnight.215 This fact is described in writings of Sayyed 
Ahmad Kasravi, Sayyed Jafar Pishavari, and Dr. Salamullah 
Javid. Kasravi writes, “The Azerbaijani families of Urmia were 
robbed; the survivors were gathered in a public building. The 
miserable people had been hungry and thirsty for several days. 
Many of them were very reputed people. The bazaar was closed 
and people could not buy anything; after the pillage they had 
nothing left in their houses.”216 The records of the period testify 
that an epidemic of cholera spread in Urmia and Selmas, and 
the majority of the starving people died of cholera.
After the declaration of independence of the Armenian 
Republic in May 1918, the Dashnak leader, Andranik, with five 
213 S. Onullahi, Erməni millətçiləri və İran [Armenian nationalists 
and Persia], referring to Sayyed Ahmad Kasravi, Tarikhi hijdeh 
sale-ye Azerbaijan (Baku, 2002), p. 53.
214 Ibid., p. 54.
215 Ibid., p. 58.
216 Ibid., p. 59.
D134E ANAR ISGENDERLI
thousand troops, attacked Khoy. At that time, Khoy was one of 
the liveliest cities of South Azerbaijan. Mosques, bazaars, and 
streets were full of people who rumored that Armenians had 
raped the women, roasted the flesh of the Turks in Erzinjan 
and Trabzon, and made the people eat it.217 On June 24, 1918, 
armed Dashnak troops led by Andranik surrounded Khoy. 
The men took up arms to defend the town. The women and 
children helped by providing food for the town defenders. 
Several houses were destroyed due to shellfire by the Dashnaks; 
an artillery shell hit a house and killed two men.
With the support of the Russian army, the Dashnak troops, 
under the command of Petros, moved from Urmia and attacked 
Selmas. There they engaged in a few daylong fierce battle. The 
Armenian troops, reinforced by the Assurs (or Aisors), won 
the battle of Selmas and victoriously returned to Urmia. With 
the Armenian troops deployed in Urmia, killing of the local 
Muslims was a widespread and ordinary practice. Meanwhile, 
Andranik launched another offensive on Khoy. Andranik 
intended to occupy Khoy, establish Minor Armenia in South 
Azerbaijan, and join with Great Armenia in the future upon 
realization of the ambitious plans.218 The Ottoman command 
in Khoy required the riflemen of the town to join the defense. 
The two sides engaged in an unequal battle near Evoghlu. 
The Armenians heavily outmanned and thus defeated the 
Ottomans. Some of the wealthy population of Khoy had left 
the town for Tabriz, but the brave and dignified defenders of 
the town vouched to stand against the enemies till the end. 
217 Ibid.
218 Ibid., pp. 61-62.
D135EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
At night, the defenders gathered in one of the mosques and 
formed a military commission charged with the organization 
of defense. The next day, the Dashnaks lined up three hundred 
meters off the town. Again, the Armenians brought artillery 
and plenty of ammunition. Though the town’s gunmen had 
never been to a war, they fought very vehemently. By nightfall, 
the Armenians had seized a part of the town.219
In those tragic days, the Ottoman army rendered support 
to the Azerbaijani people and rescued them. Involvement of the 
Ottoman forces in South Azerbaijan prevented the slaughter of 
thousands of people.
In the meantime, the Ottoman army was moving toward 
Khoy from Selmas. The people of Khoy, inspired by the 
approach of the Ottoman troops, made a fierce effort to defend 
themselves. Ottoman forces arrived to rescue the people of Khoy 
just when the Dashnaks had entered the town and launched 
the massacre of the residents. Andranik and his troops had to 
retreat.220
Andranik’s troops were defeated by joint efforts and were 
forced to retreat. The failure to capture Khoy became the 
turning point in the realization of the Armenian campaign and 
undermined their plans for Urmia.221 Defeated in Khoy, the 
Dashnak and the Aisor units prepared for a decisive attack on 
Urmia. The Russian command intended to deploy the troops 
on the Urmian shore by the steamship Chernozoyev. The 
Dashnaks and the Aisors assisted in a sailboat. The well-trained 
219 Ibid., p. 62.
220 Ibid.
221 Ibid.
D136E ANAR ISGENDERLI
unit of 180 gunmen was to land and suddenly invade the city. 
Upon landing, the gang encountered the resistance of Turks 
and Azerbaijanis and was defeated, resulting in failure of the 
Armenian plan to capture Urmia.222
222 Ibid.
D137E
CHAPTER 4
PROCLAmATION OF THE 
AZERBAIJANI DEmOCRATIC 
REPUBLIC AND ITs 
ACTIVITIEs
4.1. The Azerbaijani Democratic Republic: the 
Period in Tiflis
ON MAY 28, 1918, the Muslim National Council held its opening sitting chaired by the deputy 
chairman Hasan Agayev in the palace of the former Russian 
governor of the Caucasus. Mustafa Mahmudov acted as the 
secretary of the sitting. After impassioned and comprehensive 
debates, the Interim National Council adopted the Declaration 
of Independence, which proclaimed the establishment of the 
independent Azerbaijani Democratic Republic in south and 
southeast Transcaucasia.223 The Declaration, or “Misagi-Milli” 
(the National Vow), which consisted of six clauses, was 
approved by twenty-four votes (two of the delegates—Sultan 
Majid Ganizade and Jafar Akhundov—abstained). The 
Declaration of Independence became the first constitutional act 
in the history of Azerbaijan and affirmed Azerbaijani statehood 
223 SARA, col.970, list 1, file 1, sheets 49-50. 
D138E ANAR ISGENDERLI
in the form of a democratic republic. This legal and political 
document declared the establishment of the Azerbaijani state, 
defined the territory under its jurisdiction, and ascertained the 
governing principles of the state. The Declaration contained 
all attributes of a democratic statehood—authority vested in 
the people; representation of civil and political rights of the 
citizens; establishment of conditions for freedom of all people 
regardless of nationality, religion, class, ideology, and gender; 
and finally, separation of powers. By acknowledging these 
principles as fundamental for functioning of the state, the 
Declaration reaffirmed the determination of the Azerbaijani 
people to establish a sovereign and democratic state governed 
by law. The Declaration of Independence marked the transition 
of the Azerbaijani nation from a nation-culture status to an 
absolutely different legal-political and moral-psychological 
status of a nation-state. On May 30, radio and telegraphic 
messages announcing the independence of Azerbaijan were 
dispatched to the major capital cities of the world.
Following the adoption of the Declaration of Independence, 
the national council designated nonpartisan Fatali Khan 
Khoyski in charge of the formation of the government. After an 
hour of adjournment, Khoyski announced the makeup of the 
first cabinet, which included nine ministers from the Musavat, 
the Muslim Socialist Coalition, the Hummet, the Ittihad, and 
the nonpartisans.224
On May 29, the Muslim National Council held its second 
sitting in Tiflis chaired by Hasan Agayev. Prime Minister 
Khoyski informed the attendees of negotiations between 
224 Ibid., sheets 49-50.
D139EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
the members of the Azerbaijani and the Armenian National 
Councils on the border delimitation issues. Khoyski told them 
that the Armenians needed a political center to establish an 
Armenian federation, and cession of Erivan to Armenians was 
inevitable since the Turkish army had captured Alexandropol 
(Gumri). Other speakers—including Khalil Khasmammadov, 
Mammad Yusif Jafarov, Akber Aga Sheykhulislamov, and 
Mahammad Maharramov—noted that cession of Erivan is 
both a historical necessity and inevitable disaster at the same 
time. Out of twenty-eight delegates present at the meeting, 
sixteen voted in favor of the proposal, one voted against, 
and the remaining three abstained from voting. The issue of 
establishment of a confederation with Armenians was brought 
up for discussion as well. After brief debates over the proposal 
of future integration of the Azerbaijani and the Armenian 
councils into a confederation, the delegates considered the idea 
acceptable and unanimously voted in its support.225
On May 29, Prime Minister Khoyski wrote a letter to 
Foreign Minister Mammad Hasan Hajinski, who was in 
Batum negotiating with the Ottomans: “We put an end to all 
disputes with Armenians, they will accept the ultimatum and 
stop fighting. We ceded Erivan to them.” However, on June 1, 
during the sitting of the national council, three of its members 
from Erivan—Mir Hidayat Seyidov, Baghir Rzayev, and 
Nariman Narimanbeyov—protested against the cession and 
signed a joint note. The council resolved to append the note to 
the minutes of the sitting without further discussion.226
225 Ibid., sheets 51-52.
226 Ibid., sheets 53-54. 
D140E ANAR ISGENDERLI
Based in Tiflis, the national council and the government 
fully realized that the main director of all events in the South 
Caucasus was the Ottoman government. Any vital decision 
linked to the region required approval by the Ottomans. That 
is why the national council and the government placed their 
hopes in the negotiations in Batum.
On June 4, delegates from the three newly independent 
states of the South Caucasus—Azerbaijan, Georgia, and 
Armenia—finally negotiated and signed separate treaties with 
the Ottoman state in Batum. The chairman of the national 
council, Rasulzade, and Foreign Minister Hajinski signed the 
treaty for Azerbaijan. The Treaty of Batum became the first 
agreement concluded between the Azerbaijani Democratic 
Republic and a foreign state. Among the eleven clauses of 
the treaty, the fourth article had a particular importance for 
Azerbaijan. The article affirmed the commitment of the 
Ottoman government to render military assistance to the 
Republic of Azerbaijan in order to maintain peace and stability 
and assure the security of the country, if necessary. At the time 
of conclusion of the Batum Treaty, the national council and the 
national government still functioned in Tiflis.
Meanwhile, the Dashnak-Bolshevik army of the Baku 
Soviet of People’s Commissars, led by Shaumian, launched 
an offensive on Ganja. In the teeth of the critical military 
situation, the Azerbaijani representatives in Batum, Mammad 
Emin Rasulzade and Mammad Hasan Hajinski, appealed to 
the Ottoman government with request of rendering military 
aid to Azerbaijan in conformity with the Article 4 of the 
treaty. The appeal was approved, and the Ottomans sent the 
Caucasus Army of Islam to lend support to Azerbaijan in 
D141EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
the days of hardships. The Ottoman secretary of war, Enver 
Pasha, ordered to allocate a loan in the amount of two million 
Turkish liras as an initial aid to Azerbaijan; additionally, fifty 
thousand liras were disbursed monthly on supply expenditures 
of the Turkish army in Azerbaijan. Besides, in the meeting 
with M. A. Rasulzade in Istanbul, Enver Pasha stressed the 
importance of building a national army in Azerbaijan.
On June 13, 1918, the Azerbaijani National Council 
convened its sixth (and last) meeting in Tiflis. The agenda 
included the alarming news from Erivan about massacre 
of the Azerbaijani population by Armenians. The council 
member, Ibrahim Agha Vakilov, who had returned from 
Erivan, informed the attendees of the miserable conditions of 
Azerbaijani refugees and proposed to allocate 150,000 manats 
for delivery of humanitarian aid. As reported by Vakilov, the 
number of Muslim refugees from the Erivan guberniya had 
reached 150,000; 206 Muslim villages had been destroyed, 
and villagers had been tortured by Dashnak gangs. In the view 
of the situation, the council appealed to the Turkish military 
command to supply food to the Erivan refugees and facilitate the 
return of the expelled Muslim population to their homes.227
4.2. Establishing the Azerbaijani Democratic 
Republic in Ganja
After finalizing all preparations, the national council and 
the cabinet of the Azerbaijani Democratic Republic relocated 
to Ganja on June 16, 1918. Reactionary and narrow-minded 
227 SARA, col.970, list 1, file 6, sheet 1.
D142E ANAR ISGENDERLI
groups among the bourgeoisie and landlords uninvolved in 
the national council attempted to bar the council from power 
through the commander of the Turkish troops in Azerbaijan, 
Nuri Pasha. These groups were fervid supporters of Azerbaijan’s 
annexation to Turkey and, hence, undertook an active 
campaign against the national council. The strained relations 
between the council and the command of the Caucasus Army 
of Islam, which was also based in Ganja, gradually increased. 
By interfering in domestic affairs of an independent state, 
Nuri Pasha disobliged Khoyski’s government and provoked a 
political crisis.
In view of prevailing anarchy in the country and foreign and 
domestic challenges, on June 17, the national council—after 
lengthy debates—enacted to establish a new cabinet with 
Khoyski in the chair and entrust it with ample powers; in the 
end of the meeting the council decided to dissolve itself.228
Khoyski’s second cabinet assumed its functions under very 
complicated conditions in Ganja. The government undertook 
a number of actions to keep up political and economic life, 
eliminate anarchy, restore railroads, and establish postal and 
telegraphic communication among the provinces of Azerbaijan. 
The primary goal of the government was to overturn the Baku 
Soviet of People’s Commissars, set up by Shaumian shortly 
after the March genocide of 1918, and turn Baku into the 
capital city of the country. These were the subjects of intense 
talks between the government and the Ganja-based Ottoman 
Caucasus Army of Islam.
228 SARA, col.970, list 1, file 1, sheet 48.
D143EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
4.3. The Caucasus (Ottoman) Army of Islam and the 
Rescue Campaign on Azerbaijan
The year 1914 was marked by the instigation of World War 
I, launched for the redistribution of influence in the world. 
West’s main interest in the war was capturing new lands and 
gaining new markets. The Ottoman Empire, also engaged in the 
war, undertook two tactical ploys: according to the plan drafted 
by Jamal (Cemal) Pasha, the Ottomans attempted to reunite 
the lost lands of the caliphate under Ottoman rule. In the end 
of December 1914, the Turkish Army, headed by Enver Pasha, 
attacked Russian troops on the Caucasian Front. The historical 
battle of Sarikamish was a disaster for the Ottoman Army. Cold 
and foul weather and hunger and typhus led to a very high 
mortality among soldiers wearing thin and off-grade summer 
uniforms in the middle of winter. The constantly reinforced 
Russian army smashed the Ottomans at Sarikamish and took 
ninety thousand Ottoman soldiers and officers as war prisoners. 
The majority of captive Turkish soldiers were killed just on the 
spot. The severe winter helped the Russian command in this 
task. A portion of the war prisoners was brought to Baku by 
rail and sent to Nargin and Bulla islands in the Caspian. The 
remaining captives were exiled to Siberia. Thus, the initial stage 
of both Jamal Pasha’s pan-Islamism movement on Sinai Front 
and Enver Pasha’s pan-Turanism campaign in the Caucasus was 
catastrophic for the Ottomans.229
229 A. N. Kurat, Türkiye ve Rusya [Turkey and Russia] (Ankara, 
1990), p. 266.
D144E ANAR ISGENDERLI
The year 1917 was marked by two major events that 
changed the course of the Great War: the February Revolution 
and the October coup in Russia. In March 1918, Russia 
acceded to the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk with the Central powers 
led by Germany. In accordance with the terms of the treaty, the 
Russian army was to withdraw from eastern Anatolia; Ardahan, 
Batum, and Kars were to be surrendered by Russians in a short 
time. Under these circumstances, the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk 
gave Enver Pasha a chance to realize his Caucasus plan. During 
the Great War, Armenian armed forces, extensively supported 
by the Russian army in the killings of hundreds of thousands 
of Anatolian Turks, embarked on the plan for establishment 
of Great Armenia. But the Armenian military units could 
not accomplish the vicious plans and had to retreat to the 
South Caucasus. Here, the Armenian detachments caught the 
opportunity to commit killings of the Muslim population in 
the southern, western, and northern provinces of Azerbaijan. 
The situation required involvement of the Ottomans to rescue 
Azerbaijanis from the Dashnak-Bolshevik violence. Therefore, 
since the beginning of 1918, the Ottoman government had kept 
the Caucasus Campaign in its agenda to utilize the historical 
chance.
After declaring independence in May 1918, the newly 
established Azerbaijani Democratic Republic announced 
Ganja as its temporary capital until the liberation of Baku 
from the Soviet rule. The other new republics, Georgia 
and Armenia, announced respectively Tiflis and Erivan as 
their capitals. The founders of the Azerbaijani Democratic 
Republic now faced the challenge of vitalization and 
D145EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
empowerment of the new statehood in the view of the 
following hindrances:
•	 The	 Azerbaijani	 Republic	 was	 declared	 in	 a	 foreign	
territory, Tiflis.
•	 The	new	 state	had	no	military	capacity	 to	defend	 its	
territory.
•	 Baku	was	occupied	by	the	Baku	Soviet	troops,	which	
numbered twenty thousand soldiers.
•	 The	 political,	 economic,	 and	 military	 situation	 in	
Azerbaijan hindered resolution of the above issues.
•	 Russia’s	 Soviet	 leadership	 exerted	 all	 efforts	 to	 keep	
Azerbaijan under its influence in order to benefit from 
Baku’s oil.
•	 Great	 Britain	 and	 Germany,	 enemies	 during	 World	
War I, each had distinct plans for Azerbaijan.
These were the main factors that necessitated the conclusion 
of a peace treaty between the Azerbaijani Democratic Republic 
and the Ottoman government in order to ensure the Ottoman 
military assistance to Azerbaijan in case of any hostile situation 
in the territory of the latter.
On May 11, 1918, prior to declaration of the Azerbaijani 
Democratic Republic, leaders of the northern Caucasus nations 
of the Terek and Dagestan regions declared independence of 
the North Caucasus Mountaineers Republic. With the goal 
to ensure the Ottoman interests in the Caucasus, Enver Pasha 
recognized the North Caucasus Republic and gave instructions 
on rendering military assistance to the new statehood. 
D146E ANAR ISGENDERLI
Recognition of the North Caucasus Mountaineers Republic and 
then the Azerbaijani Democratic Republic by the Ottomans 
irritated Soviet Russia’s leaders, who viewed the spread of the 
Ottoman influence in Azerbaijan and the North Caucasus as an 
eventual loss of these territories. They were especially worried 
to lose access to the Baku oil, which would cause heavy damage 
to the Russian economy. On that score, on May 30, 1918, 
the Russian commissar of foreign affairs, Georgy Chicherin, 
sent a note to the Ottoman government with a protest against 
recognition of independence of the Caucasian states.230 But 
the Ottoman government had no intention to renounce its 
decision or adjourn the march on Caucasus.
The Russian withdrawal from the war, uncontrolled 
activities of the Russian army at the front line, and the 
Armenian-launched massacres in Azerbaijan prompted 
Azerbaijanis to appeal for help from the Ottomans. To that 
end, in October 1917, a delegation of the Azerbaijani Turks 
met with the Ottoman’s Sixth Army Command in Mosul. 
The delegation returned to the Caucasus with three Ottoman 
officers dispatched to examine the situation on the ground. The 
officers returned to the headquarters in Mosul and reported of 
favorable conditions for a military expedition.231
230 Bol’sheviki v bor’be za pobedu sotsialisticheskoy revolutsii v 
Azerbaijane. Dokumenty i materialy. 1917-1918 gg. [Bolsheviks in 
the fight for the victory of the Socialist Revolution in Azerbaijan. 
Documents and records. 1917-1918.] (Baku, 1957), p. 98. 
231 N. Yucer, Birinci dünya savaşında Osmanlı ordusunun Azerbaycan 
ve Dağıstan harekatı [The campaigns of the Ottoman Army in 
Azerbaijan and Dagestan during World War I] (Ankara, 1996), 
p. 55.
D147EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
On February 16, 1918, Enver Pasha issued an order to 
establish an entity to be headquartered in Tehran with the 
purpose to help the Muslim nations of the Caucasus, Dagestan, 
Turkestan, and Russia.232 The order instructed to appoint 
confident and devoted officers at the head of the campaign: 
Lieutenant Colonel Nuri Bey (stepbrother of Enver Pasha) was 
appointed the head of the Tehran Central Staff; Lieutenant 
Colonel Shevket Bey was assigned to lead troops to Dagestan; 
Captain Nazim Javad Bey was put in charge of the expedition 
to Afghanistan; and other officers under command of Halil 
Pasha were to be sent to other regions of the Caucasus and 
Turkestan. Enver Pasha also ordered to send a mission headed 
by Nuri Bey to Azerbaijan to establish branch organizations in 
the provinces predominantly populated by Azerbaijani Turks 
and prepare the ground for foundation of the Army of Islam 
manned by the local Muslims. Lieutenant Colonel Nuri Bey 
was promoted to honorary general rank to exclude any doubt of 
his commanding authority. All other officers in the expedition 
to Azerbaijan received promotions as well.233
On April 5, 1918, Enver Pasha approved the instructions 
on establishment, tasks, and activities of the Caucasus Army 
of Islam. According to the instructions, “the main purpose of 
establishment of the Caucasus Army of Islam was to lay the 
foundation of an army to be comprised of Caucasians, gradually 
232 W. E. D. Allen and P. Muratof, 1828-1921. Türk-Kafkaz 
sınırındakı harpleri tarihi [The Caucasian battlefields: A history 
of the wars on the Turko-Caucasian border 1828-1921] (Ankara, 
1966), p. 401. 
233 N. Yucer, op. cit., p. 57.
D148E ANAR ISGENDERLI
expand this foundation, train the Caucasian soldiers, and secure 
the high values of Islam, and political and military ties with the 
Caliph of the Sacred Law and the Ottoman State.”234
Nuri Pasha chose 149 officers and civil servants, 488 soldiers 
and sergeants from the Sixth Army for the foundation of the 
Caucasus Army of Islam. Groups of some 20-30 servicemen 
were sent to Azerbaijan in the beginning of April 1918.235
On May 9, after overcoming long and poor roads, a staff 
of 20 officers finally reached Tabriz. At that time, the majority 
of the territory of South Azerbaijan, including Tabriz, was 
under the Ottoman control. The local population of the 
county located nearby Lake Urmia was distressed by the 
Armenian military. Those who managed to survive appealed 
to the Turkish command for help. The Ottoman military 
command reacted swiftly and sent troops to aid the local 
population. When in Tabriz, Nuri Pasha assigned a special 
task to the officers to gather intelligence on the British troops 
zealous to invade Baku. Following the order, Ibrahim Kamal 
Bey began to collect information on the situation around the 
British troops withdrawing from Lake Urmia and met with 
the governor of the Gilan province, Kichik Khan, to discuss 
the prospects of joint activities of the Ottoman Army with the 
armed units of Kichik Khan.236 Then on May 12, Nuri Pasha’s 
mission moved on Savujbulag-Tebriz-Alajuje road and arrived 
at the Aras River on May 20. The officers crossed the river and 
234 Türk Silahlı Kuvvetleri Askeri Tarih ve Strateji Etüt Başkanlığı 
arşivi (ATASE) folder 1, file 1, sheet 19.
235 Ibid., sheet 29-30.
236 A.N. Kurat, op. cit., p. 385.
D149EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
entered the Zangezur province of Azerbaijan where they were 
met triumphantly by the local population. When the group 
reached Zangezur, ferocities of the Armenian military against 
the Azerbaijani civilians were climaxing. Nuri Pasha kept several 
Turkish officers in the province with the purpose of preventing 
the Armenian aggression and organize resistance groups from 
the local people. Some other Turkish officers were dispatched 
to Nakhchivan and Ordubad.237
After Zangezur, Nuri Pasha proceeded to Yevlakh via 
Jabrayil, Aghdam, and Terter. Upon Nuri Pasha’s arrival in 
Yevlakh on May 24, the residents greeted his mission with 
fervor. The Turkish commander initially chose to headquarter 
the Caucasus Army of Islam in Nukha (now Sheki), but he 
had to change his decision and established the headquarters in 
Ganja due to high activity of Armenian units around Nukha 
and the fact that the town was located aloof from the main 
transport routes. On May 25, Nuri Pasha arrived in Ganja 
and set to organizing resistance groups in several provinces. 
Within a short time, he set up a command post and formed 
smaller teams for the maintenance of law and order in Ganja, 
Gazakh, Zagatala, Nukha, Aghdam, Jabrayil, Karabakh, and 
the eastern territories of Zangezur. Prior to Nuri Pasha’s arrival 
in Azerbaijan, guerilla groups had formed in different provinces 
of Azerbaijan to stand against the Armenian invaders. These 
units were led by formerly captive Turkish officers who had 
been taken to Azerbaijan from the front line. However, at that 
time, the Azerbaijani corps was very low on manpower. The 
entire military personnel included one thousand soldiers and 
237 N. Yucer, op. cit., p. 57.
D150E ANAR ISGENDERLI
officers, with half of them being former Turkish prisoners.238 
Under these circumstances, Nuri Pasha, already familiarized 
with the situation, was assured that without reinforcement, the 
Ottoman campaign in Azerbaijan would not yield any results.
Enver Pasha, apprised of the state of affairs in Azerbaijan, 
ordered the attachment of the Fifth Caucasus Division of 
the East Armies Group to the Caucasus Army of Islam. The 
Fifth Caucasus Division was manned with 257 officers and 
5,575 men.239 However, the active Ottoman forces dispatched 
to Azerbaijan were still fewer in number than the opposing 
Dashnak-Bolshevik troops. On June 20, 1918, Nuri Pasha 
sent a letter to Enver Pasha with a request for additional 
20,000 rifles and ammunition; he also experienced shortage 
in qualified officers for organization of regular infantry and 
cavalry troops.240 In view of these deficiencies and with the 
purpose to ensure the success of the Caucasus Campaign, Enver 
Pasha dispatched the Fifteenth Infantry Division with 157 
officers and 7,636 men to be placed under the command of 
the Caucasus Army of Islam. The Fifteenth Infantry Division 
was commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Suleyman Izzet Bey.241 
Both the Fifth Caucasus Division and the Fifteenth Infantry 
Division were battle-hardened during WWI and were honored 
to bear the name of the most courageous divisions of the 
238 E. Rüştü, Büyük harpda Bakü yollarında [On the way to Baku 
during the Great War] (Ankara, 1934), p. 89. 
239 Ibid., p. 92.
240 T. Sünbül, Azerbaycan dosyası [Azerbaijani file] (Ankara, 1980), 
p. 141. 
241 Ibid., p. 146.
D151EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
Ottoman Army. In the subsequent correspondence, Nuri Pasha 
emphasized the numerical superiority of the opposing troops 
and convinced Enver Pasha to send reinforcements (the 106th 
and 107th regiments of the 36th Division). By comparison, 
the Baku Soviet troops numbered over 20,000 by the end of 
June 1918.242
The Turkish troops entered a fierce battle upon their 
arrival in Azerbaijan. The Bolshevik-Dashnak forces advanced 
westward both on Shamakhi road and by rail and launched 
an all-out attack on Ganja, the then capital of the Azerbaijani 
Democratic Republic. In the face of the Bolshevik-Dashnak 
threat, the command of the Caucasus Army of Islam decided to 
move troops eastward in order to block the adversary. Nuri Pasha 
identified the priority tasks: preventing the potential Armenian 
threat in and around Ganja, disarming Armenians in the city, 
and ensuring the security of the Azerbaijani population. By that 
time, over twenty thousand Armenians had settled in Ganja, 
predominantly in its eastern quarters. The Armenian community 
opposed the arrival of the Ottoman troops in Azerbaijan and 
stood against their intention to establish headquarters in Ganja. 
They were anxious to see the rapid advancement of the Baku 
Soviet forces toward Ganja. The local Armenians had formed an 
armed unit of six hundred men supplied with various weapons, 
including machine guns and ammunition. On June 10, Nuri 
Pasha ordered the disarmament of the Ganja Armenians. The next 
day, Nuri Pasha’s Ganja unit surrounded the Armenian quarter; 
242 A. B. Kadishev, Interventsiia i grazhdanskaia voina v Zakavkaz’e 
[Intervention and civil war in Transcaucasia] (Moscow, 1960), p. 
189.
D152E ANAR ISGENDERLI
the soldiers and officers of the Turkish cavalry regiment assumed 
prebattle positions and captured four Armenian watchmen. Two 
of the Ottoman officers went to the Armenian quarter to explain 
the necessity of surrendering their weapons. The Armenians 
refused to yield and fired at the officers. Then they attacked 
furiously, trying to surround the Turkish troops. Thirteen soldiers 
were killed and seven were wounded from the Turkish side in the 
clash. The Ganja unit retreated to take better-defended positions 
and eventually rebuffed the Armenian attack. The commander 
of the Turkish Army notified the Armenians through a German 
national from Helenendorf that if they chose to continue the 
hostilities, the Armenian district would be bombarded. After 
the warning, at 11:00 p.m., a priest, an Armenian officer, and a 
commissar holding a white flag appeared in front of the Ganja 
unit headquarters. After negotiations, the Armenians agreed 
to give up their arms. However, the Armenians failed to keep 
their promise again. The Turkish military command decided to 
suspend the operation till the next morning. On June 12, Turkish 
artillery forced the Armenians to surrender. The Ottoman troops 
kept the Armenian quarter in a blockade for three days and 
completed the process of disarming the Armenians.243 Thus the 
potential threat for the Caucasus Army of Islam in Ganja was 
eliminated.
The arrival of the Turkish troops in Ganja by invitation 
of the Azerbaijani Democratic Republic, the buildup of the 
Caucasus Army of Islam under Nuri Pasha’s command, and the 
shaping of the Azerbaijani National Army perturbed the leaders 
of the Baku Soviet of People’s Commissars. On June 6, 1918, 
243 N. Keykurun, op. cit., p. 59.
D153EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
the Baku Soviet forces with twenty thousand soldiers attacked 
westward from Hajigabul by the Order No. 8 of the commissar 
of war and navy affairs, Korganov, with an aim to terminate the 
activities of the Azerbaijani National Government in Ganja. 
The majority of the soldiers and the officers of this Red Army 
were ethnic Armenians; three of the four commissars leading 
the offensive were also Armenians. On June 6, before marching 
out to Ganja, Korganov addressed the personnel: “You must 
determine the fate of the peasants’ and workers’ revolution in 
Transcaucasia. If Turkish generals enter Baku with their troops, 
they will smash the Soviet rule. That’s why you must defend the 
hub of the oil industry, Baku, for the Soviet republic. You will 
receive all necessary support from the North Caucasus.”244
Initially, the Baku Soviet troops marched toward Ganja 
without encountering any resistance. On June 16, the 
Soviet army confronted the Army of Islam near the village 
of Gara-Maryam. At 9:00 a.m., the Soviet troops launched 
an assault on the opposing unit comprised of Azerbaijanis, 
Georgians, and Dagestanis. In the seven-hour-long battle, the 
Azerbaijani national troops tried to prevent the Soviet units 
from penetrating into Gara-Maryam but failed to fulfill the 
task. Gara-Maryam, which had an important strategic position, 
was captured by the Bolshevik-Dashnak forces.
The Baku Soviet military entered the Azerbaijani villages, 
took away all weapons from the people, and appropriated their 
food and pack animals. Any unarmed villagers who attempted 
to resist were killed without hesitation. At the same time, the 
244 Suren Shaumian, Bakinskaia Kommuna [The Baku commune] 
(Baku, 1927), p. 54.
D154E ANAR ISGENDERLI
Soviet command established special groups in the invaded 
villages to propagandize the population and organize an 
anti-Ottoman front. In order to strengthen the Red Army, the 
Bolsheviks announced a military draft of non-Muslims born 
between 1893 and 1897.
The course of the battle of Gara-Maryam was closely 
analyzed in the headquarters of the Caucasus Army of Islam. 
The commander of the Caucasus Army of Islam, Nuri Pasha, 
the commander of the Azerbaijani corps, Aliagha Shikhlinski, 
and the chief of staff of the Fifth Caucasus Division, Rüştü 
Bey, made a visit to the front line to study the situation from 
the ground, regroup the forces, and mobilize all resources. Nuri 
Pasha also visited Goychay and met not only with the soldiers 
but also with the local people; he called the villagers to render 
all possible aid to the Turkish-Azerbaijani troops.
After a thorough examination of the situation at the 
front line, Nuri Pasha put off doubts of the eventual victory 
over the Bolsheviks despite the failure in the first battle; he 
was assured that the joint Turkish-Azerbaijani troops could 
achieve a military advantage by mobilizing all available 
resources. Therefore, Nuri Pasha ordered preparation for a 
decisive battle and dispatched reinforcement to Goychay. The 
troops prepared their front line until June 27. On June 26, 
the Bolshevik-Dashnak forces obtained intelligence on the 
precombat preparations undertaken by the Caucasus Army 
of Islam. Upon receiving this information, the Red Army 
headquarters made a decision to attack without delay in order 
to forestall the Azerbaijani offensive and take the military 
initiative. The Baku Soviet troops launched an attack on June 
27, but the Army of Islam held their ground. This was the 
D155EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
first time when the Bolshevik detachments could not win a 
battle they had started. The unexpectedly launched battle had 
a great psychological importance for the Caucasus Army of 
Islam. The results of battle proved that the Bolshevik-Dashnak 
forces were not invincible and that a properly prearranged 
combat could halt the Bolsheviks and undermine their plans. 
In the early morning of June 29, the Caucasus Army of Islam 
pushed forward to a winning attack. The operational flexibility 
and swiftness of the headquarters of the Caucasus Army of 
Islam, timely reinforcement of the troops defending Goychay, 
and high morale among the Azerbaijani soldiers effectively 
neutralized the efforts of the Bolshevik forces led by Dashnak 
Amirov. The Bolsheviks, defeated near Goychay, were forced 
to retreat and took positions four miles off the town. On July 
1, the Dashnak-Bolshevik units gave up and, when they saw 
no prospect for further advance, began to retreat.245
Thus, in the battles around Goychay and Gara-Maryam 
from mid-June to early July, the Caucasus Army of Islam 
achieved a sweeping victory over the joint Bolshevik-Dashnak 
troops and flung them back to Aghsu. The Bolshevik military 
could not take the military initiative again after these clashes. 
During that period, the Caucasus Army of Islam, joined by 
the Azerbaijani volunteers, achieved major progress in their 
conduct of combat, from a defeat in the early fight to a 
confident superiority after the battle of Goychay.
245 Erdaş Nilgün. Milli mücadile döneminde Kafkas Cümhuriyyetleri 
ilə ilişkiler (1917-1921) [Relationships with the Republics of 
Caucausus at the time of the national struggle (1917-1921)] 
(Ankara, 1994), p. 39.
D156E ANAR ISGENDERLI
In parallel with the battles near Goychay, there were clashes 
between the Turkish-Azerbaijani troops and the Red Army along 
the Kura River near Salyan; the sides fought to gain control of 
this strategically important location. Salyan was considered to 
be a key to the rich grain stocks of the Mughan plain. The 
failure to capture a bridge over the Kura River near Yevlakh 
during the Ganja march impelled the Baku Soviet leaders and 
the command of the Bolshevik-Dashnak troops to seek other 
options. The Soviet leadership planned to send special troops 
on vessels from the Caspian Sea up the Kura River to Yevlakh to 
arrange the explosion of the Yevlakh bridge. From June 16 till 
July 2, Salyan turned into a battlefield for the Soviet military 
fighting against the Turkish-Azerbaijani troops. The Soviet 
units in Salyan included over two thousand infantry soldiers 
and held twelve machine guns, six cannons, two warships, 
and one troopship sailing in the Kura River. Although the 
Dashnak-Bolshevik units outnumbered the Muslim troops 
and were better equipped, on July 2, the latter rebuffed the 
Dashnak-Bolshevik assault and forced them to retreat.246
On July 5, the joint Turkish-Azerbaijani troops marched 
toward Aghsu. The next morning, they attacked and defeated 
the Dashnak-Bolshevik forces and drove them out of Aghsu. 
The Baku Soviet forces partially retreated southward and 
overran positions in Kurdemir.247
On July 7 and 8, 1918, the Turkish-Azerbaijani troops 
reached Kurdemir and immediately engaged in a battle. The 
military superiority of the Bolsheviks, who even possessed an 
246 N. Yucer, op. cit., p. 95.
247 Ibid., p. 96.
D157EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
ironclad train and armored vehicles, did not deter the Army 
of Islam. By the night of July 10, the Muslims proved able to 
push the Dashnak-Bolshevik units out of Kurdemir and began 
pursuit of the retreating troops.
Dislodgement of the Soviet troops from Shamakhi was the 
next task of the Caucasus Army of Islam on its way to Baku. 
Fighting for Shamakhi with its complex terrain became a 
serious challenge for the Muslim troops; the task, if completed 
successfully, would free the local population from the fear of 
the Armenian atrocities once for all. Shamakhi also had an 
important strategic location for further direct advancement 
toward Baku. For this reason, the command of the Caucasus 
Army of Islam deemed it essential to prepare extensively for 
a decisive assault on Shamakhi and complete it at the earliest 
time. On July 19, 1918, Mursel Pasha, the commander of the 
Eastern Front, ordered an attack on Shamakhi. Heavy rain 
and muddy roads complicated the movement of the weaponry 
in the mountains. Despite these difficulties, the soldiers of 
the Tenth and Thirteenth Regiments demonstrated physical 
endurance and delivered heavy strikes at the Soviet troops. In 
the afternoon, the Bolshevik-Dashnak detachments started 
a massive retreat back to Shamakhi.248 The battle continued 
on July 20; by nightfall, the Bolshevik troops were dislodged 
from Shamakhi, and the Turkish-Azerbaijani forces took over 
the town. Anastas Mikoyan, one of the Baku Soviet leaders 
and the commissar of the third brigade in Shamakhi, accused 
the commander of the Third Army Hamazasp (Srvandztian) 
in failing to arrange proper defense of Shamakhi. The Baku 
248 E. Rüştü, op. cit., p. 149.
D158E ANAR ISGENDERLI
Soviet leadership sent urgent telegrams to Lenin and Stalin and 
dispatched reinforcement to support the Bolshevik-Dashnak 
troops; however, all efforts to recapture Shamakhi were doomed 
to failure.249
The Bolshevik-Dashnak forces attempted to take advantage 
of the temporary ceasefire on the front line. Chaos in the Red 
Army units ascended to the Baku Soviet and brought the entity 
to the verge of a collapse. The last resort of the Bolshevik leaders 
in Baku was an aid from Soviet Russia—their only ally capable 
of redressing the situation. By Lenin’s direction, a well-armed 
Soviet unit of 780 soldiers led by Petrov was transferred to 
Baku from the Ukrainian Front. On July 19, Petrov arrived 
in Baku with his unit and was immediately appointed as the 
military commissar of the Baku district. It was clear that Petrov’s 
unit by itself was incapable of preventing the march of the 
Caucasus Army of Islam to Baku. Under these circumstances, 
the Bolsheviks appealed to their supporters among the Baku 
residents and tried to attract additional military support to 
the Bolshevik-Dashnak detachments at the front line by 
appealing to chauvinistic sentiments of the non-Azerbaijani 
population.250
As the units of the Caucasus Army of Islam approached 
Baku, the political forces around the Baku Commissars became 
embroiled in contention. The leaders of the Baku Soviet, 
249 Suren Shaumian, op. cit., p. 69.
250 E. A. Tokarzhevskii, Iz istorii inostrannoi interventsii i 
qrazhdanskoi voiny v Azerbaijane [Glimpses of history of the 
foreign intervention and the civil war in Azerbaijan] (Baku, 
1957), pp. 190-191.
D159EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
extraneous to the Azerbaijani nation, realized that in case of 
marching of the Muslim troops in Baku, they would be held 
liable for the tragedies and crimes they had committed. The only 
way out was seen in bringing the British troops to Baku. Some 
Baku Soviet members—the Socialist-Revolutionaries (SR) and 
the Dashnaks—reckoned that the advent of the British troops 
in Baku would keep the Caucasus Army of Islam out of the city 
and strengthen their positions in Baku. The Bolsheviks suffered 
a heavy defeat in an extraordinary meeting of the Baku Soviet 
on July 25. Despite all efforts of the Bolsheviks in the meeting, 
the right-wing SR, the Dashnaks, and the Mensheviks voted in 
favor of inviting British troops to Baku.251
The Turkish-Azerbaijani troops were rapidly approaching 
Baku without facing any serious resistance in the suburbs; the 
Muslim command cherished illusions for a prompt surrender 
of the city. On July 31, the commander of the Caucasus Army 
of Islam sent envoys to the Baku Soviet to persuade them to 
surrender peacefully and avoid unnecessary casualties. The 
Turkish-Azerbaijani command guaranteed a corridor for 
Armenians who chose to leave the city. Enver Pasha was 
personally in control of the surrender process; he ordered, 
by telegram, that all Armenians be in no way hindered from 
moving to Armenia, if they peacefully surrendered the city. The 
Armenians of Baku and their supporters expected that the early 
arrival of the British troops in Baku would change the state of 
affairs in their favor.252
251  Ibid., p. 198.
252 L. Dunsterville, The Adventures of Dunsterforce (London: Arnold, 
1920), pp. 207-9. Russian translation: Britanskii imperializm v 
D160E ANAR ISGENDERLI
On the night of July 30, the Bolsheviks made their last try to 
preserve their power. The Baku Soviet and the Dashnaktsutiun 
leaders made a common decision to send all remaining units to 
the front line. On August 1, the Socialist Revolutionaries, the 
Mensheviks, and the Armenians declared a new government 
in Baku—the Centrocaspian Dictatorship—dominated by the 
Dashnaktsutiun Party.253
The strife for power prompted the toppled Baku Soviet 
commissars to leave Baku for Astrakhan in quest of support 
from Bolshevik authorities consolidated there. The initial 
attempt failed, and on August 14, the former commissars were 
arrested by the Centrocaspian Dictatorship and convicted 
of embezzlement. A month later, on September 14, the 
commissars utilized the final offensive of the Caucasus Army 
of Islam and escaped from prison under heavy bombardment. 
They managed to board the vessel Turkmen, which initially 
set a course for Astrakhan. However, the commissars were 
exposed by the crew, and the vessel changed its course for 
Krasnovodsk where the commissars were surrendered to the 
Turkestan socialist-revolutionary government. The Turkestani 
government, which had received resolution of the Centrocaspian 
Dictatorship sentencing the commissars to death without 
investigation, supported the decision. On September 19, the 
commissars were shot dead in Agjakum valley.
In early August, the Caucasus Army of Islam continued 
marching toward Baku. On August 3, the Muslim troops 
Baku i Persii v 1917-1918 g. [British imperialism in Baku and Persia 
in 1917-1918] (Tbilisi, 1925), p. 89.
253 Ibid., p. 114.
D161EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
engaged in a battle with the Centrocaspian units between 
Khirdalan and Bilajari settlements northeast of Baku. After 
winning the battle, Mursel Pasha, the commander of the Eastern 
Front, resent his ultimatum to the forces in control of the city. 
The letter was written in the Russian and the Turkish languages 
and addressed to the chairman of the Armenian National 
Council in Baku and the commander of the Centrocaspian 
Army. The letter read,
Mr. Chairman of the Armenian National Council, as you 
are aware, the Turkish Army is at the approaches to Baku. 
If you agree to surrender the city peacefully, I guarantee the 
protection of rights of everybody regardless of ethnicity and 
faith. If the city is not surrendered, you will be responsible 
for bloodshed and losses sustained after occupation of the 
city.254
The leaders of the Armenian National Council and the 
Dashnaktsutiun Party left the ultimatum unanswered and 
resumed fighting against the Turkish-Azerbaijani troops.
On August 4, a small detachment of the British troops, 
headed by Colonel Stokes, arrived in Baku. The British 
military assistance, moderate as it was, enheartened the leaders 
of the Centrocaspian Dictatorship and gave a second wind 
to the Dashnak troops. The leaders of the Centrocaspian 
Dictatorship propagandized the residents and tried to assure 
the population by alleging that the British command would 
254 Kut’ül Amare Kahramanı Halil Paşa’nın Anıları: Bitmeyen Savaş 
(Istanbul, 1972), p. 213.
D162E ANAR ISGENDERLI
send thirty thousand troops against the Turkish Army. The 
propaganda yielded results.
The Turkish army planned to launch a decisive attack on 
Baku on August 5. The battle began early in the morning with 
the Caucasus Army of Islam taking the initiative. The Muslims 
prevailed all along the line of contact. The Centrocaspian 
troops retreated after the first thrust of the Muslims. The 
Dashnak defense line, which lay through the Bayil hights and 
the hills of Gurd Gapysy, was captured by the Caucasus Army 
of Islam. However, despite the penetration through the outer 
line of resistance and approach to the second defense line, the 
attack halted due to an insufficient supply of artillery shells. 
The Muslim infantry, left without artillery support, was forced 
to take up defensive dispositions. The situation reversed—the 
Dashnaks flung the Muslim units three miles back. The death 
toll among the Dashnak-Centrocaspian forces reached 2,000. 
The Caucasus Army of Islam lost 139 soldiers and 9 officers, 
and 463 Muslim servicemen were injured in the combat.255
The failure of the Muslim army to gain control over Baku 
reanimated the Dashnaks. On August 6, after reinforcement 
of the Armenian-Russian units by the British detachment of 
General Dunsterville,256 all able men of Baku aged between 
sixteen and sixty-five were compulsively drafted into the 
army. Some six hundred Muslims who resisted the order were 
immediately executed.257
255 N. Yucer, op. cit., p. 120.
256 Dunsterville, op. cit., pp. 218-317.
257 M. Saray, Azerbaycan türkleri tarihi [History of Azerbaijani 
Turks] (Istanbul, 1993), pp.122-123.
D163EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
Successful completion of the Muslim offensive required 
substantial reinforcement by the local troops and, above all, 
heightening of the morale among the soldiers and revival of 
the winning spirit. With this aim in mind, a few days later, 
the command of the Caucasus Army of Islam addressed to the 
soldiers:
To the Turkish Army! If you do not capture this city of 
treasure and gold, you will miss an opportunity to make 
a precious gift to our beloved motherland. If you do 
not capture the famous city near the green sea, you will 
see the Caucasian Turks and the Muslims of Turkestan 
stabbed in the heart with a poisoned dagger with the 
following words engraved on it: ‘Alas, the Turks did not 
come to our relief.’ The Caucasus will wail and Turkestan 
will lament.”
The liberation of Baku was a critical cause for the 
Azerbaijanis, who saw it as the future capital of an independent 
Azerbaijan. Rasulzade, while in Turkey, wrote in a letter to the 
minister of foreign affairs, M. Hajinski: “Baku must be seized 
soon by all means and at any cost. Otherwise we will achieve a 
stalemate. Should we fail to overtake Baku, it will be all over. 
Then good-bye, Azerbaijan!”258
The battle of August 5 was followed by a brief truce. 
The Centrocaspian and the British troops attempted to 
take advantage of the opportunity and press the success but 
were repulsed by the Turkish troops. Meanwhile, within 
258 SARA, col. 894, list 10, file 154, sheet 16.
D164E ANAR ISGENDERLI
a few days, the Caucasus Army of Islam took control of 
Novkhany, Goradil, Pirshaghy, Kurdekhany, and Fatmai 
villages and drew the villagers of Mashtagha and Hokumeli 
into the units attacking Baku. Protracted battles from August 
25 to September 13 ended with the predominance of the 
Turkish-Azerbaijani troops, which drew closer to Baku.259 
On September 14, at half past eight in the evening, the 
commander of the Caucasus Army of Islam, Nuri Pasha, 
issued Order No. 100 to launch the final assault on the city. 
The number of soldiers and officers was increased up to 
fourteen thousand, including eight thousand Ottomans and 
six thousand Azerbaijanis.260
On September 15, at 5:30 a.m., the Muslim troops 
mounted a crucial offensive. The leadership of the 
Centrocaspian Dictatorship, realizing the hopelessness of 
the situation and its inability to repulse the attack, agreed to 
begin talks. At 10:30 a.m., the commander of the Western 
Front of the Centrocaspian Army arrived at the headquarters 
of the Fifth Muslim Division in a car with a white flag aloft.261 
He accepted an ultimatum of unconditional surrender on the 
following terms:
1. Capitulation of troops in the city
2. Surrender of artillery, other arms, and buildings
3. Release of Turkish, German, and Austrian prisoners 
from their imprisonment on Nargin Island
259 N. Yucer, op. cit., p. 137. 
260 W. E. D. Allen and P. Muratof, op. cit., p. 458.
261 E. Rüştü, op. cit., p. 212. 
D165EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
4. Surrender of ammunition depots, food, trucks, armored 
vehicles, planes, and other military equipment262
In the fights for Baku, the Turkish-Azerbaijani army captured 
17 Armenian and 9 Russian officers and 1,151 Armenian, 383 
Russian, 4 British, and 113 other soldiers. The Fifth Muslim 
Division lost up to 1,130 servicemen in the battles for Baku from 
early August till mid-September. The overall death toll among 
the Muslim officers and soldiers perished in the battles for the 
independence of Azerbaijan exceeded 4,000 from mid-June 
till mid-September, not including casualties in the voluntary 
Azerbaijani units.263
Thus, on September 15, at 3:00 p.m., Baku was completely 
taken under the control of the Caucasus Army of Islam. Nuri 
Pasha sent congratulatory telegrams to the Ottoman minister 
of war, Enver Pasha, and to the Azerbaijani Government in 
Ganja. Nuri Pasha also requested the Azerbaijani Government 
to swiftly dispatch a police force from Ganja to establish and 
preserve order in Baku. The establishment of Turkish control 
over Baku brought about rejoicing both within the Azerbaijani 
society and among the leaders of the Ottoman Empire, 
especially Enver Pasha. Rasulzade wrote of that historical 
moment: “September 15 is as valuable as May 28 in the history 
of the Azerbaijani nation. On May 28 the independence of the 
262 Süleyman İzzet, Birinci Dünya Harbi’nde Azerbaycan ve Dağıstan 
Muharebelerinde 15-ci Piyade Tümeni, [15th Infantry Division’s 
movements and battles in Azerbaijan and North Caucasia in 
WWI] (Ankara, 1936), p. 49.
263 Süleyman İzzet, op. cit., p. 49.
D166E ANAR ISGENDERLI
Republic was declared to the world, whereas on September 15 
this independence gained a solid foundation. With liberation 
of Baku by the Caucasus Army of Islam the head joined the 
body. Baku is the head and the body is Azerbaijan.”264
Fatali Khan Khoyski, the then prime minister of Azerbaijan, 
wrote to Nuri Pasha on the occasion of taking control of Baku: 
“On behalf of my nation I am proud to enunciate our gratitude 
to the bravest and noblest soldiers in the world—the sons of 
the Turkish people on the occasion of liberating Baku, the 
capital of Azerbaijan, from the enemies. The nation is grateful 
to you.”265
The commanders of the Turkish Army—Nuri Pasha, 
Halil Pasha, Mursel Pasha, and others—were hosted by the 
esteemed “father of the people,” a great enlightener and patron, 
Haji Zeynal-Abdin Taghiyev. Taghiyev, who had promised to 
present his grand double-story mansion (now the Museum 
of the Azerbaijani History) to the Turkish command in case 
of their triumph and liberation of Baku, kept his pledge and 
placed the building at the service of the Turkish officers.266
A few days after entering Baku, the Caucasus Army of 
Islam began to prepare a mission for Karabakh to prevent the 
massacre of Azerbaijanis launched by the Dashnak gangs. Some 
other unit of the Army continued the rescue campaign toward 
Dagestan.
264 Azerbaycan journal  (July-October 1993): p. 80.
265 Azerbaycan journal  issue no. 7 (1962): p. 29.
266 Onk Nizamettin, “Yeni Azerbaycan kurularken” [“While building 
new Azerbaijan”], Türk Dünyası journal of history (April 1992): 
p. 34.
D167EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
4.4. The Baku soviet of People’s Commissars
The slaughters of the Turkic population in March 1918, 
launched by Dashnak Armenian gangs under the guidance 
of Stepan Shaumian, altered the political situation in Baku 
in the favor of Bolsheviks. Most of the Azerbaijani families 
had to leave the city; many of them fled to Central Asia and 
Persia, and the rest scattered in the surrounding villages to 
escape genocide by the Bolshevik-Dashnak gangs. Patronized 
by high-ranking Armenian “Bolsheviks,” the Dashnaktsutiun 
leaders acted as sole owners of Baku. All papers and magazines 
but Armenian-Bolshevik political organs were shut down. 
Bolsheviks gained control of the entire transport and established 
a labor commissariat and food directorate. Notwithstanding the 
ban on all national councils, the Armenian National Council 
continued functioning.
On April 25, Bolsheviks established the Baku Soviet of 
People’s Commissars to assume the entire authority over the 
city. After being elected the Baku Soviet’s chairman, Shaumian, 
under the veil of establishment of “workers’ and peasants’ 
authority,” set a goal to cleanse Azerbaijan of Azerbaijanis, 
plunder the resources of the country, and realize the dream of 
Great Armenia on the Azerbaijani lands. Following Shaumian’s 
order of April 26, Bolsheviks stripped fifty million manats from 
local bourgeoisie by using force and intimidation. The money, 
violently reived from Azerbaijani magnates, was later found in 
Shaumian’s cabin when he attempted to flee from Baku.
Under Russian guidance, Shaumian nationalized the oil 
industry and arranged the delivery of oil to Russia. In order to 
speed up the production and transportation of the Azerbaijani 
D168E ANAR ISGENDERLI
oil, Lenin approved allocation of one hundred million rubles 
to the Baku Soviet. In comparison with the period between 
November 1917 and March 1918, when only 4,313,000 puds 
of oil were delivered to Russian ports, this number increased 
drastically and reached 80,025,000 puds from early April to 
late July 1918. Over 700,000 puds of cotton, 100,000 puds of 
dried fish, tons of rice, salt, and other provisions were supplied 
to Russia from Baku and Azerbaijani provinces under the guise 
of fraternal aid.267
The Baku Soviet dismissed the city duma of Baku chaired 
by Fatali Khan Khoyski and declared the Transcaucasian Seim 
a counterrevolutionary entity. The Moscow leadership applied 
best efforts to bolster the Baku Soviet both in military and 
political terms. At Lenin’s direction, the Military Commissariat 
and the Council for Revolutionary Struggle arranged swift 
supply of all necessary ammunition for the Dashnak-Bolshevik 
troops in Baku and sent five thousand rifles, two million 
cartridges, thirty-five machine guns, four armored vehicles, and 
thirteen aircrafts.268 Grigory Korganov, then navy commissar of 
the Baku Soviet, writes in a letter to Moscow: “The commune 
army numbers 18,000 troops; the overall majority of soldiers, 
roughly 13,000, and almost all officers are Armenians.”269 
The commanders of the Baku Soviet troops—Z. Avetisian, N. 
267 Azərbaycanda sosialist inqilabının qələbəsi uğrunda bolşeviklərin 
mübarizəsi. Sənədlər və materiallar. 1917-1918 [Bolsheviks’ 
struggle for the victory of socialist revolution in Azerbaijan. 
Documents and records. 1917-1918] (Baku, 1960), p. 89.
268 Ibid., p. 191.
269 Suren Shaumian, op. cit., p. 25.
D169EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
Ghazarian, and Amazasp Srvantstian—were former gangsters, 
notorious for outrageous atrocities against Azerbaijanis. The 
Baku Soviet’s leader Shaumian, unable to reach Nakhchivan 
directly, dispatched his directives to Andranik, whose 
ferocious gang terrorized the Azerbaijani population in the 
region. In July 1918, Andranik wired to Shaumian: “Julfa is 
in hand. It is at your disposal.”270 To that end, in July 1918, 
Andranik announced the establishment of the Bolshevik rule 
in Nakhchivan and declared the province an integral part 
of Soviet Russia. On June 4, 1918, Andranik telegraphed 
Shaumian, asserting his readiness to render obedience and 
accept the authority of the central Russian government and 
help the Baku Commune. After reporting the news to Lenin, 
Shaumian replied by wire: “Julfa, to people’s leader Andranik. 
I have received your telegram no. 577 and passed the full text 
to the central government in Moscow. For our part, I greet 
you as a true hero of the people.”271 Further in the telegram, 
Shaumian requested to politicize the Armenian aggression and 
seek access routes to Baku.
One of the primary goals of the Baku Soviet was 
establishment of the Dashnak-Bolshevik rule in Azerbaijani 
provinces through massacres and genocide of Azerbaijani Turks. 
The Baku Soviet, hostile to the idea of national sovereignty 
of Azerbaijan, was prepared to rather burn Baku than cede it 
to the Azerbaijani Democratic Republic. The time-dictated 
270 Ch. Agaian, Rol’ Rossii v istoricheskikh sud’bakh armianskogo 
naroda [Russia’s role in the historic foredoom of the Armenian 
people] (Moscow, 1978), p. 267.
271 Ch. Agaian, op. cit., p. 260.
D170E ANAR ISGENDERLI
overturn of the alien anti-Azerbaijani regime became a sacred 
duty of the national government of Azerbaijan.
4.5. The British Troops Enter Baku
The political developments in Azerbaijan hinged on twists 
and consequences of the world-shaking war rather than domestic 
processes. In the imperialist war between the two belligerent 
camps, Azerbaijan naturally supported the Ottomans and hoped 
for their victory to secure its own interests. However, the events 
took a different course. On October 30, 1918, Turkey signed 
the Mudros Treaty with the Entente. The treaty obligated the 
defeated Ottoman troops to withdraw from Baku, desist from 
impeding the occupation of Baku by the Entente troops, and 
yield the control over Transcaucasian railroad to the Entente. 
The British detachments disembarking from the Persian port 
of Anzali were to occupy Baku on behalf of the allies. Article 
11 of the Mudros Treaty declared Azerbaijan within the circle 
of British influence, whereas Article 15 stipulated British 
control over roads and oilfields of Azerbaijan and enforced 
Turkey to refrain from protesting against occupation of Baku. 
Azerbaijan’s plenipotentiary representative in the Ottoman 
Empire, Alimerdan Topchubashov, voiced his government’s 
concern in regard to the severe conditions of the Mudros Treaty, 
which affected Azerbaijan, and lodged an objection against 
the inclusion of clauses related to Baku and the Azerbaijani 
railroad in the treaty without Azerbaijan’s participation. The 
note of protest emphasized that despite the recognition of the 
Azerbaijani Democratic Republic by the Ottoman government, 
it neglected the international law and regulations by accepting 
D171EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
the clauses, which concern the capital city of Azerbaijan, and 
supporting British intervention in the country.272 However, the 
Azerbaijani government fully realized its complete disability to 
influence the provisions of the treaty and, hence, dispatched a 
delegation to Anzali to settle relations with the British forces 
bound for Baku. In the meeting with General Thomson, the 
commander of the British forces in Anzali, the Azerbaijani 
envoys proposed that the British military command declared 
recognition of ADR prior to entering its territory. However, the 
proposal was rejected by General Thomson, who stated, “To 
my knowledge, the Azerbaijani people do not have a republic 
established by popular vote, there is only a government set up by 
the Turkish command. Nevertheless, if you claim the opposite, 
we shall check everything on the ground and make an appropriate 
decision. The Allies came in not to destruct, but to create.”273
General Thomson declared that the Azerbaijani and the 
Turkish troops must withdraw from Baku before 10:00 a.m. 
on November 17. The British forces would take charge of Baku 
and its oilfields, and the rest of the country would stay under 
control of the Azerbaijani government and army. The manifesto 
refused to officially recognize Azerbaijan but provided for 
establishment of de facto relations between its government and 
envoys from the United Kingdom, France, and the United States 
and announced that all agencies and services would continue 
functioning with some adjustments. Other provisions implied 
272 SARA, col. 970, list 1, file 68, sheet 2.
273 M. Mammadzade, Milli Azərbaycan hərəkatı [The Azerbaijani 
national movement] (Berlin, 1938; reprinted: Baku, 1992), p 
107.
D172E ANAR ISGENDERLI
the appointment of General Thomson in the position of 
governor-general of Baku, establishment of British supervision 
over the city police, resumption of free functioning of the 
city duma, participation of Azerbaijani delegates in the Paris 
Peace Conference in accordance with the principle of national 
self-determination, entry of Lazar Bicherakhov and his troops 
along with the British forces in Baku, and debarment of the 
armed Armenian gangs in Baku.274
The talks of the Azerbaijani delegation with General 
Thomson had a certain success, mainly due to the stipulation of 
Azerbaijanis partaking in the peace conference and the obligation 
assumed by General Thomson to bar Armenian gangs from the 
city. The arrival of the British forces in Baku on November 17 
entailed different attitudes from the local residents. Supporters 
of the Russian and the Armenian national councils rejoiced. 
Bicherakhov scattered leaflets from planes addressed “to the 
Russian Citizens,” congratulating the Christian population of 
Baku for “embracing the Motherland.” General Thomson’s 
manifest, followed two days later, was in the same vein. However, 
his intentions were overshadowed by General Bicherakhov who 
announced the setup of the illegitimate Caucasian-Caspian 
government and launched preparations for a takeover in Baku. 
With Bicherakhov’s arrival, rumormongers within the Armenian 
and the Russian national councils in Baku claimed that no 
Azerbaijani state existed, and there was one and undivided 
Russia. The Azerbaijani government was planned to be deposed 
and replaced by Bicherakhov’s Caucasian-Caspian government.
274 A. Ziyadxanlı, Azərbaycan (Baku, 1919; reprinted: Baku, 1993), 
p. 46.
D173EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
Upon arrival in Baku, General Thomson met with 
representatives of local national and political groups, including 
delegates from Armenian and Azerbaijani communities of the 
town. He described these meetings and briefly characterized 
the situation in Baku in a report to his command:
On the 18th [of November] . . . the Armenian 
Bishop called and poured forth some of the woes of 
his people and a “moderate” Armenian leader with 
him explained exactly which people, Russian and 
Tartar [i.e., Azerbaijanis], should be drastically dealt 
with, in his view, as a foundation to any building up 
process . . .
Mr. Asadalieff275 called by request and was most 
encouraging as to the prospects of forming a coalition 
provincial Government of moderates of all parties, 
politicians to be rigidly excluded. He is a very wealthy 
Tartar and carries much weight with all classes in 
consequence and apparently has been a moderating 
influence for many years . . .
To form a hasty opinion of a complex situation with 
72 hours experience is absurd. The following stand out as 
salient features:
1. National patriotism for a Great Russia whether a 
Monarchy or Republic is practically non-existent 
in Baku.
275 Mirza Asadullayev, member of the National Council and future 
member of the Cabinet.
D174E ANAR ISGENDERLI
2. The hatred and intolerance between the 
uneducated Armenian and Tartar is incredible in 
its ferocity.
3. The educated Russian has lost heart at any rate 
temporarily, and carries little weight but he sides 
with the Tartar rather than the Armenian whom 
all stigmatise traitors to every cause they have 
supported from Bolshevism to the British.
4. The Allies are suspected of trying to push the 
Caucasus peoples under a Central Russian 
Government of some kind after making good 
terms for the British, French, and American pets, 
the Armenians.276
4.6. Forming the Azerbaijani Parliament
The Azerbaijani National Council, forced to cease 
activities on June 17, 1918, in Ganja, resumed its functions 
on November 16 in Baku. In the opening speech, Rasulzade 
declared, “Our National Council is not a council founded upon 
a constituent assembly and elected by popular vote. Our present 
National Council shall expand into a parliament and include 
representatives of all nations, who bind the fate of all strata of 
their societies with the fate of Azerbaijan, who rejoice at success 
and grieve over sorrows of Azerbaijan. Then we will have a 
276 Situation on arrival in Transcaucasia. Narrative of first few days in 
Baku. November 17-24, 1918, by Major General W. M. Thomson, 
commanding Northern Persian Force. The British Archives 
6480105, CAB 45/107, pp. 2, 3, 5.
D175EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
full-fledged parliament.”277 The chairman of the government, 
F. Khoyski, addressed the council with a request to take charge 
of preparations for convening a constituting assembly due to 
the overwhelming workload of the government. Khoyski’s 
request was agreed to by the Council.
On November 20, 1918, the second gathering of 
the national council in Baku, under the chairmanship of 
Rasulzade, brought an extensive discussion of the draft law 
on Forming an Interim Parliament of Azerbaijan. It should 
be noted that in late 1917, the Muslim parties of the South 
Caucasus contested in the elections to the Russian Constituent 
Assembly and won fourteen seats. Unable to participate in 
the Russian Constituent Assembly, they decided to form 
the Transcaucasian Commissariat in Tiflis, which included 
Azerbaijani, Georgian, and Armenian delegates. The fourteen 
Muslim deputies, elected through popular elections, managed 
to raise the number of seats to forty-four by virtue of the votes 
they gained. Unable to call a constitutive meeting in Azerbaijan, 
the Central Muslim Committee of the South Caucasus opted 
for representation of Azerbaijan in the Transcaucasian Seim in 
the interim.278 The fourteen deputies who won in the elections 
to the Russian Constituent Assembly had come from various 
political movements and gained over one million of Muslim 
votes. Therefore, after self-termination of the Transcaucasian 
Seim on May 26, 1918, the forty-four Muslim deputies 
formed the Azerbaijani National Council and took charge of 
governance in Azerbaijan.
277 SARA, col. 895, list 1, file 11, sheet 15.
278 SARA, col. 894, list 10, file 187, sheets 1-2.
D176E ANAR ISGENDERLI
The meeting of the national council on November 20 
recognized the fact that Azerbaijanis were not the only people 
living in Azerbaijan and emphasized the need for the council 
to represent all the minorities. At that time, none of the 
forty-four members of the council came from a minority. The 
orators noted that, along with political representation, the 
council should also include representatives of all social strata. 
The resolution on establishment of a parliament in Azerbaijan 
delimited the territory of the country, which included the Baku 
and the Ganja guberniyas, Zagatala okrug, parts of the Erivan 
and the Tiflis guberniyas. According to the Caucasus Almanac, 
the population of that territory was 2,750,000 people, 
including 1,900,000 Muslims, 500,000 Armenians, and 
230,000 Russians. In terms of one representative per 24,000 
people, the council resolved to grant eighty seats to Muslims, 
twenty-one seats to Armenians, ten seats to Russians, and one 
seat for German, Jewish, Georgian, and Polish minorities. The 
act implied direct transfer of the forty-four council members 
to the parliament as they had already been elected by popular 
vote. The remaining thirty-six seats were distributed among 
cities and uyezds.279 The act also affirmed suffrage for both 
genders and all people within the borders of the country and 
hence made Azerbaijan the first country in the Orient to grant 
suffrage to women.
The twenty-one seats designated for Armenians were 
to be taken by members of the Armenian National Council 
from Ganja (eight seats), Shusha (eight seats), and Baku (five 
279 SARA, col. 895, list 3, file 187, sheets 1-2.
D177EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
seats). Ten representatives of the Russian population were to be 
nominated by the Russian National Council.280
After gaining a foothold in Baku, General Thomson 
engaged in mounting a campaign of czarist Russia’s ally—Great 
Britain—against Soviet Russia and rendered full support to 
armies of Denikin, Kolchak, and Yudenich. Thomson raised 
a demand against the government of Azerbaijan to establish 
earnest relationships with the Russian National Council, 
which, in its turn, demanded from the Azerbaijani government 
the recognition of Russia’s territorial integrity, authority of the 
Russian Constituent Assembly, and Kolchak’s government in 
Ufa. These issues were discussed in a closed meeting of the 
Azerbaijani National Council held in the evening of November 
24. Speaking of the Russian demands, Khoyski noted that 
although it could be acceptable to recognize the Russian 
Constituent Assembly, Azerbaijan’s vital aspiration was to send 
a delegation to the Paris Peace Conference concerned with 
consequences of World War I. He viewed the recognition of 
Kolchak’s government unacceptable since it was not clear how the 
government was formed and who was in that government.281
After intense debates, the council made the following 
decisions:
1. The political situation and system in Azerbaijan to be 
sealed at the Paris Peace Conference.
2. The actual system of governance continues to stay in 
place.
280 SARA, col. 895, list 3, file 25, sheets 3-5. 
281 SARA, col. 895, list 1, file 11, sheets 10-11.
D178E ANAR ISGENDERLI
3. If the Russian Constituent Assembly participates in 
the Paris Peace Conference along with representatives 
of all self-determined nations, Azerbaijan will join the 
conference as well to lobby its position on the issue of 
self-determination.282
The national council called its last meeting under 
chairmanship of Rasulzade at 8:00 p.m. on December 3, 1918. 
The chairman of the cabinet, Khoyski, conveyed the essence of 
the letter he had received at 2:00 p.m. that day from General 
Thomson. In his letter, Thomson declared that the parliament 
should not hold any session in Baku prior to establishment of 
a coalition government.283
Khoyski informed the council members of the cabinet’s steps 
taken in regard to the letter and negotiations with Thomson. 
He also announced that besides Russians and Armenians, 
some Muslim groups also tried to drag the Azerbaijani 
National Council in the mud and persuade Thomson of its 
incompetence. Speaking of the negotiations with Thomson, 
Khoyski noted that he had insisted on the principle of a 
parliament-formed cabinet and had argued that a government 
should be established by the legislative authority elected by 
the majority of the population in order to rely on its support 
and be accountable to the parliament. Through long debates, 
Khoyski had managed to convince Thomson. Composition 
of the coalition government had been the second issue in the 
agenda of negotiations. Thomson had contended that the 
282 Ibid., sheets 11-12.
283 Ibid., sheets 1-3.
D179EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
government should include five representavies of the Mulsim 
population and five members for the Christian minority (three 
Russian and two Armenian members). In response, Khoyski 
had noted that Thomson’s proposal was unfair to Muslims, 
who constituted an absolute majority of the population, and 
had made a counterproposal to compose the government of 
seven Azerbaijanis, three Armenians, and two Russians, or eight 
Azerbaijanis, three Armenians, and three Russians. Eventually, 
Khoyski convinced Thomson to accept the latter option. 
Finishing the narrative, the Premier stated that Thomson had 
assured him that he would support the functioning of the 
parliament and prevent any provoking incident on the opening 
day.
The first meeting of Khoyski with Thomson on November 
20 was contentious. General Thomson declared that he did 
not recognize the Azerbaijani Democratic Republic and 
had come to the land of allied Russia. Khoyski responded 
that the establishment of the Republic was derived from 
commitment and aspiration of the Azerbaijani people and had 
been announced to the international community. Khoyski 
continued, “You [the British] are a great and also civilized 
nation and empire. You should accept our independence.” 
The general responded, “These are political issues between the 
two countries. I am merely a soldier.” Khoyski insisted, “If you 
are a soldier, then I am the Prime Minister of the Republic of 
Azerbaijan, which proclaimed its independence. We did not 
invite you here. I demand your withdrawal from my homeland.” 
General Thomson replied through the translator, “Please tell 
His Excellency Prime Minister, that one should possess a 
military force in order to demand withdrawal of troops. As 
D180E ANAR ISGENDERLI
far as I know, your republic did not form an army.” Khoyski 
returned, “Please tell His Excellency General that he possesses 
only military knowledge. He is either unaware of popular 
will or confuses us with Indians. We, the Azerbaijani Turks, 
had expelled over 100,000 Russian soldiers with the might of 
people beyond our borders before declaring independence. If 
you persist, it would take only few hours to throw a handful of 
British soldiers into the sea with the strength of people. But we 
neither expect malice from you, no bear you any malice.”284
General Thomson provided his own accunt of the meeting 
with Premier Khoyski: “November 20th. The President 
[referring to Fatali Khan Khoyski] of Azerbaijan Government 
came with Mr. Assadalieff [i.e., Mirza Asadullayev] and explained 
at great length how the Republic were forced by circumstances 
into the arms of the Turks. He contended that he was glad to 
see them go and honestly welcomed the Allies as the hope for 
small nations. They look forward to complete emancipation 
from Russia and to that end were raising a ‘defensive army’ of 
50,000 men. He acquiesced in the view that the representation 
of all parties in the Government was desirable and promised 
a reorganization on this basis within a fortnight. He clearly 
understands that the Allies have no intention of recognizing 
Independent Republics, and that all questions of that nature 
will be settled at the Peace Conference. He has little hope of a 
coalition Government but will give it a fair trial and will strive 
for justice for all. He asks that we should judge as to who will be 
284 N. Sheykhzamanli, Azerbaycan istiqlal mücadelesi xatiraları 
[Memoirs of the struggle for independence in Azerbaijan] (Baku, 
1997), p. 85.
D181EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
the transgressor. He spoke bitterly of Russian Government and 
of the treachery of the Armenians, he admits that there is blame 
on all parties. Undoubtedly a clever man, a lawyer, who has set 
up a vigorous local administration, vastly more practicable than 
any previously known in the Caucasus. He stated round Nuri’s 
having lingered and expressed indignation at his claiming to be 
in the employ of Azerbaijan. He would write and stop it and 
declared that all Turks either had gone or were on the point 
of doing so. The Azerbaijan Army had been removed from 
Baku as demanded by us, and would only be maintained at 
Elizabetpol and outlying districts against Armenian marauders 
commanded by Andronik and Avetissoff who were at the 
moment murdering Tartars in large numbers.”285
On December 7, 1918, the Taghiyev Girl’s School hosted 
the opening session of the Azerbaijani parliament. This was the 
first parliament formed on the utmost democratic principles of 
that time in the entire Muslim East. The parliament included 
representatives of all nationalities populating the country. The 
chairman of the national council, Rasulzade, made an extensive 
congratulatory address at the opening ceremony. By the 
nomination of the Musavat Party, Alimerdan Topchubashov 
was elected chairman in absentia (he was visiting Istanbul). 
Hasan Aghayev became his first deputy. Rahim Vakilov was 
confirmed in the office of Secretary of the Parliament. In 
Topchubashov’s absence, the parliament was chaired by Hasan 
285 Situation on arrival in Transcaucasia. Narrative of first few days 
in Baku. November 17-24, 1918, by Major General W. M. 
Thomson, commanding Northern Persian Force. The British 
Archives 6480105, CAB 45/107, pp. 4-5.
D182E ANAR ISGENDERLI
Aghayev. The opening session of the parliament accepted the 
resignation of the cabinet and reassigned Fatali Khan Khoyski 
to form a new cabinet.286
4.7. The Government’s Foreign and Domestic 
Policies
On December 26, 1918, Khoyski submitted a new list 
of ministers for parliamentary discussions. The parliament 
approved the program of the new cabinet and voted confidence 
in the government. Khoyski offered three ministerial posts 
to Russians and two portfolios to Armenians in his coalition 
government. Having witnessed the popular support of the 
government, General Thomson declared on December 28 the 
recognition of Khoyski’s government as the only legal governing 
authority in Azerbaijan.
After the disclosure of the coup attempt plotted by 
Bicherakhov’s group, General Thomson, upon demand of 
the Azerbaijani government, outlawed the Caucasus-Caspian 
government, dislodged them from Baku within forty-eight 
hours, and disarmed the Armenian detachments.
From December 1918, the British command gradually 
eased the restrictions imposed in Baku and lifted control over 
the Azerbaijani police, water transport, oil industry, financial 
system, and printed press. In April 1919, due to abolition of 
the British governorate in Baku, the first Azerbaijani regiment 
286 Azərbaycan Xalq Cümhuriyyəti (1918-1920). Parlament [The 
People’s Republic of Azerbaijan (1918-1920). Parliament] 
volume 1 (Baku, 1998), p. 13. 
D183EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
formed in Ganja entered the capital and was gleefully received 
by the people.
This interim period was supposed to last till resolution 
of political issues concerning the Caucasus in the Paris 
Peace Conference. In February 1919, three months after 
the occupation of Baku by British troops, the Lloyd George 
government decided to withdraw the troops from the South 
Caucasus.287 At the same time, strengthening of American or 
French influence in the region was not desirable for the British 
government, which proposed dislocation of the Italian army 
in the Caucasus. However, there was no agreement of opinion 
among the British political quarters on possibility of sending 
sufficient amount of Italian troops through the port of Batum. 
Lord Curzon, acknowledged as an expert in the regional 
issues, noted in a letter to Foreign Minister Arthur Balfour 
that military expansion in the Caucasus contradicts “national 
interests” of the Italians, who would not be able to stand long 
against encroaching Bolshevism.288 Curzon’s opinion remained 
disregarded, and on April 9, 1919, the British Military Council 
approved the British-Italian Treaty. On May 10, 1919, the 
British command notified the governments of Azerbaijan 
and Georgia of the decision of the British Military Council 
to remove troops from the South Caucasus.289 The decision 
287 Tadeusz Swietochowski, Russian Azerbaijan, 1905-1920: The 
Shaping of National Identity in a Muslim Community (Cambridge, 
1985; Turkish translation: Ankara, 1988), page 156. 
288 H. Nicolson, Peacemaking 1919, 1933, Russian translation 
(Moscow, 1945), p. 268.
289 SARA, col. 970, list 1, file 54, sheet 11.
D184E ANAR ISGENDERLI
was an unexpected one for the commander of Allied Forces in 
Baku, General Thomson, who argued that “withdrawal of the 
British troops from the South Caucasus is an act of violence 
and betrayal of the newly established republics.”290
At the end of June, delegates to the Paris Peace Conference 
from Azerbaijan and Georgia met with Louis Mallet, one of the 
chiefs of the British delegation, to express their concern about 
the withdrawal of British troops from the South Caucasus. 
Mallet confirmed the decision and responded that the troops 
were required in another region. He assured that Denikin’s 
army would not enter neither Azerbaijan nor Georgia as the 
army’s command had been respectively instructed by the 
newly appointed British high commissioner in the Caucasus, 
Wardrop.291
On June 28, the British delegation officially presented 
the decision to remove troops from the Caucasus to the Peace 
Conference. The decision prompted the Azerbaijani, Georgian, 
and mountaineer delegations to start negotiations with the 
Italians. However, the new Italian cabinet of Francesco Nitti 
suspended the issue of sending troops to the Caucasus, and the 
negotiations stalled.
In conformity with resolutions of the Paris Peace Conference, 
the British army undertook withdrawal starting from April 
1919 and completely left the Caucasus by mid-August 1919. 
The government of Azerbaijan had not only managed to 
assert its power in the face of the British intervention but had 
also succeeded to gradually put the British command out of 
290 Tadeusz Swietochowski, op. cit., page 156.
291 SARA, col. 970, list 1, file 142, sheet 19.
D185EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
control over the city. However, although on the one part, the 
British withdrawal from Baku bolstered the independence of 
Azerbaijan, on the other part, it strengthened the desire of the 
Soviet Russian leadership to reinstate the foregone imperial 
borders. On August 23, 1919, British General Digby Inglis 
Shuttleworth addressed the residents of Baku on behalf of 
the Allied Command on the occasion of withdrawal of forces. 
The address read, “Taking this chance, we ask pardon for the 
departing British troops from the people of Azerbaijan, and 
especially from the population of Baku. We sincerely regret 
to say good-bye to our numerous friends and acquaintances, 
we wish them peace and happiness with all our hearts. All 
servicemen of the British army leave with their best memories 
of the days spent in Baku.”292
After withdrawal of the British troops from Baku, General 
Shuttleworth wrote a report on the situation and the activity of 
the British command in Azerbaijan where he also touched upon 
the question of intercommunity relations in Baku between 
Azerbaijanis and Armenians:
It was evident that the Tartars . . . still believed 
that we should establish peace conditions. On the 
other hand the Russians and Armenians, who had 
accompanied us, were rather naturally thirsting for 
revenge. Consequently, when it became known that 
the British intended to work through the existing 
Government until such time as a new Government, 
representative of all classes, could be formed, a storm 
292 SARA, col. 970, list 1, file 144, sheet 9.
D186E ANAR ISGENDERLI
of indignation arose amongst our disappointed friends 
who had expected us to keep the ring while they paid 
off old scores. The population of Baku, at the time 
of re-occupation, consisted of some two hundred and 
sixty thousand souls, of whom two hundred thousand 
were Tartars. In Azerbaijan itself there was said to be a 
population of some four million of whoum three-fifths 
were Tartars the remainder being Armenians and 
Russians. There was a parliament sitting which 
consisted of members nominated on a proportionate 
basis by the various national councils and district 
associations, as constituted in pre-war days. The 
Armenians and Russians had been allotted a limited 
number of seats in this parliament . . .
It is interesting to observe that the Tartars stated that 
in former years no Mussulman apprentices were allowed 
by the Russians to learn how to become skilled workmen 
on the railways. It is a fact that each of our men trained 
some six Mussulman boys during our then months 
occupation of Baku, and reported very favourably upon 
their capacity and intelligence . . .
It will be remembered that General Bicherakov’s 
Russian troops accompanied us to Baku while the 
Armenian troops were left at Lenkoran. Once the British 
were established in Baku the repartiation fo Russians 
and Armenians took place, with the result that the bulk 
of the Armenian troops, left at Lenkoran, terurned to 
Baku, as private individuals. These joined their Russian 
comrades in their disapproval of the British policy. To 
them, the paying off of old scores under the guise of 
D187EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
punishment of the Tartars was more important than the 
quick establishment of peaceful conditions, which was 
our desire. The refusal of the British to destroy the Tartar 
Government raised a storm which the establishment of a 
coalition government did not appease . . . 293
The discord among the newly indepentent states in the 
Caucasus, primarily on territorial and border issues, gave rise to 
foreign threats. On April 25, 1919, delegates from Azerbaijan, 
Dagestan, Georgia, and Armenia gathered in Tiflis to hold 
the Caucasian Conference. Convened to deal with political, 
economic, financial, and border issues of the region, the 
conference revealed sharp differences among the participating 
countries on territorial and border questions. However, the 
offensive of the former czarist general Denikin’s voluntary 
army on Dagestan made the delegates abandon the conference 
unfinished.
With the intention of restoring the borders of “one and 
undivided Russia,” Denikin intruded the territory of the North 
Caucasus Mountaineers Republic in spring 1919 and captured 
Derbent. It was clear that the czarist general had planned 
aggression against Azerbaijan. An extraordinary session of the 
parliament on June 11, 1919, resolved to establish a State Defense 
Committee, which assumed the entire governing authority.
Georgia, alarmed with the threat from Denikin’s army as 
well, signed a mutual defense pact with Azerbaijan. The pact 
293 Excerpts from the report of the 2nd British occupation of Baku 
by General D. I. Shuttleworth. The British Archives 6479639, 
WO 106/1562.
D188E ANAR ISGENDERLI
stipulated mutual military assistance between the two countries 
in case of any foreign encroachment on their sovereignty and 
territory. The military agreement was signed for three years 
and allowed for Armenia to join it within two weeks. But 
Armenia preferred to sign a secret covenant with Denikin. The 
Azerbaijani-Georgian military pact provided for supply of 12 
small cannons, 12 mountain cannons, 24 machine guns, 3,000 
five-charge rifles, 211 sabers, 795 lances, and other arms from 
Georgia to Azerbaijan.294
4.8. The Azerbaijani Delegation at the Paris Peace 
Conference
Despite the end of World War I in November 1918, it took 
a while to finalize its consequences. The winners concurred 
to call an international peace conference in Paris to settle the 
major postwar issues in the world.
The parliament of Azerbaijan concluded to delegate a 
plenipotentiary mission with large discretion to the peace 
conference. The parliament’s chairman, Topchubashov, was 
appointed to lead the mission. The main purpose of sending 
an Azerbaijani delegation to the peace conference was to gain 
international recognition of the Azerbaijani Democratic Republic. 
Acceptance of Azerbaijan’s independence by neighboring 
countries did not fully alleviate the fragility of the new state. Only 
294 Azerbaijanskaia Demokraticheskaia Respublika (1918-1920). 
Armiia (dokumenty i materaly) [The Azerbaijani Democratic 
Republic (1918-1920). The Army (Documents and records)] 
(Baku, 1998), pp. 108-109.
D189EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
recognition by the Great Powers could help rebuff the aggression 
of Denikin’s army and Soviet Russia.
Prior to the opening of the Paris Peace Conference, 
Topchubashov spearheaded extensive preparatory work in 
Istanbul, met with the Ottoman government members, 
Ukrainian, Russian, Persian, United States, Italian, Swedish, 
Dutch, and Armenian officials, exchanged views on the 
international situation and the purposes pursued at the peace 
conference, and informed them of the situation in Azerbaijan. 
The meetings with the Persian and the Russian envoys were 
the most important in regard to the issue of maintaining the 
independence of Azerbaijan.
Propagators of the anti-Azerbaijani campaign undertaken 
by Armenians in Europe and the United States denied 
existence of an independent state of Azerbaijan and by all 
means provided biased information to the leaders of the Allied 
Powers. The French government, influenced by Armenians and 
White Russians, made various excuses to keep the Azerbaijani 
delegation out of the conference and delayed the arrival of the 
mission for three months.
Having started its work in January 1919, the Paris Peace 
Conference dispatched a mission to Russia’s former south 
provinces to survey the social, political, and economic situation 
from the ground. The mission included thirty delegates; most 
of them were Americans. The Commission on the Caucasus 
was led by Benjamin Moore, who asked the following questions 
from Topchubashov and Hajinski:
1. Could Azerbaijan exist as a politically and 
economically independent country?
D190E ANAR ISGENDERLI
2. Do you have sufficient material and moral strength 
for independence?
3. Could a federation or a confederation be 
established in the Caucasus or Transcaucasia?
4. If a Russian Federative Republic is created, would 
Azerbaijan consider joining this federation?
5. Do you assume a possibility of being taken under 
auspices of any other country?295
The Azerbaijani delegates answered in the affirmative to 
the first two questions but expressed doubts in regard to the 
issue of establishment of a federation. Topchubashov wrote, 
“The Allies are inclined to compromise with the stiff Armenian 
demands. Willing to create Great Armenia on the account of 
Turkey and Azerbaijan, the Armenians refused to join our 
federation.”296 In response to the fifth question, Topchubashov 
expressed a desire to gain support of the United States under 
the Wilsonian principles since this country did not have any 
economic interest in Azerbaijan.
Having waited for permission to join the conference since 
January 1919, the Azerbaijani mission finally arrived in Paris in 
early May, with the British’s help, after three months of intense 
diplomatic and political struggle. On May 28, 1919, the 
Azerbaijani delegates were received by U.S. President Wilson. In a 
memo handed to President Wilson, the delegation described the 
history of establishment of the republic in Azerbaijan and sacrifices 
295 A. Topchubashov, Paris məktubları [Letters from Paris] (Baku, 
1998), p. 24. 
296 Ibid., pp. 24-25.
D191EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
made on the path to freedom. The memo noted that throughout 
this struggle, 2 Azerbaijani towns and over 500 villages had been 
destroyed, and roughly 150,000 Muslim civilians had perished. 
In the Erivan guberniya alone 200 Muslim villages had been put 
on fire, and 200,000 Muslims had lost shelter in a very short 
time.297 The delegation requested the president to recognize the 
independence of Azerbaijan, apply the Wilsonian principles of 
self-determination298 to Azerbaijan, admit Azerbaijan to the League 
of Nations, render the U.S. military assistance to Azerbaijan, and 
aid the Azerbaijani delegation in establishment of diplomatic 
and economic relationships between Azerbaijan and the United 
States.299 However, Woodrow Wilson suggested to the Azerbaijani 
delegation to support the idea of confederation and accept one of 
the Great Powers’ auspice over the confederation under a mandate 
from the League of Nations. The Azerbaijani and, partially, the 
Georgian missions positively viewed the establishment of a 
confederation. The Armenian mission endeavored to undermine 
the plans. The Armenians called upon the conference presidium 
297 SARA, col. 894, list 10, file 94, sheets 66-67.
298 The principles read, (1) A nation should be distinguished 
by its intellectual, moral and religious features; (2) A nation 
should prove its capability to decide its own fate; (3) It should 
possess economic, natural and financial resources to cover its 
expenditures; (4) It should be capable of defending against 
foreign aggression; (5) It must have suffered from oppression of 
the parent state.
299 A. Raevskii, Musavatskoe pravitel’stvo na Versal’skoi konferentsii. 
Donesenia predsedatelia azerbaijanskoi musavatskoi delaqatsii 
[The Musavat Government at the Paris Conference. Speeches 
of the Chairman of the Azerbaijani Musavat Delegation] (Baku, 
1931), pp. 39-40.
D192E ANAR ISGENDERLI
to take cognizance of the Armenian contribution to the Entente’s 
victory and requested the Great Powers to facilitate in the creation of 
Great Armenia. The Armenians claimed a vast territory, including 
seven eastern provinces of Turkey, the Erivan guberniya, the 
southern parts of the Tiflis and the Elizavetpol (Ganja) guberniyas, 
and the territories of Kars and Ardahan. Besides, they also counted 
on a war indemnity in the amount of nineteen billion francs.300
On the other side, the Persian envoys to the Paris Peace 
Conference submitted a memo by which they demanded 
annexation of Baku, Derbent, Shaki, Shamakhi, Ganja, Karabakh, 
Nakhchivan, and Erivan. Persia, which had been an outsider in 
the war, was unsurprisingly denied the claims. Moreover, the 
Persian mission was sent off immediately after signing a treaty 
with Great Britain on August 9, 1919. On March 21, 1920, 
Persia declared recognition of Azerbaijan as an independent state 
and concluded a treaty of friendship with Azerbaijan.301
Eventually, on January 11, 1920, the Supreme Council of 
the Paris Peace Conference unanimously resolved to recognize 
de facto the independence of Azerbaijan. The news reached 
Azerbaijan on January 14 and was jubilantly received in the 
parliament. The foreign envoys attending the session joined 
the members of the parliament in commemorating their 
compatriots and the Ottoman soldiers who sacrificed their lives 
in the cause of independence. On this occasion, the Parliament 
announced a general amnesty on February 9, 1920.302 Over 
300 Azerbaijan newspaper (May 18, 1919). 
301 SARA, col. 970, list 1, file 101, sheets 2-3.
302 Mir Yakub, Beynelmilel siyasetde petrol [Oil in international 
politics] (Istanbul, 1928), p. 121. 
D193EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
three hundred Armenian criminals, proven to be guilty in 1918 
massacres of Muslims in Baku, Shamakhi, Guba, and other 
uyezds of Azerbaijan, were set free.
On January 19, the Azerbaijani and the Georgian missions 
received an invitation to the Supreme Council of the Paris 
Peace Conference. The Allies formally assumed the obligation 
to defend the newly recognized states of the South Caucasus 
from foreign aggression. Apart from two hundred million puds 
of refined oil, Azerbaijan also was obliged to supply cotton, 
wool, silk, and animal skin in exchange for one hundred 
steam engines, two thousand tanks, and five hundred covered 
railroad cars to be delivered from Europe and the United 
States.303
4.9. The Government’s Activity
Despite the lack of any previous experience in statecraft, the 
leadership of the Azerbaijani Democratic Republic managed to 
create a normally operating state machine, estabishing relations 
with more than twenty countries, including Turkey, Georgia, 
Armenia, Persia, Belgium, Holland, Greece, Denmark, Italy, 
France, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, the United States, 
Ukraine, Lithuania, Poland, and Finland on consulate-general 
and consular agency levels.304
303 Ibid., p. 129.
304 Azerbaijanskaia Demokraticheskaia Respublika (1918-1920). 
Vneshnaia politika (doku¬mentı i materialı) [The Azerbaijani 
Democratic Republic (1918-20). Foreign policy (Documents 
and records)] (Baku, 1998), p. 196. 
D194E ANAR ISGENDERLI
In form, Azerbaijan was a parliamentary republic. During 
the period of functioning in Ganja, on June 27, 1918, the 
cabinet declared the Azerbaijani language the official state 
language of the Azerbaijani Republic. Due to insufficiency of 
educated personnel with fluent Azerbaijani, the government 
temporarily permitted to use the Russian language in public 
offices. On June 24, the government adopted a national 
flag with white crescent and eight-point star on the red 
background, eventually replaced by a three-strip (green, red, 
and blue) background on November 9. On June 26, the 
government enacted the establishment of a Detached Army 
of Azerbaijan. Later, on August 11, it declared a general 
mobilization and called in all Azerbaijani citizens born 
between 1894 and 1899. It stipulated the establishment of a 
War Ministry on November 1. A month later, on December 
25, the government undertook major military appointments: 
Samedaga Mehmandarov was appointed the Minister of War, 
General Aliaga Shykhlinski became his deputy, and General 
Suleyman Sulkevich assumed the position of the Chief of Staff. 
The military budget reached four hundred million manats in 
1919. The process of army buildup was principally completed 
by January 1920 to include thirty thousand of infantry and 
ten thousand of cavalry troops.305
On August 23, 1918, the government adopted Regulations 
of Azerbaijani Citizenship. Another important step was the 
establishment of the Extraordinary Investigation Commission 
on July 15 to scrutinize the acts of genocide of the Azerbaijani 
population by Dashnak Armenian gangs. Establishment of 
305 Ibid., p. 104
D195EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
the Parliament (December 7, 1918), adoption of official state 
symbols (June 21, 1918), and recognition of equality of men 
and women were among the major achievements of the new 
republic. Azerbaijan also confirmed the separation of powers 
among legislative, executive, and judicial authorities.
In January and February 1919, the government established 
governorates in Karabakh and Nakhchivan, respectively, to put 
an end to Armenian atrocities and defend civilians from armed 
Armenian detachments.
On July 21, 1919, the Parliament enacted the Statute 
on Elections to the Constituent Assembly of the Republic of 
Azerbaijan.306 A few weeks later, on August 11, the Parliament 
passed another important law on Azerbaijani Citizenship, 
which recognized former Russian nationals whose parents or 
themselves were born on the territory of Azerbaijan as citizens 
of Azerbaijan regardless of their ethnic or religious identity.
Public education was among primary concerns of the 
government. Roughly half of the schools switched to use 
the Azerbaijani language, which became a compulsory 
subject. Another essential step was establishment of the Baku 
University on September 1, 1919. A number of boys’ and girls’ 
secondary schools were opened in the provinces of the country, 
and up to one hundred young men received government 
scholarships to study in European universities. Establishment 
of the Azerbaijani Chamber of Appeals, Intelligence and 
Counter-Intelligence Departments, and the Organization for 
306 Azərbaycan Xalq Cümhuriyyəti (1918-1920). Parlament [The 
People’s Republic of Azerbaijan (1918-1920). Parliament] 
volume 1 (Baku, 1998), p. 876. 
D196E ANAR ISGENDERLI
Combatting Counter-Revolution became the vital pillar of 
the state-building process. The Baku-Batum oil pipeline was 
restored in 1919 to provide monetary influx into the country. 
To revitalize the domestic commerce, the government issued 
a decree on free trade (August 27, 1918) and gave rebirth to 
the merchant fleet (October 30, 1918). The Caspian Fleet of 
Azerbaijan was established in summer 1919.
The territory of the Azerbaijani Democratic Republic was 
97,300 square kilometers (or roughly 37,600 square miles). 
8,700 square kilometers (3,360 square miles) on the border with 
Georgia and 7,900 square kilometers (3,000 square miles) on 
the border with Armenia were considered by the Government 
of Azerbaijan as contested areas. The population of Azerbaijan 
was 2,862,000 people; 70 percent of them were Muslims.307
During the twenty-three months of independence, the 
Azerbaijani Democratic Republic was governed by five 
subsequent cabinets, with first three chaired by Fatali Khan 
Khoyski and the other two led by Nasib Yusifbeyli.
Within seventeen months of functioning, the Azerbaijani 
Parliament, composed of 15 parties, held 145 sessions and 
passed some 230 acts to secure the interests of the entire 
nation.
4.10. Invasion by soviet Russia
Despite international recognition of Azerbaijan, its 
northern borders continued to stay under threat. In a note 
sent to the Azerbaijani government, Chicherin, the commissar 
307 Almanac of Azerbaijan Republic (Baku, 1920), p. 93. 
D197EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
on Foreign Affair of Soviet Russia, proposed a military alliance 
with Azerbaijan to jointly oppose Denikin’s army. It was evident 
for the Azerbaijani leadership that the Soviet government 
was attempting to involve and exhaust the young state in 
an unequal military conflict with Denikin and consequently 
deprive it of its independence. Azerbaijan’s foreign minister 
Khoyski replied that the struggle of the Soviet government 
against Denikin was an internal affair of the Russian people, 
and the government of Azerbaijan had no intention to interfere 
in domestic issues of Russia. Chicherin’s second note dated 
January 23 failed to recognize the independence of Azerbaijan 
and accused the Azerbaijani government of refusal to fight 
against Denikin’s troops. In return, Khoyski demanded 
unconditional recognition of Azerbaijan’s sovereignty by Soviet 
Russia. Chicherin’s next note of March 7 was nothing but 
trickery and procrastination. Over time, it was becoming clear 
that these games were aimed at masking military preparations 
for invasion of Azerbaijan and reduce vigilance of the 
Azerbaijani government. The genuine attitude of Soviet Russia 
toward Azerbaijan was perfectly reflected in Lenin’s telegram 
to the members of the Military-Revolutionary Council of the 
Caucasus Front, Smilga and Orjonikidze, sent on March 17, 
1920: “It is very critical to capture Baku. Concentrate all your 
efforts on this.”308
308 Internatsional’naia pomosh XI Armii v bor’be za pobedu sovetskoi 
vlasti v Azerbaijane. Dokumentı i materialı. 1920-1921 gg. 
[International aid to the 11th army in the fight for the victory 
of the Soviet power in Azerbaijan. Documents and records. 
1920-1921] (Baku, 1989), p. 17. 
D198E ANAR ISGENDERLI
The government’s tardiness to introduce land reforms 
was cleverly employed by the Bolsheviks. In early 1919, they 
provoked uprisings among peasants in a number of uyezds, 
with the fiercest insurrection organized in Ganja. The uprising 
was suppressed by September 1919.309
On February 11-12, 1920, the Bolsheviks founded the 
Communist Party of Azerbaijan in Baku. The actual leader 
of the Bolshevik party was Anastas Mikoyan, an inveterate 
enemy of the Azerbaijani nation. The party’s objective was to 
overthrow the incumbent government and establish a Soviet 
rule in Azerbaijan through an armed revolt.310
In parallel, Soviet Russia also exploited Armenia’s enmity toward 
Azerbaijan. In early 1920, Armenian envoys in Moscow, Priumov, 
and Zaharian offered assistance in overthrowing the government in 
Azerbaijan in exchange for territorial concessions. The Armenian 
proposal included insurgencies among the Armenian population of 
Karabakh and Ganjabasar and a war to be launched by Armenia 
against Azerbaijan. In March 1920, in the days of Novruz 
festivities, almost all Azerbaijani troops were engaged in suppression 
of Armenian riots in Karabakh, leaving the northern borders 
undefended. Meantime, 72,000 Russian troops were approaching 
the Azerbaijani border near the river Samur. The aid promised to 
the Azerbaijani government from the West had not appeared.
309 E. A. Tokarzhevskii, Iz istorii inostrannoi interventsii i qrazhdanskoi 
voiny v Azerbaijane [Glimpses of history of the foreign intervention 
and the civil war in Azerbaijan] (Baku, 1957), p. 249. 
310 Azərbaycan Kommunist Partiyası tarixinin oçerkləri [Essays on the 
history of the Communist Party of Azerbaijan] (Baku, 1986), p. 
199.
D199EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
Members of the Azerbaijani Cabinet did not share a 
common view on how to deal with Soviet Russia: Foreign 
Minister Khoyski was a hard-liner, while Minister of Interrior 
Mammad Hasan Hajinski was inclined to negotiate and make 
terms with local Bolsheviks. Hajinski argued that by making 
considerable concessions to Russia, Azerbaijan could preserve 
its independence.
In the meeting of the cabinet in March 1920, Hajinski 
gained a solid support from his adherents; in the circumstances, 
Prime Minister Yusifbeyli had to resign. Hajinski was assigned 
to form a new cabinet. However, he procrastinated and shortly 
joined the Bolshevik party himself.
The British archives contain an interesting description 
of Nasib Bey Yusifbeyli. In a letter to headquarters in 
London, the British high commissioner in the Caucasus, 
Wardrop, writes, “Prime Minister Yusifbeyli is an accurate, 
well-educated, sharp-witted, liberal, sincere, faithful, outcome 
driven and gracious man. The long delay by the Allies to 
determine Azerbaijan’s political status hampers his work. 
Prime Minister’s ideas are rather nationalistic than religious. 
He detests Bolshevism . . . His only desire is to see his country 
independent . . . His team and cabinet could be a role model 
for some European countries. The people and the government 
of this country have much better attitude toward Great Britain 
than in any other country. If we help them, they will faithfully 
collaborate with the United Kingdom.”311
311 Azərbaycan Xalq Cümhuriyyəti. Böyük Britaniyanın arxiv 
sənədləri [The People’s Republic of Azerbaijan. Archive records 
of Great Britain] (Baku, 2008), p. 18.
D200E ANAR ISGENDERLI
The delay in forming of a new cabinet exacerbated the 
situation. The strife among the parliamentary factions reached 
its peak. Leadership of the Ittihad Party, which was in a 
continuing opposition to the incumbent authority and striving 
to overthrow it, demanded conclusion of military alliance 
with Russia. Azerbaijani Bolsheviks called for an appeal to the 
Russian government for military aid and clamored to bring in 
Russia’s Eleventh Army under the veil of establishing law and 
order in the country.
In April 1920, after defeating Denikin’s troops, the Eleventh 
Red Army approached the border of Azerbaijan. On Ap ril 15, 
Khoyski sent a note to Chicherin demanding explanations of 
the reasons and purpose of the Russian troop’s concentration 
on the border with Azerbaijan. However, the note was ignored 
by Chicherin. In the meantime, the Communist (Bolshevik) 
Party of Azerbaijan sent a delegation to the town of Petrovsk 
to discuss the details of a Russian intervention in Azerbaijan. 
On behalf of the people of Azerbaijan, the local Bolsheviks, led 
by Mikoyan, invited the Russian army into Azerbaijan. The 
jointly elaborated plan envisaged an armed revolt twenty-four 
hours prior to entering of the Eleventh Russian Army into 
the territory of Azerbaijan. The plan sought to convince the 
international community that the Azerbaijani government fell 
in consequence of an internal revolt rather than the foreign 
military intervention. However, Russia’s Eleventh Army did 
not wait for a rebellion to start in Baku, crossed the frontier 
on the night of April 26, and moved toward Baku. The 
insignificant number of border guard troops was helpless to 
resist the invaders. The deputy minister of war, Shikhlinski, 
had countermanded orders for the explosion of railroad 
D201EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
bridges. The “auxiliary regiment” guarding the vital sites in the 
city, including the building of the parliament, defected to the 
Bolsheviks. Guns on the warships in the Baku bay were aimed 
at the Parliament building.
Simultaneously with the invasion of the Russian army, 
the Central Committee of the Communist (Bolsheviks’) Party 
of Azerbaijan, in conjunction with the Baku Bureau of the 
Caucasus Regional Committee of the Russian Communist 
(Bolsheviks’) Party, presented a surrender ultimatum to the 
Parliament. The ultimatum was discussed in the last meeting 
of the Parliament on April 27 under the chairmanship of M. 
Y. Jafarov. The meeting lasted three hours (from 08:45 p.m. 
to 11:45 p.m.). At the suggestion of Rasulzade, the doors 
remained open for the public during deliberations. Hajinski 
informed the Parliament members of the ultimatum, which 
demanded surrender of all authorities to the Communists 
the same evening; otherwise, the Central Committee of the 
Azerbaijani Communists threatened to make every effort to 
surrender power to the Red Army. The Communists also 
warned that a failure to surrender the same night would lead 
to a ban of political parties, including the Musavat. Hajinski 
also related that the Communists had refused to consider any 
of the government’s proposals and had notified that in case of 
repudiation of voluntary surrender, the entire responsibility for 
consequences would be born by the members of the Parliament. 
In conclusion, Hajinski called the parliamentarians to make the 
only right decision “for the sake of saving the nation.” Many of 
the Parliament members made a stand against unconditional 
surrender of power to the Communists. At the same time, 
they declared that the authority could be surrendered to the 
D202E ANAR ISGENDERLI
Communists under certain conditions, the foremost of them 
being independence of the country. Eventually, the majority 
in the Parliament voted for passing the authorities to the 
Communists of Azerbaijan under the below conditions:
1. The Russian army shall not enter Baku but transit by 
rail to aid Anatolia.312
2. The independence and the territory of Azerbaijan shall be 
protected from any kind of aggression and annexation.
3. The Army of Azerbaijan shall remain as is.
4. The political parties of Azerbaijan shall enjoy freedom 
of activity.
5. Former statesmen, members of the Parliament and the 
Cabinet shall not be persecuted, public servants shall 
maintain their jobs, and only executive officials shall be 
superseded.
6. Azerbaijani Councils shall confer freely to determine 
the form of government.
312 The Ottoman Empire was defeated in World War I and faced 
a threat of being splitted among the winners. On the other 
hand, Russia, disengaged from the world war with the cumbrous 
Brest-Litovsk Peace Treaty, was stricken with civil war. A 
common attitute toward Western powers shared by Lenin’s 
Soviet government and the Turkish forces led by Mustafa Kemal 
(Ataturk) brought these two camps together. The Soviet command 
utilized this factor and deceived both the local population and the 
international community by announcing that the main reason 
of transgressing the borders of Azerbaijan was sending troops in 
support of Ataturk’s army through Azerbaijan’s territory.
D203EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
On April 29, the Revolutionary Committee of Azerbaijan 
appealed to Soviet Russia for military aid although the Russian 
army had entered the territory of Azerbaijan two days earlier. 
This marked the end of the twenty-three-month-long existence 
of the Azerbaijani Democratic Republic.
On April 28, 1920, the Bolsheviks proclaimed the 
establishment of the Soviet Socialist Republic of Azerbaijan. 
After taking over the power, the Bolsheviks did not adhere to 
the surrender conditions. Baku again lived through a week of 
looting; in parallel, the Red Army continued encroachment 
on Azerbaijani towns and villages. Thus, Russia’s military 
intervention, flagrant violation of international law, and 
bloodshed by the Red Army resulted in the fall of the Azerbaijani 
Democratic Republic, recognized as an independent state by the 
Supreme Council of the Paris Peace Conference. The resistance 
movement of the Azerbaijani people in support of freedom 
and independent statehood was squashed; all government 
institutions of the Azerbaijani Republic were abolished. North 
Azerbaijan was reannexed by the Russian empire, this time 
under the guise of Bolshevism. The Azerbaijani nation was 
compelled to live under occupation until October 1991.

D205E
CONCLUsION
THE SOUTH CAUCASUS is still embroiling. The forces that disturb stability and their patrons are 
known. It is also not a secret on who seized the other’s territory 
by force and arms and expelled one million people. But it is 
not clear what goals are pursued by this expansionist policy. 
Today, when the world struggles against terror, there is a great 
need for all peace-defending nations to unite in this fight. In 
the words of late Austrian historian Erich Feigl, “Would I dare 
to write about these realities, if my friend was not killed by an 
Armenian terrorist?” The answer is yes. Erich Feigl cleared up 
the relationships between Turks and Armenians, disregarding 
ethnic and religious differences. May his soul find heavenly 
peace for the unbiased position he held in his books.
An American historian, Firuz Kazemzadeh, who had 
never been to the South Caucasus personally, carried notable 
researches on the region. Kazemzadeh emphasized that the 
Soviet regime deprived the Azerbaijani nation of everything 
and particularly of its history. Meanwhile, Armenians dispersed 
around the globe launched large-scale propaganda campaigns to 
convince the international community that they had allegedly 
been pursued and driven out of their historical homeland. 
Armenians claim without scruple that Turks are their enemies 
and continue to believe in this absurdity.
D206E ANAR ISGENDERLI
Another American researcher, Tadeusz Swietochowski, 
wrote that when Armenian nationalists established terrorist 
groups like the Hunchak and the Dashnaktsutiun in late 
nineteenth century, it was clear who they planned to fight 
against and where their support would come from. These 
organizations made no secret of what means they would utilize 
to achieve their goals. As to Muslims (Azerbaijanis), they 
confined themselves to establishment of only one organization, 
the Hummat, in early twentieth century. The goal of the group 
was more like a desire: to achieve solidarity of all Muslims of the 
world. However, this did not imply that other nations would 
be menaced or there were any views on their territories.
A Russian historian, Vasili Velichko, wrote that the annals of 
the Armenian history are full of controversies and grand names 
unknown to any historian; now and then people of dubious 
descent are described in superlatives. Armenia, a country with 
erratic borders, was under continuing vassalage of neighboring 
rulers, constantly betrayed by its questionable kings.
Ilia Chavchavadze, the prominent Georgian publicist of 
the nineteenth century, wrote on Armenians: “May all-mighty 
God bestow strength and ability to unite on them. Nevertheless, 
may they never defraud anyone; may they never abase us, and 
aggrandize and glorify themselves. We offered you shelter and 
harbored you, we fraternized with you. Do not treat us in our 
home like enemies. A lion on your way is better than a foe in 
your house.”
One of the founding fathers of the Azerbaijani Democratic 
Republic, Alimerdan Bey Topchubashov, wrote from the Paris 
Peace Conference: “The Georgians are in sympathy with us on 
all issues connected with the future of the Caucasus. But the 
D207EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
Armenians nearly question our coexistence in the Caucasus by 
estranging from us and the Georgians. The Armenians forgot 
that we are here to achieve peace.”
The twentieth century witnessed numerous tragedies in 
various countries of the world. The genocide of Azerbaijani 
civilians by the Armenian military in the town of Khojaly 
in February 1992 is remembered as one of the most violent 
atrocities of the century. The Armenian troops killed 613 
innocent people overnight, mostly elderly, women, and 
children; 1,275 civilians were taken prisoners.
The Armenian military aggression on the Azerbaijani lands 
did not halt at the Khojaly tragedy. In 1992-93, Armenian 
armed forces laid hands on a number of native provinces of 
Azerbaijan, including Shusha, Lachin, Kalbajar, Agdam, Fizuli, 
Jabrayil, Qubadli, and Zangilan.
Azerbaijan has been negotiating for almost twenty years 
to return the captured territories. The four UN resolutions 
demanding immediate withdrawal of Armenian troops from 
the territory of Azerbaijan remain unfulfilled.
Notwithstanding these facts, today, Azerbaijan conducts 
an independent foreign policy, continues development, and 
ranks among the global leaders for the pace of economic 
growth. Azerbaijanis are a nation of peace-defending, tolerant, 
and hospitable people who wish for peaceful coexistence with 
their neighbors. At the same time, they wish for restoration 
of the historical territory of Azerbaijan, liberation of invaded 
lands, return of hundreds of thousands of refugees and forced 
internal migrants to their homes, recognition of the true facts 
by the international community, and identification and fair 
prosecution of the aggressor. May justice triumph!
The map of the South Caucasus officially submitted to the 
Paris Peace Conference (1919)

The building and the editorial office of Kaspii 
newspaper burned and destroyed during the  
March events of 1918.
Corpses of Azerbaijani victims of the March massacre  
in Baku (1918).
Burned shops on Bazaar street in Baku (March, 1918).
Persian postcard devoted to the March 1918 massacre 
in Baku. The title in Farsi reads, “The massacre of 
Muslims in Baku and Iranian consul  
witnessing the events.”
Excavation of a mass grave of 1918 genocide  
in Guba, Azerbaijan.
D215E
GLOssARY
Akhund A Muslim cleric, common in Iran and Azerbaijan, 
responsible for leading religious services in a community.
Guberniya A major administrative subdivision of Imperial 
Russia.
Imam An Islamic leadership position, often the leader of a 
mosque and the community. Similar to spiritual leaders, 
the imam is the one who leads the prayer during Islamic 
gatherings.
Medrese or Madrasah A religious school in Azerbaijan and other 
Muslim countries.
Okrug A type of administrative division of oblasts and several 
guberniyas in Imperial Russia.
Pasha A high rank in the Ottoman Empire political system, 
typically granted to governors, generals and dignitaries. 
As an honorary title, Pasha, in one of its various ranks, is 
equivalent to the British title of Lord.
Pud An obsolete unit of mass equal to approximately 16.38 
kilograms (36.11 pounds).
D216E ANAR ISGENDERLI
SAPPPMRA State Archive on Political Parties and Public 
Movements of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
SARA State Archives of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
The Transcaucasian Seim (Sejm or Polish for “assembly”) 
The first government of the independent Transcaucasia 
established at Tbilisi in November 1917.
Uyezd An administrative subdivision of guberniya in Imperial 
Russia.
Verst(a) An obsolete Russian unit of length equal to 3,500 feet 
(1.0668 kilometers, or 0.6629 miles).
D217E
LIsT OF REFERENCEs
In the Azerbaijani Language
1. The State Archives of the Republic of Azerbaijan, collections: 
100, 879, 894, 895, 970, 1061.
2. The State Archive on Political Parties and Public Movements 
of the Republic of Azerbaijan, collection 277.
3. Azərbaycan Xalq Cümhuriyyətinin Ensiklopediyası 
[Encyclopedia of the People’s Republic of Azerbaijan], in 2 
volumes. Volume 1, Baku, 2004; Volume 2, Baku, 2005.
4. Azərbaycan Xalq Cümhuriyyəti. Böyük Britaniyanın arxiv 
sənədləri [The People’s Republic of Azerbaijan. Archive Records 
of Great Britain], Baku, 2008.
5. Azərbaycan Xalq Cümhuriyyəti (1918-1920). Parlament 
[The People’s Republic of Azerbaijan, 1918-20. Parliament], 
Volumes 1 and 2, Baku, 1998.
6. Azərbaycan Kommunist Partiyası tarixinin oçerkləri [Essays 
on the History of the Communist Party of Azerbaijan], Baku, 
1986.
7. Azərbaycanda sosialist inqilabının qələbəsi uğrunda 
bolşeviklərin mübarizəsi. Sə nədlər və materiallar. 1917-1918 
[Bolsheviks’ Struggle for the Victory of Socialist Revolution in 
Azerbaijan. Documents and Records. 1917-18], Baku, 1960.
8. I. Chavchavadze, Erməni alimləri və fəryad edən daşlar 
[Armenian Savants and Outcrying Stones], Baku, 1995.
D218E ANAR ISGENDERLI
9. Erməni terror və quldur birləşmələrinin bəşəriyyətə qarşı 
cinayətləri (XIX-XX əsrlər) [Crimes of the Armenian Terrorist 
Gangs against Humanity (19th-20th centuries)], Baku, 2003.
10. J. Hasanov, Azərbaycan beynəlxalq münasibətlər sistemində, 
1918-1920 [Azerbaijan as an Actor in the System of 
International Relations, 1918-20], Baku, 1993.
11. A. Iskenderov, Azərbaycanda türk-müsəlman soyqırımı 
probleminin tarixşünaslığı (1918-1920) [The Historiography 
of the Turk-Muslim Genocide in Azerbaijan], Baku, 2006.
12. The Kaspii newspaper, April 16, 1917, issue 84.
13. M. Mammadzade, Ermənilər və İran [Armenians and 
Persia], Istanbul, 1927; reprinted: Baku, 1993.
14. M. Mammadzade, Milli Azərbaycan hərəkatı [The 
Azerbaijani National Movement], Berlin, 1938; reprinted: 
Baku, 1992.
15. M. Muradzade, Mart hadise-i əliməsi [The March Events], 
Baku, 1919; reprinted in 1996.
16. I. Mammadov, Tariximiz, torpağımız, taleyimiz [Our 
History, Land, and Fate], Baku, 2003.
17. Muhammad Asad Bey, Şərqdə neft və qan [Oil and Blood in 
the East], Baku, 2005.
18. M. S. Ordubadi, Qanlı illər [The Bloody Years], Baku, 
1991.
19. S. Onullahi, Erməni millətçiləri və İran [Armenian 
Nationalists and Persia], Baku, 2002.
20. A. Pashayev, Açılmamış səhifələrin izi ilə [The Trails of 
Unopened Pages], Baku, 2001.
21. S. J. Pishavari, Seçilmiş əsərləri [Selected Works], Baku, 
1965.
D219EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
22. S. Sardariniya, Arazın hər iki tayında müsəlmanların 
soyqırımı [The Muslim Genocide on Both Sides of Aras], 
Baku, 2006.
23. A. Topchubashov, Paris məktubları [Letters from Paris], 
Baku, 1998.
24. Zaqafqaziya Seyminin Müsəlman fraksiyası və Azərbaycan 
Milli Şurası iclaslarının protokolları [Minutes of Meetings of the 
Muslim Faction of Transcaucasian Seim and the Azerbaijani 
National Council], Baku, 2006.
25. A. Ziyadxanlı, Azərbaycan, Baku, 1919; reprinted: Baku, 
1993.
In the Turkish Language
26. Azerbaycan journal, 1993, July-October.
27. Azerbaycan journal, 1962, issue no. 7.
28. Azerbaycan belgelerinde ermeni sorunu (1918-1920) [The 
Armenian Question in the Provinces of Azerbaijan (1918-20)], 
Ankara, 2001.
29. H. Baykara, Azerbaycan istiklal mücadelesi tarihi [History of 
the Struggle for Independence of Azerbaijan], Istanbul, 1975; 
reprinted: Baku, 1992.
30. Erdaş Nilgün. Milli mücadile döneminde Kafkas 
Cümhuriyyetleri ilə ilişkiler (1917-1921) [Relationships 
with the Republics of Caucausus at the time of the National 
Struggle (1917-21)], Ankara, 1994.
31. Kut’ül Amare Kahramanı Halil Paşa’nın Anıları: Bitmeyen 
Savaş [Halil Pasha, the Hero of Kut-al-Amara: an Unfinished 
War], Istanbul, 1972.
D220E ANAR ISGENDERLI
32. Kazım Karabekir, Erzincan ve Erzurum kurtuluşu [The 
Liberation of Erzinjan and Erzurum], Ankara, 1990.
33. İngilizlerin Mavi Kitap’ına Sovyetler’in Yanıtı Kızıl Kitap 
Güneybatı Kafkas’ta Taşnak Mezalimi (translated by Kayhan 
Yükseler) [The Red Book of the Soviets in reply to the Blue 
Guide of England: Dashnak Atrocities in the Southwestern 
Caucasus], Istanbul, 2006.
34. Karibi, Ermeni iddialarına yanıt gürcü devletinin kırmızı 
kitapı [The Red Book of the Georgian Government in reply to 
the Armenian Claims], Istanbul, 2007.
35. N. Keykurun, Azerbaycan istiklalı mücadelesi hatiraları 
[Memoirs of the Struggle for Independence in Azerbaijan], 
Istanbul, 1964.
36. A. N. Kurat, Türkiye və Rusya [Turkey and Russia], Ankara, 
1990.
37. Mir Yakub, Beynelmilel siyasetde petrol [Oil in the 
International Politics], Istanbul, 1928.
38. Onk Nizamettin, “Yeni Azerbaycan kurularken” [“While 
Building New Azerbaijan”], Türk Dünyası journal of 
history, April 1992.
39. M. Saray, Azerbaycan türkleri tarihi [History of Azerbaijani 
Turks], Istanbul, 1993.
40. Süleyman İzzet, 15 piyade tümeninin Azerbaycan və Şimali 
Kafkasiyadakı harekati və müharibeleri [15th Infantry 
Division’s Movements and Battles in Azerbaijan and the 
North Caucasus in WWI], Ankara, 1936.
41. Süleyman Kocabaş, Ermeni sorunu nedir ve ne değildir [What 
Is and What Is Not the Armenian Question], Istanbul, 1958.
42. T. Sünbül, Azerbaycan dosyası [The Azerbaijani File], 
Ankara, 1980.
D221EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
43. Türk Silahlı Kuvvetleri Askeri Tarih ve Strateji Etüt 
Başkanlığı arşivi (ATASE) [The Archive of the Turkish 
General Staff Military History and Strategic Research and 
Inspection Directorate], col. 1, col. 3820, col. 5309.
44. Şahin Ergün, Trabzon ve Batum konfransları ve anlaşmaları 
(1917-1918) [The Conferences and the Treaties of Trabzon 
and Batum (1917-18)], Ankara, 2002.
45. E. Rüştü, Büyük harpda Bakü yollarında [On the Way to 
Baku during the Great War], Ankara, 1934.
46. N. Yucer, Birinci dünya savaşında Osmanlı ordusunun 
Azerbaycan ve Dağıstan harekatı [The Campaigns of the 
Ottoman Army in Azerbaijan and Dagestan during World 
War I], Ankara, 1996.
In the Russian Language
47. ‘Armyanskiy genotsid’: mif i realnost [‘Armenian Genocide’: 
Myth and Reality], Baku, 1992.
48. The Azerbaijan newspaper, May 18, 1919.
49. Aktı, sobranniye Kavkazkoyu Arxeograficheskoyu 
Komissieyu (AKAK) [Records compied by The Caucasus 
Archeographic Commission (RCAC)], volume 7, Tiflis, 1878.
50. Aktı, sobranniye Kavkazkoyu Arxeograficheskoyu Komissieyu 
(AKAK) [Records compied by The Caucasus Archeographic 
Commission (RCAC)], volume 10, Tiflis, 1885.
51. T. Akopian, İstoriia Yerevana [History of Yerevan], Yerevan, 
1975.
52. Ch. Agaian, Rol’ Rossii v istoricheskikh sud’bakh armianskogo 
naroda [Russia’s Role in the Historic Foredoom of the Armenian 
People], Moscow, 1978.
D222E ANAR ISGENDERLI
53. Azerbaijanskaia Demokraticheskaia Respublika (1918-1920). 
Armiia (dokumenty i materaly) [The Azerbaijani Democratic 
Republic (1918-20). The Army (Documents and Records)], 
Baku, 1998.
54. Azerbaijanskaia Demokraticheskaia Respublika (1918-1920). 
Vneshniaia politika (doku mentı i materialı) [The Azerbaijani 
Democratic Republic (1918-20). Foreign Policy (Documents 
and Records)], Baku, 1998.
55. B. Baikov, “Vospominaniya o revolutsii v Zakavkaz’e 
(1917-1920)” [“The Memories of the Revolution in 
Transcaucasia (1917-20)”], Archive of the Russian Revolution, 
volume 9, Berlin, 1922.
56. Bol’sheviki v bor’be za pobedu sotsialisticheskoi revolutsii v 
Azerbaijane. Dokumenty i materialy. 1917-1918 gody [Bolsheviks 
in the Fight for the Victory of the Socialist Revolution in Azerbaijan. 
Documents and Records. 1917-18], Baku, 1957.
57. Garegin Nzhde i yeqo uchenie [The Teaching of Garegin 
Nzhdeh and Its Relevance], Yerevan, 2004.
58. Herodotus. Istoriia [History], Leningrad, 1972.
59. S. Glinka, Opisanie pereseleniia armian azerbaijanskikh v 
peredel Rossii [Description of the Ressetlement of Azerbaijani 
Armenians to the Territory of Russia], Moscow, 1831; 
reprinted: Baku, 1990.
60. V. Grigoriev, Statisticheskoie opisanie Nakhichevanskoi 
provintsii [Statistical Description of the Nakhchivan Province], 
St. Petersburg, 1833.
61. Grazhdanskoie upravlenie Zakavkaz’em ot prisoedineniia 
Gruzii do namestnichestva Velikogo Kniazia Mikhaila 
Nikolaevicha [Civil Governance in Transcaucasia from 
D223EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
Georgia’s Accession to Viceroyalty of Grand Duke Mikhail 
Nikolayevich], Tiflis, 1901.
62. L. Dabagian, Voprosy istorii [Questions of History], Moscow, 
1929.
63. N. Dubrovin, Zakavkaz’e v 1803-1806 godakh [Transcaucasia 
in 1803-06], St. Petersburg, 1866.
64. Dokumenty i materialy po vneshnei politike Zakavkaz’ia 
i Gruzii [Documents and Records on the Foreign Policy of 
Transcaucasia and Georgia], Tiflis, 1969.
65. Lionel Charles Dunsterville, Britanskii imperializm v Baku 
i Persii v 1917-1918 g. [British Imperialism in Baku and 
Persia in 1917-18], Tiflis, 1925.
66. M. M. Diakonov, Predystoriia armianskogo naroda 
[Pre-History of the Armenian People], Yerevan, 1968.
67. A. D. Eritsov, “Dannye ob armianskom naselenii v 
Rossii” [“Data on the Armenian Population in Russia”], 
published in The Bulletin of the Caucasus Branch of the 
Imperial Russian Geographic Society, volume 1, Tiflis, 
1881.
68. Esai Hasan-Jalalian, Kratkaia istoria strany Albanskoi 
(1702-1722 gg) [Brief History of the Country of Albania 
(1702-22)], Baku, 1989.
69. B. Ishkhanian, Narodnosti Kavkaza. (Statistiko-
ekonomicheskoe issledovanie) [Ethnicities in The Caucasus. A 
Statistical-Economic Reseach], St. Petersburg, 1916.
70. B. Ishkhanian, Velikie uzhasy v qor. Baku. Anketnoe 
issledovanie sentiabrskikh sobıtii 1918 g. [Atrocities in the 
city of Baku. A Questionnaire Survey of September Events of 
1918], Tiflis, 1920.
D224E ANAR ISGENDERLI
71. Istoriia XIX veka [The History of the 19th Century], edited by 
professors Lavisse and Rambaud, Translated from French, 
volume 8, Moscow, 1939.
72. K. Imanov, Armianskie inorodnyie skazki [Tall Armenian 
Tales], Baku, 2008.
73. Internatsional’naia pomosh XI Armii v bor’be za pobedu 
sovetskoi vlasti v Azerbaijane. Dokumentı i materialı. 
1920-1921 gg. [International Aid to the 11th Army in the 
Fight for the Victory of the Soviet Power in Azerbaijan. 
Documents and Records. 1920-21], Baku, 1989.
74. A. B. Kadishev, Interventsiia i grazhdanskaia voina v 
Zakavkaz’e [The Intervention and the Civil War in the 
Transcaucasia], Moscow, 1960.
75. Kavkazskii kalendar’ na 1855 g. [The Caucasus Almanac for 
the year of 1955], Tiflis, 1855.
76. Y. D. Lazarev, Prichiny bedstvii armian v Turtsii [The Reasons 
of Armenian Miseries in Turkey], Tiflis, 1899.
77. J. Malevil, Armianskaia tragedia 1915 goda [The Armenian 
Tragedy of 1915], Baku, 1990.
78. R. Mustafaev, Marshy Smerti. Prestuplenia armianstva protiv 
yevreiskogo naroda [The Marches of Death. Armenian Crimes 
against the Jewish Nation], Baku, 2008.
79. I. Mamedov, Trilogia panarmenizma. Kovarnaia strategia 
chereduiushikhsia agressii [The Trilogy of Pan-Armenism. 
The Insidious Strategy of Alternating Aggressions], Baku, 
2006.
80. Materialy po izucheniu Nakhichevanskoi SSR [Study materials 
on the Nakhchivan SSR], Tiflis, 1933.
81. S. S. Pastermasian, Zapadnaia Armenia v kontse XIX v. 
[West Armenia in late 19th Century], M., 1949.
D225EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
82. Polnoie sobranie zakonov Rossiiskoi imperii [Complete 
Collection of Laws of the Russian Empire], Collection 2, 
volume 3, St. Petersburg, 1830.
83. V. A. Potto, Kavkazskaya voyna. Persidskaya voyna 
1826-1828 gg. [The Caucasian War. The Persian War in 
1826-1828], volume 3, Saint-Petersburg 1911; reprinted: 
Stavropol, 2005.
84. V. A. Parsamian, Istoriia armianskogo naroda. 1801-1900 
gg [History of the Armenian People. 1801-1900], book 1, 
Yerevan, 1977.
85. Pravitel’stvennyi vestnik [The Government Bulletin], St. 
Petersburg, 1878.
86. Prisoedinenie Vostochnoi Armenii k Rossii. Sbornik 
dokumentov [Accession of East Armenia to Russia. Collection 
of Documents], volume 1, (1801-1813), Yerevan, 1972.
87. A. Raevskii, Musavatskoe pravitel’stvo na Versal’skoi 
konferentsii. Done senia predsedatelia azerbaijanskoi 
musavatskoi delaqatsii [The Musavat Government at the 
Versailles Conference. Speeches of the Chairman of the 
Azerbaijani Musavat Delegation], Baku, 1931.
88. Saleh Bey. Armianstvo [The Armenism], Baku, 1994.
89. S. E. Sef, Kak bol’sheviki prishli k vlasti v 1917-1918 gg. v 
Bakinskom ra ione [How Bolsheviks Came to Power in 1917-18 
in Baku], Baku, 1927.
90. Traktat mezhdu Karabakhskim khanom i Rossiiskoi imperiei 
o perekhode khanstva pod vlast’ Rossii ot 14 maia 1805 
goda [The Treaty between the Khan of Karabakh and the 
Russian Empire on Accession of the Khanate to Russia].
91. Tacitus Cornelius, Sochinenia [Writings], volume 2, St. 
Petersburg, 1887.
D226E ANAR ISGENDERLI
92. E. A. Tokarzhevskii, Iz istorii inostrannoi interventsii i 
qrazhdanskoi voiny v Azerbaijane [Glimpses of History of the 
Foreign Intervention and the Civil War in Azerbaijan], Baku, 
1957.
93. N. N. Shavrov, Novaia ugroza russkomu delu v Zakavkaz’e. 
Predstoiashaia rasprodazha Mugani inorodtsam [The New 
Threat to the Russian Cause in Transcaucasia. The Forthcoming 
Sale of Mughan to Aliens], Baku, 1990.
94. Suren Shaumian, Bakinskaia Kommuna [The Baku 
Commune], Baku, 1927.
95. I. Shopen, Istoricheskii pamiatnik sostoiania Armianskoi 
oblasti (Erivanskoi gubernii) v epokhu prisoedinenia k Rossiiskoi 
imperii [Historical Memorial of the Situation in the Armenian 
Oblast’ (the Erivan guberniya) in the Days of Accession to the 
Russian Empire], St. Petersburg, 1852.
96. V. L. Velichko, Russkoe delo i mezhduplemennyie voprosy [The 
Russian Cause and the Inter-Tribal Issues], St. Petersburg, 1904.
97. Kh. Y. Verdiyeva, Pereselencheskaya politika Rossiiskoi imperii 
v severnom Azerbaijane [Resettlement Policy of the Russian 
Empire in North Azerbaijan], Baku, 1999.
98. Vserossiiskoe uchreditelnoe sobraniie (1917 qod v dokumentakh 
i materialakh) [The All-Russian Constituent Assembly (1917. 
Documents and Records)], Moscow-Leningrad, 1930.
99. Zapisi grafa N. P. Ignat’eva o San-Stefano [Notes of Count N. 
P. Ignatiev on San Stefano], S.b., 1896.
In the English Language
100. Audrey L. Altstadt, The Azeribaijani Turks: Power and 
Identity under the Russian Rule, Stanford, California, 1992.
D227EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
101. L. C. Dunsterville, The Adventures of Dunsterforce, 
London: Arnold, 1920,
102. W. E. D. Allen and P. Muratof, Caucasian Battlefields: 
A History of the Wars on the Turco-Caucasian Border 
1828-1921, Cambridge 1953; the Turkish edition: 
Ankara, 1966.
103. Erich Feigl, A Myth of Terror. Armenian Extremism: Its 
Causes and Its Historical Context, Vienna, 1986.
104. H. Katchaznouni, The Armenian Revolutionary Federation 
(Dashnagtzoutiun) Has Nothing to Do Anymore, New York: 
Armenian Information Service, 1955.
105. Firuz Kazemzadeh, The Struggle for Transcaucasia 
(1917-1921), New York, 1951.
106. Justin McCarthy, Caroline McCarthy, Turks and 
Armenians: a Manual on the Armenian Question, 
Washington, D.C., The Assembly of Turkish American 
Assosiation, 1989.
107. Justin McCarthy, “The Anatolian Armenians 1912-1922”, 
Proceedings of Symposium on Armenians in the Ottoman 
Empire and Turkiye (1912-1922), Bogazici University 
Publications, Istanbul 1984, pp 17-25.
108. Richard Pipes, The Formation of the Soviet Union: 
Communism and Nationalism, 1917-1923, Cambridge, 
1964.
109. Ronald Grigor Suny, The Baku Commune, 1917-1918: 
Class and Nationality in the Russian Revolution, Princeton 
University Press, 1972.
110. Tadeusz Swietochowski, Russian Azerbaijan, 1905-1920: 
The Shaping of National Identity in a Muslim Community, 
Cambridge, 1985; Turkish translation: Ankara, 1988.
D228E ANAR ISGENDERLI
111. Situation on arrival in Transcaucasia. Narrative of first few 
days in Baku. November 17th-24th, 1918 by Major General 
W. M. Thomson, Commanding Northern Persian Force. 
The British Archives, 6480105, CAB 45/107.
112. Report of the 2nd British occupation of Baku by General 
D. I. Shuttleworth. The British Archives, 6479639, WO 
106/1562.
In the French Language
113. Henry Barby, Les Extravagances Bolcheviques et L’epopee 
Armenienne, Paris, 1921.
D229E
INDEX
A
Agayev, Hasan, 137-38
Aiollo (leader of Baku 
Mensheviks), 91
Aisors, 133-35
Akhundov, Kazim, 81-82
Akhunzade, Huseyn, 125
Albania, 11-12
Alexander I, 18-19
Alexander II, 37
Allen, W. E. D.
   Caucasian Battlefields, 9
Altstadt, Audrey L., 96
   Azerbaijan Turks: Power and 
Identity under Russian Rule, 
The, 96
Amazasp, 115-16, 120
Amirov, Tatevos, 80
Andonian, Aram, 47
   Reminiscences of the Armenian 
Genocide, 47
Andranik (Dashnak leader), 94, 99, 
122, 127, 133-35, 169
Ararat Republic, 124
Argutinski, Prince, 25
Armenia, 140
Armenian Church, 15, 35, 42
Armenian National Council, 57, 
76-78, 87-88, 121, 139, 161, 
167
Armenian Protestant Church, 36
Armenian province, establishment 
of, 14, 25, 29
Armenian rebellion, 40
Armenians
   army formation of, 57
   British assistance for, 100
   collaboration with Russians, 42
   mass killings by, 43, 48, 72
   population of, 25
   resettlement of, 13, 17-34, 36, 40
   under the Ottoman Empire, 34
Armenian statehood, 13, 27
Ashtaraketsi, Catholicos Nerses, 25
Atropatene, 11-12
Avakian (city commandant), 89
Aydemirov, Ibrahim, 119
Azerbaijan, 140, 194-95
   autonomy for, 53-54
   independence of, 137
      See also Azerbaijani Democratic 
Republic
   Soviet Russian invasion of, 196-
203
   tribes of, 11
Azerbaijani Democratic Republic, 
146, 179, 188
   end of, 203
   in Ganja, 141
   government activity of, 193-96
   hindrances to vitalization of, 145
   in Tiflis, 137-41
Azerbaijani National Council, 97, 
141, 174-75, 178
Azerbaijanis, 16, 29, 33
Azerbaijan Turks: Power and 
Identity under Russian Rule, 
The (Altstadt), 96
D230E ANAR ISGENDERLI
B
Bagrat (Armenian archbishop), 92, 
106
Baikov, Boris, 86-88
   Memories of the Revolution in 
Transcaucasia, 86
Baku Commune 1917-1918, The 
(Suny), 94
Baku massacres, 74-103
Baku Soviet commissars, 160
Baku Soviet of People’s 
Commissars, 93, 99, 140, 
142, 152, 167
Baku Soviet’s Executive 
Committee, 54
Baku University, 195
Balfour, Arthur, 183
Barby, Henry, 89
Batum Peace Conference, 64
Baykara, Huseyn, 99
   History of Azerbaijan’s 
Independence Struggle, The, 99
Bicherakhov, Lazar, 172
Bismarck, Otto von, 39
Bolshevik Revolution, 53-54
Bolsheviks, 64, 73-76, 86-87, 91, 
93, 98-99, 154-55, 158-60, 
167, 198
Bristol, Mark Lambert, 49
   Bristol’s Papers, 49
C
Cadets, 52, 91, 97
Caspian campaign, 13
Catherine II, 27
Caucasian Battlefields (Allen and 
Muratoff), 9
Caucasus Army of Islam, 140, 142, 
150-51, 154-55, 164-66
   battle in Shamakhi, 157
   establishment of, 147
   headquarters of, 149
   march to Baku, 158
Caucasus Campaign, 144, 150
Centrocaspian Dictatorship, 160-
61, 164
Chardin, Jean, 26
Chavchavadze, Ilia, 206
Chavchavadze (prince of Georgia), 
25
Chicherin, Georgy, 146, 196-97, 
200
Chkheidze, Nikoloz, 68
Chkhenkeli, Akaki, 65
Communist Party of Azerbaijan, 
198, 200
Cornelius, Tacitus, 17
Cox, Percy, 101
Crimean War, 36
Curzon, Lord, 183
D
Dabaghian, Levon, 35
Dashnaks, 74, 77, 87, 94, 97-98, 
115, 134-35, 159, 162
   crimes by, 84, 93, 117-18, 120, 
132
Dashnaktsutiun Party, 40, 64, 76-
77, 88, 91, 101, 113, 160-61
   instructions from, 44, 46
Day of Genocide, 15
Declaration of Independence, 137-38
Democratic Republic of the South 
Caucasus, 64
Detached Army of Azerbaijan, 194
Dyakonov, Igor, 17
E
Eastern Anatolia, 35, 37, 43, 56, 
144
Edirne Peace Treaty, 36
Eldeniz, decline of, 12
D231EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
Engekharan, 110-11
Enver Pasha, 42, 63-64, 141, 143-
45, 147, 150-51, 159, 165
Erekle II, 27
Erivan, 24, 26, 32, 121-22, 144
   Azerbaijani refugees in, 141
   cession of, 16, 139
   massacres in, 128-32
Erivan guberniya, 25, 30, 141
Erzincan armistice, 56
Evelina, 74-75, 87
Executive Committee of Public 
Entities, 52
Extraordinary Investigation 
Commission, 71-72, 194
F
February Revolution, 77, 144
Feigl, Erich, 205
Fifteenth Infantry Division, 150
Fifth Caucasus Division, 150
Fox, Edward, 49
Free Armenia, 132
G
Ganja, 144, 149, 151
Garegin Nzhde i ego uchenie, 128
Gegechkori, Evgeni, 67
Gelovani, David, 113-14
Georgia, 67-68, 140, 144, 187
Germany, 39, 61, 144
Glinka, Sergey, 14
Great Armenia, 132, 134, 144, 
167, 190, 192
Griboyedov, Alexander, 25
Guba massacres, 112-21
H
Hajinski, Mammad Hasan, 52, 63, 
71, 139-40, 199
Harbord, James G., 43
Herodotus, 17
History of Albania, The (Moses of 
Kalankatuyk), 12
History of Azerbaijan’s Independence 
Struggle, The (Baykara), 99
History of the 19th Century, The 
(Lavisse and Rambaud), 31
Hummet. See Mensheviks
Hunchak Party, 40
Husein Rauf Bey, 62
I
Ibrahim, Khan of Karabakh, 18
Ibrahim Kamal Bey, 148
Independent Transcaucasian 
Government. See 
Transcaucasian Commissariat
Interim National Council of 
Muslims of the South 
Caucasus, 69
Ishkhanian, B., 31
Ittihad Party, 69, 138, 200
J
Jafargulu, Haji, 108
Jafarov, Mammad Yusif, 51, 55, 
69, 139, 201
Jamal Pasha, 143
Japaridze, Prokofy, 75-76, 89
Jews, 83-84, 119-20
k
Kanayan, Drastamat, 127
Karabakh, Khan of, 19
Karabakh khanate, 14
Karchikian, Kh., 55, 68
Kasravi, Sayyed Ahmad, 133
Katchaznouni, Hovhannes, 131
Kazemzadeh, Firuz, 90-91, 205
D232E ANAR ISGENDERLI
Kazim Karabekir Pasha, 43
Khalil, Ibrahim, 18-19, 22
Khasmammadov, Khalil Bey, 55, 
71, 120, 139
Khatisov (Khatisyan), Alexander, 
63
Khojaly, 207
Khoy massacres, 132, 134-35
Khoyski, Fatali Khan, 55, 65, 68, 
100, 138, 142, 166, 182, 196
Kichik Khan, 148
Kluge, Alexander, 72, 79
Korganov, Grigory, 73, 153, 168
Korkodyan, Z., 130
   Population of Soviet Armenia in 
1831-1931, The, 130
Kvasnik, A. N., 78
L
Lalayev, Stepan, 82
Layard, Austen Henry, 36-37
Lazarev (colonel), 25, 32-33
Lenin, Vladimir, 73
Liddell, Robert Scotland, 46
Lisanevich, Dmitri, 19
Lossow, Otto von, 65
m
Macdonell, Ranald, 98
Mahmudov, Mustafa, 137
Maku, massacres in, 132
Mallet, Louis, 184
Mannea, 11
March massacres, 60, 81, 86, 89
Markosian, S. S., 17
Marling, Charles, 99
Marsimon (Aisors’s commander), 
133
Matthew of Edessa, 34
McCarthy, Justin, 10, 18, 39, 50
McDonnell, R., 100
Mehdigulu aga, 19
Mehmet Vehib Pasha, 65
Melikshah (sultan), 35
“Memo on Situation in Baku,” 101
Memories of the Revolution in 
Transcaucasia (Baikov) 86
Mensheviks, 53, 60, 69, 97, 138, 
159-60
Mente?e, Halil bey, 65-66
Mikoyan, Anastas, 157, 198
Milne, George, 102
Minas, Abbot, 26
Minor Armenia, 134
Mir-Sadig, Mashadi, 118
Molokan Revolt, 122
Moses of Kalankatuyk, 12
   History of Albania, The, 12
Mudros Treaty, 170
Muhammed (Lezgin), 118
Muradzade, Mahammad, 83
Muratoff, Paul.
   Caucasian Battlefields, 9
Mursel Pasha, 157, 161, 166
Musavat Party, 69, 74, 87, 91-92, 
138
Muslim civilians, 15, 191
Muslim National Council, 57-59, 
137-38
Muslim Social Democrats, 69
Muslim Socialist Coalition, 60, 
138
N
Naim Bey, 47
Nakhchivan, 24, 32, 126, 149, 
169, 195
Narimanbeyov, Nariman, 139
Narimanov (doctor), 95
Nashe Vremya, 78
Nicholas I, 14, 30
Nicholas II, 42
North Caucasus Mountaineers 
D233EREALITIES OF AZERBAIJAN 1917-1920
Republic, 145-46, 187
Nuri Bey, 147
Nuri Pasha, 148-51, 154, 164-66
O
October coup, 144
Ordubadi, Mammad Said, 41
Ori, Israel, 26
Orkhan Bey (sultan), 35
Ottoman Empire, 35-36, 38, 65, 
143, 202
Ottoman government, 38, 45, 144, 
146
   military assistance to Azerbaijan, 
140
   uprisings against, 40
P
Paris Peace Conference, 172, 177-
78, 183-84, 203
   Azerbaijani delegation to, 188-93
Parliament of Azerbaijan, 175
Parsamian, Vardan, 27
Paskevich, Ivan, 32
Pastermasian, S. S., 17
Pavlovich, Alexander. See 
Alexander I
Persian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 
102
Peter I, 13, 26
Peter the Great, 13
Petros, Agha, 133
Pipes, Richard, 99
Pishavari, Seyid Jafar, 93
Population of Soviet Armenia 
in 1831-1931, The 
(Korkodyan), 130
Provisional Government of Russia, 
52, 58
R
Rafibeyov, Khudadat Bey, 59
Rasulzade, Mammad Emin, 52, 61, 
69, 140
Red Army, 74, 131, 153-54, 156, 
158, 200-201, 203
Reminiscences of the Armenian 
Genocide (Andonian), 47
Republican Party of Armenia, 128
Revolutionary Defense Committee, 
76
Romanov, house of, 51, 73
Russia, 51-52, 56, 61, 73, 132, 144
Russian army, 15, 48, 132, 143, 
200-203
   Armenians enlisted in, 42, 44
   demobilization of, 57
   disarming of, 58, 76, 97
Russian Conquest of the Caucasus, 
The (Baddeley), 9
Russian Constituent Assembly, 
175, 177
Russian Council of People’s 
Commissars, 73
Russian Federative Republic, 190
Russian National Council, 177
Rustambeyov,Shafi bey, 68
Rzayev, Baghir, 139
s
Safataliyev, Ismayil bey, 95
Safavi Empire, 13
Salisbury, Lord Robert Cecil, 37
Salyan, 156
Sarikamish, battle of, 143
Sazanov (Russian doctor), 104
Sefikurdski, Aslan, 59-60
Serkarov, Hatam, 114
Seyidov, Mir Hidayat, 139
Shamakhi massacres, 103-12
Shaumian, Stepan, 52, 54, 73-74, 
D234E ANAR ISGENDERLI
76-77, 86, 88, 90, 99, 167-
69
Shavrov, Nikolay, 14, 28
Shaw, Stanford J., 48
Sheykhzamanli, Naghi Keykurun, 
97
Shopen, Ivan, 14, 33
Shuttleworth, Digby Inglis, 185
Sokolov, Vladimir, 81-82
Solemn Plight of 1803, 14
South Caucasus, 9, 51, 144
   map of, 208
   political forces in, 54
   Russian invasion in, 14
Soviet Socialist Republic of 
Azerbaijan, 203
Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ 
Deputies, 52
Special Investigation Commission, 
15
Special Transcaucasian Committee, 
51-52
Suleyman Izzet Bey, 150
Sultanov, Jalil, 125-26
Sultanov, Khosrov Pasha, 70
Suny, Ronald Grigor, 94, 96
   Baku Commune 1917-1918, The, 
94
Swietochowski, Tadeusz, 206
T
Taghiyev, Mahammad, 74
Talat Pasha, 46-47
Taleshinskii (general), 90
Tiflis, 144
Topchubashov, Alimerdan Bey, 
170, 181, 206
Trabzon Conference, 62
Transcaucasian Commissariat, 51, 
55-59, 76, 175
Transcaucasian Federative 
Democratic Republic, 63, 67
Transcaucasian Seim, 59-63, 66, 
68, 168, 175
Treaty of Batum, 140
Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, 61, 144
Treaty of Kurekchay, 14, 18
Treaty of San Stefano, 38-39
Treaty of Turkmenchay, 14, 24-
26, 28, 33
Tsereteli, Irakli, 67
Turkic Federalist Party, 53
Turkish War of Independence, 49
U
Urmia Tragedy, 132-33
V
Vakilov, Ibrahim Agha, 141
Varjapetian, Nerses, 36-37
Velichko, Vasili, 206
W
Wardrop, Oliver, 102-3, 184, 199
West Armenia, 36-37, 39
Wilhelm I, 39
Wilson, Woodrow, 191
World War I, 143
Y
Yekaterinasert, 27
Yelizavetpol, 28, 31, 41
Yusifbeyli, Nasib, 69, 196
Z
Zangezur, 26
Zangezur massacres, 128
Anar Isgenderli is a professor of history and a faculty chair 
at Baku State University. His research areas include history of 
Armenian-Turkic and Azerbaijani-Armenian relations in the 
Ottoman Empire and the South Caucasus in nineteenth to 
twentieth centuries. Among other topics, Professor Isgenderli’s 
works investigate slaughters of Azerbaijani civilians by Armenian 
military detachments based on local and foreign records. The 
History of Massacres in March 1918, published in 1997, looked 
into reasons and outcomes of the bashing of Azerbaijani civilians 
by Armenian militarized gangs in Baku, Shamakhi, Quba, and 
other cities and towns of Azerbaijan on the basis of statistical 
data, interviews, and other documents completed by the Special 
Investigation Commission. The 2006 treatise The History of 
Turkic-Muslim Genocide in Azerbaijan (1918-1920) analyzed 
available researches and records on massacres of Muslim Turks by 
Armenian military units and gave an objective assessment of the 
events. Prof. Anar Isgenderli is the author of over two hundred 
research articles published in and outside of Azerbaijan.
