
 
 
Robin Hood 
 
 
 
Level 2 
 
Retold by Liz Austin                                               
Series Editors: Andy Hopkins and Jocelyn Potter 
Contents 
 
 
                                                                                          page 
Introduction                                                                                v 
Chapter 1   Robin Fitzooth is Born in                                              
Sherwood Forest                                                      1 
Chapter 2   The Sheriff of Nottingham Finds                                
Robin Hood                                                             3 
Chapter 3   At St Mary’s Abbey                                                  5 
Chapter 4   The King’s Deer                                                       6 
Chapter 5   Robin Hood Meets Little John                                  9 
Chapter 6   Robin Hood Helps Sir Richard of Lee                    12 
Chapter 7    Sir Richard Pays the Abbot                                    14 
Chapter 8    Lady Marian and the Sheriff                                      
of Nottingham                                                       15 
Chapter 9    The Sheriff’s Visit                                                 17 
Chapter 10  Marian Goes to Sherwood Forest                         19 
Chapter 11  Robin Hood and Friar Tuck                                  20 
Chapter 12  The Two Churchmen and the Bags                           
of Gold                                                                  25 
Chapter 13  Sir Richard of Lee Comes Back to                              
the Forest                                                               27 
Chapter 14  Robin Hood and the Gold Arrow                          28 
Chapter 15  The Tall Friar                                                        31 
Chapter 16  The Last Adventure                                               34 
Activities                                                                                   39 
                              Introduction 
Lord Gamwell followed the man to the middle of Sherwood Forest. There, 
in the spring sunshine, he saw his daughter. He also saw a baby boy in her 
arms. Joanna looked up at her father and smiled. 'This is Robin, your 
grandson,' she said. 
Robin Hood was born in the forest, and the forest was his home for much 
of his life. His story is hundreds of years old. At that time, in England, 
many Saxon people lived in small villages on the lands of important 
Norman lords (from Normandy, now in France). Other people lived on 
church lands. Life was hard for these villagers because they had to give 
money and food to their lord and to the church. 
So village people loved to hear stories about Robin Hood. Robin 
Hood was clever, strong and brave. He loved adventure, and he was the 
best fighter in England. He took money from rich people and gave it to 
the poor villagers. 
The most famous Robin Hood stories are in this book. They are about 
beautiful Lady Marian, the greedy Sheriff of Nottingham, good King 
Richard, and his bad brother, Prince John. 
Many countries have stories about brave and clever adventurers. But is 
Robin Hood only a story? Perhaps Robin really did live, and perhaps 
not. There was a King Richard; he was king from 1189 to 1199. He left 
England and fought in Jerusalem. When he was away, Prince John was 
the most important man in England. Then, when Richard died, John was 
the next king. 
The stories say that Robin Hood lived with his men in Sherwood 
Forest, near the town  of Nottingham. Sherwood Forest and Nottingham 
are about two hundred kilometres north of London. Many people there 
say that Robin Hood really lived in the forest. 
Chapter 1                                         
Robin Fitzooth is Born in Sherwood Forest 
The Robin Hood stories are very famous. Most people know that Robin 
lived in Saxon and Norman times. He robbed rich people and gave the 
money to poor people. But not everybody knows that he came from a 
rich family. And not many people know that Robin Hood was half-
Saxon and half-Norman. 
♦ 
The story begins with Robin Hood's Saxon grandfather, Sir* George 
Gamwell. Gamwell lived near a Norman lord*. This lord wanted to take 
Gamwell's house and his lands. The two men fought, and the Norman 
lord killed Gamwell's two sons. Gamwell's wife also died. 
But Sir George also had a young daughter, Joanna. 
‘I have no sons,’ Gamwell said to Joanna. ‘So I will teach you to 
fight with a sword, and with a bow and arrow.’ 
Five years later, Joanna was nineteen years old and very beautiful. 
One day, a young man visited Sir George. His name was William 
Fitzooth, and he was a Norman. 
‘Sir George,’ he began, ‘I love your daughter. I hope that she loves 
me. I would like to marry her. I have money and land…’ 
But Sir George was very angry. 
‘Never!’ he answered. ‘My daughter will never marry you. Get off 
my land. Do not come here again or I will kill you!’ 
Joanna loved this young man. So she tried to talk to her father, but he 
didn't want to listen. 
Sir, Lord, Lady: Important men had the words Sir or Lord before their names; 
important women had the word Lady. 
 
1 
‘Go to your room!’ he shouted. ‘I do not want to hear that man's 
name again.’ 
That night, William came back to Sir George's home. He stood under 
Joanna's window and called to her. Joanna took . some clothes and came 
quietly out of the house. 
William took her hand. ‘Will you come with me and marry me?’ he 
asked. ‘We cannot live in my home because your father's men will look 
for you there. So we will live in the green forest.’ 
‘I am sorry for my father,’ Joanna said sadly, ‘but I love you. I know 
you are a good man. I will marry you.’ 
In the morning, Sir George woke late. He called to his men, ‘Where 
is my daughter ? I want to speak to her.’ 
But Joanna was nowhere in the house. 
Sir George was very angry, then very sad. 
‘I have no family now,’ he thought. 
♦ 
One fine day in April, a year later, a man came to the house. 
‘Your daughter sent me here,’ he said. ‘She wants you to come and 
see her.’ 
Sir George followed the man to the middle of Sherwood Forest. 
There, in the spring sunshine, he saw his daughter. He also saw a baby 
boy in her arms. Joanna looked up at her father and smiled. 
‘This is Robin, your grandson,’ she said. 
She gave the baby to her father. Sir George wanted to be angry, but 
he was very happy with his grandson in his arms. 
‘Robin? Is that your name?’ he said. ‘Well, little Robin, I wanted to 
kill your father but that is not possible now. Please, daughter, come 
with your husband and live near me. Let's forget the past.’ 
‘We will come and live near you, father,’ said Joanna. ‘But I will 
often bring my son to the forest. I will teach him to find his 
 
 
 
 
2 
way in the forest in the day and at night. He will learn to make arrows 
for his bow, and to catch forest animals. He will make a ire and cook the 
meat. The forest will always be his second home.’ 
Chapter 2                                                 
The Sheriff of Nottingham Finds Robin Hood 
Robin's grandfather died, then his mother and father. After twenty-five 
years, Robin was lord of Gamwell and Locksley, and lived in his father's 
home, Locksley House. 
The village people liked Robin Fitzooth. 
‘He is a good man,’ they said. ‘No man, woman or child is hungry on 
Robin of Locksley's lands.’ 
Not all lords were so kind. The worst person was the greedy Sheriff 
of Nottingham. The sheriff took everything from the villagers, and often 
these poor people were very hungry. Robin listened carefully to the 
stories about the sheriff. He sent food and clothes to the poorest 
families. 
♦ 
At about this time, people began to tell stories about a robber. They 
called him Robin Hood. 
‘The sheriff is a hard man,’ they said. ‘He and his rich friends take 
everything from us. But now brave Robin Hood and his men rob rich 
people and give their money to poor villagers!’ 
In those days, the Great North Road went through Sherwood Forest. 
Robin Hood's men often stopped rich men in the forest, and took their 
money. Sometimes Prince John's men also used the road. So Robin 
Hood robbed him too. 
‘The forest is on your land,’ said Prince John to the sheriff. ‘Why 
don't you catch and kill this robber?’ 
 
 
 
3 
‘It is not so easy,’ answered the sheriff. ‘The village people don't 
want to tell me much. They say only that the robbers live in or near 
Sherwood Forest. But they know more than they say. I have a plan to 
learn more about this man Robin Hood.’ 
‘What is your plan?’ asked the prince. 
‘It is this,’ answered the sheriff. ‘Robin of Locksley lives near 
Sherwood Forest. Tonight there is going to be a great party at Locksley 
House. I know that Fitzooth will invite the village people on his land. So 
I will send one of my men. He can wear village clothes and ask 
questions about “good” Robin Hood, “the people's friend”. When I 
know more about this Robin, I can catch him.’ 
That evening, there were a lot of people at Locksley House. There 
was food and drink for the villagers, and there was dancing and singing. 
Everybody was very happy. And Robin was the happiest person there, 
because he and the lovely Lady Marian Fitzwalter planned to marry the 
next day. 
The sheriff's man turned to a villager next to him. 
‘I often hear the name Robin Hood,’ he said. ‘Who is he ? Does he 
live near here ?’ 
The man laughed. ‘Don't you know, friend? Robin Fitzooth is Robin 
Hood!’                                           
The sheriff's man quickly left Locksley House and went to his lord. 
‘This is better than I hoped,’ said the sheriff. ‘Tomorrow, Robin 
Fitzooth will marry Lady Marian at St Mary's Abbey. But my men will 
stop him and bring him to me. Prince John will kill him and give me 
Fitzooth's money and lands. Lady Marian's family is also rich. She will 
not marry Robin, so perhaps I will marry her. Yes, tomorrow will be a 
great day for me!’ 
 
 
 
4 
Chapter 3    At St Mary's Abbey 
At 10 o'clock the next morning, Robin Fitzooth and Lady Marian stood 
in front of the abbot in St Mary's Abbey. Lady Marian was some years 
younger than Robin, and very lovely. She wore a white dress, and her 
long hair was the colour of the forest trees in autumn. 
The abbot began to speak. 
‘Robin of Locksley,’ he began ‘do you ...’ 
‘Stop!’ somebody called from the back of the church. Robin turned. 
It was the Sheriff of Nottingham. Behind the sheriff were twenty men 
with bows and arrows. 
‘My Lord Abbot,’ called the sheriff loudly. ‘This man has to come 
with me. He is the robber, Robin Hood!’ Then he turned to his men.       
‘Why are you waiting?’ he asked. ‘Take him!’ 
‘Yes, I am Robin Hood,’ answered Robin, ‘but you will not take me. 
Look carefully round the church, Sheriff. Do you not see my men?’ 
The sheriff looked and saw thirty or more tall, strong men. 
The abbot was angry and afraid. ‘What are you doing?’ he shouted.   
‘Will you fight in a church ?’ 
‘This man has to come with me,’ said the sheriff again. ‘Give me 
your sword, Robin Hood, and come quietly. The good abbot does not 
want you to fight!’ 
Robin walked slowly to the sheriff. 
‘Here you are, my Lord,’ he said - and hit the sheriff hard on the 
head with the top of his sword. The sheriff fell back. 
‘Outside! Everybody outside!’ shouted Robin. 
His men pushed the sheriff's men back through the church door. A 
great fight began outside the abbey. 
Robin spoke quickly to Marian. 
‘We can fight and win today,’ he said. ‘But now the sheriff knows my 
name, and I cannot go back to Locksley House. Wait 
 
 
 
 
5 
for me, my love. King Richard will come back to England - he will hear 
about the greedy sheriff and his friends. But now I will be Robin Hood 
of Sherwood Forest and not Robin of Locksley. I will never hurt a 
woman, a child or a poor man. But rich and greedy men will be afraid to 
walk near my forest home!’ 
Chapter 4   The King's Deer 
After the fight in the abbey, the Sheriff of Nottingham asked Prince 
John for Robin Fitzooth's lands. The prince sold them to him for a lot of 
money in gold. The greedy sheriff, of course, wanted to get the money 
back again as fast as possible. So his poor villagers had to pay the 
sheriff more money than before. The villagers on Robin's land also had 
to pay. Their new lord, the sheriff, was a very hard man. 
One of these villages was Farnsfield. It was very close to Sherwood, 
and the villagers often went into the forest. There they caught small 
animals and birds for their dinner. On their first visit to Farnsfield, the 
sheriff and his men took money and food. They also found an old man 
in the forest, with a dead deer on his back. 
That evening, the sheriff called all the villagers. Then his men 
brought out the old man and the dead deer. 
‘Listen well!’ said the sheriff loudly. ‘You know that the deer in the 
forest are the king's deer. The king and his lords can catch and kill them 
— you cannot. This evening, I will help you to remember that!’ 
The sheriff looked at the villagers and smiled. Nobody spoke. Then 
he turned to the old man. 
‘What is your name, old man ?’ asked the sheriff, coldly. 
‘I ... I ... I am Much the forester, My Lord,’ answered the man, very 
afraid. 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
‘Well, Much the forester,’ said the sheriff. ‘You killed a king's deer. 
How much are you going to pay me for it?’ 
‘My Lord, you know that I cannot give you anything!’ said poor 
Much. ‘You ... you took our money ... and our food. I found the deer, but 
it was dead. I didn't kill it!’ 
‘I am not interested in your stories, old man,’ said the sheriff. ‘You 
cannot pay me any money? Very well, then you will have to pay with 
your life!’ 
He turned to one of his men. ‘Kill this robber,’ he said, ‘and pull 
down his home! This will be a lesson for the villagers of Farnsfield!’ 
The sheriff's man took out his sword, and pulled back Much's head. 
The villagers could not help the old forester because they were afraid. 
But Much called out, ‘No! Kill me, but please do not pull down my 
house! It is my son's home, too, and he did not hurt you. He did not take 
the deer. Wait, please ...!’ Much turned his eyes to the forest. ‘Oh, Robin 
Hood,’ he thought, ‘where are you now ? Only you can help me.’ 
‘So you have a son ?’ said the sheriff's man. ‘Well, he can stay in 
your house when we pull it down!’ 
He laughed loudly, but the sheriff looked more carefully at the 
forester. 
‘Wait!’ he called. ‘I think this man knows something! Old man, why 
are you looking into the forest? Do you think that Robin Hood will help 
you? Do you know something about him? Tell me, and perhaps I will 
not kill you!’ 
‘I can take you to Robin Hood!’ said Much quickly. ‘I can take you to 
his home in the forest. It is this way! Follow me!’ 
The sheriff's man took his hands away, and Much began to move 
slowly to the forest. Then he suddenly ran as fast as he could. 
‘Catch him!’ shouted the sheriff. 
Much was nearly inside the forest now, but the sheriff's fighters 
quickly took out their bows. Three arrows hit him, and Much fell to the 
ground. His open eyes looked up at the sky. 
 
 
 
 
7 
‘I said “catch him”, not “kill him”,’ said the sheriff angrily. ‘Now the 
man is dead, he cannot tell us anything.’ He looked at the villagers 
again. ‘Perhaps one of you can tell me the way through the forest to the 
robber's home ? I will pay you well!’ 
But nobody told the sheriff about Robin Hood. 
The sheriff was now very angry. 
‘There is nothing more for us here,’ he said to his men. ‘Pull down 
the forester's house, and we will go.’ 
He turned one last time to the villagers. ‘The next man with a deer 
will die too - but not as quickly. Remember that!’ 
Later in the evening, the villagers carried Much into the centre of the 
village. The forester's young son stood outside his father's house. There 
was nothing there now. 
‘We are very sorry,’ the villagers said to the boy. ‘We could not do 
anything. Do not be too sad — your father died bravely!’ 
Then a small man with a bow and arrows on his back walked quietly 
into the village. 
‘It is Will Scarlet, Robin Hood's man!’ said the villagers. 
Will Scarlet put down his bow, and put his hand on the boy's head. 
‘Robin knows that the sheriff was here,’ he said. ‘He sent me to help, 
but I am too late! Who was this man ? Was he your father?’ 
‘Yes, he was my father,’ answered the young boy sadly. ‘Now I have 
no family - and no home!’ He turned to Will Scarlet. ‘Oh, please,’ he 
cried, ‘take me with you! My father taught me a lot about the forest. You 
can teach me to be a fighter too! I want to be Robin Hood's man. I want 
to fight the sheriff - and Prince John too.’ 
‘You are very young,’ said Will. ‘When you are older, perhaps...’ 
‘I am not young, I am fourteen,’ said the boy. ‘I am small, but I am 
strong. I learn quickly. I have nothing here. Please take me with you.’ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
And so Will Scarlet took young Much to Robin Hood. 
That year, many young men came to the forest. They all had stories 
about the sheriff and his men. Robin and Will Scarlet taught them to use 
a sword and a bow and arrow. But Much, the forester's son, was always 
one of the best and bravest of Robin's men. 
Chapter 5    Robin Hood Meets Little John 
Our drink is strong, our food is good Come 
in and drink with, Robin Hood. When 
Robin Hood is not at home Come in and 
drink with Little John. (An old drinking 
song) 
In the first weeks and months after the fight in the abbey, Robin and his 
men worked very hard. They cut down young trees and built homes in 
the centre of the forest. They made arrows from wood and caught forest 
deer for their food. They bought bread and milk from the villagers. 
Sometimes Robin liked to leave his men, and look for adventure. One 
fine autumn morning, he and his friend Will Scarlet woke early. 
‘It is a beautiful day,’ said Robin. ‘I think I will go for a walk to the 
river. Will you come with me?’ 
‘I. want to make some new arrows for my bow,’ answered Will. ‘But 
I will meet you at lunch time near the bridge.’ 
So Robin left Will and walked quickly through the forest to the river 
and the little bridge. Robin stood in the middle of the bridge, and looked 
up at the trees. 
‘The autumn colours are beautiful,’ he thought. Then he looked down 
at the water. ‘I will catch a fish for our lunch,’ he thought. ‘Will and I 
can make a fire. I have some bread, and 
 
 
 
 
9 
there is fruit on the trees. We will eat very well. Ah, this is a wonderful 
life!’ 
Suddenly somebody behind him said, ‘Well, little man! Are you 
going to stand there all day? Get out of my way!’ 
Robin turned. The speaker was a big man, nearly two metres tall. 
‘Now this will be an interesting adventure,’ he thought. ‘That man is 
very strong. Can I fight him - and win ?’ He did not move from the 
bridge. 
‘I arrived here first,’ he called to the big man, ‘so you will have to 
wait. I think I am going to do some fishing. Then, perhaps, I will get out 
of your way’ 
The big man moved onto the bridge. 
‘I will not wait!’ he said. ‘And you are not going to fish, you are 
going to fight!’ 
They fought there, in the middle of the bridge. Robin couldn't win. 
He knew that after a minute or two. The man wasn't very fast but he was 
very strong. So Robin quickly thought of a plan. 
He looked over the top of the big man's head, and shouted,  ‘Look, 
the sheriff's men!’ 
The big man turned and looked. Robin quickly kicked the man's legs 
as hard as he could. The big man was very angry — but he didn't fall. He 
kicked Robin, and Robin fell off the bridge into the water. 
The big man laughed. 
‘I won the fight,’ he said. ‘Come, I will help you.’ 
He looked over the bridge into the water. But Robin was not there. 
‘Where are you?’ called the man. ‘Are you all right?’ 
Robin suddenly came up from the water. He was a long way from the 
bridge. 
‘Perhaps you won the fight,’ laughed Robin, ‘but you did not catch 
me!’ 
He began to climb onto dry ground. Then Will Scarlet arrived. 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
They fought there, in the middle of the bridge. 
‘What happened, Robin?’ he called. ‘Did this man throw you in 
the water? He will have to fight me now!’ 
‘No! No!' laughed Robin. ‘Let's be friends. So what is your 
name, friend? And what are you doing in my forest?’ 
‘Your forest?’ answered the big man. ‘It is not your forest! I 
came here to find brave Robin Hood. But first, I think, I will throw 
you in the river again!’ 
‘Friend,' said Robin, ‘you found Robin Hood, and threw him in 
the water. Please, don't do it again!’ 
‘What! Are you really Robin Hood?’ asked the man. ‘I am very 
happy about that. My name is John Little and I want to be one of 
your men.’ 
Robin laughed. ‘ “Little” is a good name for you, because you 
are very small - only the size of a small tree! We will always call 
you our “little” John. Come to our forest home, Little John!’ 
Chapter 6    Robin Hood Helps Sir Richard of Lee 
Autumn went and winter came. One cold but sunny day in January, 
a man came slowly over the Great North Road on an old horse. The 
snow on the forest trees shone in the winter sunshine. But the man 
did not look at the forest. He looked only at the road in front of 
him. 
‘It is a beautiful morning,’ he heard suddenly. ‘Why are you so 
sad ?’ 
Will Scarlet came out of the forest and stood in the middle of the 
road. The man looked up. 
‘Who are you ?’ he asked. 
‘My name is Will Scarlet,’ said Will, ‘and I am Robin Hood's 
man. Are you afraid ?’ 
‘No, I am not afraid,’ said the man. ‘I know that Robin Hood 
helps poor people. But he cannot help me.’ 
 
 
12 
Will Scarlet laughed. 
‘Perhaps we can help you, and perhaps we can't. Robin Hood 
and his men love dangerous adventures. Come and eat with us! Tell 
us your problems!’ 
So Will Scarlet took the man to Robin Hood. First, they gave 
him food and drink. He was very hungry. 
‘You eat well in your forest home,’ said the man. ‘You eat as 
well as the King - perhaps better! Thank you for this good food.’ 
Then he stood up. 
‘Wait,’ said Robin. ‘Can't you pay us something for your 
dinner? With a little gold I can help many poor families.’ 
The man did not answer for some time. 
Then he said, ‘I have gold in my bags - six hundred pounds! But 
I cannot give it to you. I am going to St Mary's Abbey. This money 
is for the abbot.’ 
‘That is a lot of money,’ said Will, ‘and the church has too 
much gold.’ 
‘That is my problem,’ said the man. ‘The abbot wants more -five 
hundred pounds more — and I cannot pay him this year. Perhaps 
he will wait another year, but I think not. I think that he will ask for 
my lands - and my home too.’ 
‘Yes,’ said Robin, ‘the abbot is a greedy man. Tell us your 
name, friend, and tell us your story too. Perhaps we can help.’ 
So the man told his story. His name was Richard of Lee, and his 
son killed a man in a fight. The man died, and the Sheriff of 
Nottingham's men took the boy away. 
‘Ah, the sheriff,’ said Robin. ‘Another greedy man! Did he ask 
for money ?’ 
‘You know him well,’ answered Richard of Lee. ‘He said, “Pay 
me one thousand pounds or your son will die!” I am not a rich man, 
but the Abbot of St Mary's paid the money for me. This happened 
last year. Now I have to pay the abbot. He wants 
 
 
 
13 
one thousand, one hundred pounds - and I can only give him six 
hundred.’ 
Robin laughed. ‘I can give you the money. But first, let's try 
something ... perhaps the good abbot is not a bad man. Tell him 
that you do not have the money. Ask him to help you. Ask him to 
wait another year!’ 
Then Robin turned to his men. 
‘Who will go with this man and listen to the abbot's answer?’ 
‘I will go with him,’ said Little John. ‘I am ready for an 
adventure!’ 
Chapter 7    Sir Richard Pays the Abbot 
At twelve o'clock the next day, the Abbot of St Mary's was in his 
great dining room. On the table there were bags of gold. He went 
to the window and looked out. 
‘Sir Richard of Lee is here at the right time, I see,’ he thought.  
‘But his clothes are poor, and his horse is old. Good! I think my 
friend, the sheriff, is right. Sir Richard cannot pay my one 
thousand, one hundred pounds. So this evening, I will be Lord of 
his house and his lands!’ 
A few minutes later, Sir Richard and Little John came into the 
room. 
‘Well,’ said the abbot, 'you are here at the right time. Do you 
have my money ?’ 
‘My Lord Abbot,’ Sir Richard began, ‘you are a church man. I 
hope you will be kind. Next year ...’ 
‘Stop!’ shouted the abbot. ‘Do not ask for more time! I want my 
money now Pay me the one thousand, one hundred pounds, or your 
house and lands will be mine this evening!’ 
Sir Richard then put six bags of gold on the abbot's table. ‘Here 
are six hundred pounds, My Lord,’ he said quietly. ‘There 
 
 
14  
is one hundred in each bag. It is a lot of money for me. Next year 
I hope ...’  
‘Not next year, or next month, or next week!’ shouted the abbot 
again. ‘I want all my money today! Do you have my gold -yes or no?’ 
Then Little John put five more bags on the table. 
‘Here you are, My Lord,’ he said. ‘Five hundred more pounds. This 
good man and his family will sleep in their home tonight.’ 
The abbot looked at the money, then he looked at Little John. The 
abbot's face was very red. He opened his mouth and then closed it again. 
What could he say? 
Later, in the forest, Little John told the story to Robin Hood and the 
other men. 
‘The abbot's face was wonderful,’ said Little John. ‘He was angry, 
but he had to take the money’ 
They laughed for a long time, but then Robin said, 
‘This was a fine adventure. But the abbot will tell the sheriff, and the 
sheriff will also be angry. They are dangerous men. Sir Richard has to 
be careful.’ 
Chapter 8                                        
Lady Marian and the Sheriff of Nottingham 
Every year in summer, Marian's father had a great party. Lords and 
ladies and the people from the villages came. They ate and drank. This 
year, the Sheriff of Nottingham came too, with fifty of his men. He 
watched Marian carefully. 
‘She is very beautiful,’ he thought, ‘and Robin Hood loves her. I 
know he will come today. Then my men can catch him.’ 
The music started and people began to dance. A man went to Marian 
and spoke to her. She smiled and gave him her hand. 
The sheriff stood up and called loudly to his men, ‘That's him! That's 
Robin Hood! Take him!’ 
 
 
 
15 
 
Then Little John put five more bags on the table. 
The sheriff's men took out their swords and moved through the dancers. 
Suddenly ten of the dancers ran for their swords too. They were, of course, 
Robin's men, and a great fight began. Robin's men were better fighters than 
the sheriff's. Marian wanted to fight too, but her father stopped her. 
‘Marian, what are you doing? Put down that sword! I am sorry about 
Robin — no other man will marry you. You are only interested in fighting!’ 
The sheriff heard Marian's father and smiled. 
‘Lady Marian is really very lovely,’ he thought. ‘Her father wants to find 
another husband for her? Good. I will marry her, then she will help me find 
Robin Hood.’ 
 Chapter 9   The Sheriff's Visit 
The next day, the sheriff arrived at Lord Fitzwalter's house with twenty 
horsemen. Lord Fitzwalter watched them through a window. He was not 
happy. 
‘He wants to talk about yesterday's fight,’ he said to his daughter, ‘and 
you nearly fought too! Please go to your room. I will speak to him.’ 
‘I do not want to speak to the sheriff, father,’ said Marian, ‘but I will 
listen behind the door!’ 
Marian left the room, and a minute later, the sheriff walked in. 
‘My Lord Sheriff,’ began Lord Fitzwalter, ‘I am sorry about the fight 
yesterday, but your men…’ 
‘No, no, I do not want to talk about that,’ said the sheriff. He put his 
hand on Lord Fitzwalter's arm and smiled. ‘I want to speak to you about 
your daughter, the Lady Marian.’ 
‘Ah, Marian,’ said Lord Fitzwalter unhappily. ‘Marian is a good girl but 
she does not always listen to me. Perhaps one day a husband will...’ 
 
 
 
 
 
17 
‘Ah yes!’ said the sheriff and smiled. ‘Well, I am looking for a wife, 
and I would like to marry your daughter. I like a strong woman - and 
Marian is also very beautiful. I will be a good husband. I have lands, 
money - and important friends.’ 
‘My Lord, what can I say?’ said Marian's father. He was now 
very unhappy. Marian wanted to marry Robin and no other 
man - he knew that. ‘You are very kind. I will talk to Marian 
but...’     
‘I will come back tomorrow,’ said the sheriff. ‘Remember -Prince 
John is my very good friend. He can be your friend too. Think 
carefully!’ 
♦ 
That evening, Marian and her father talked for a long time about Robin, 
the sheriff and Prince John. 
‘Marian, why don't you marry the sheriff?’ said her father. ‘He is 
rich and important, and he is a friend of Prince John. I am afraid of the 
prince. Please marry the sheriff, and forget Robin Fitzooth.’ 
Marian took her father's hand. ‘Father, I am sorry to bring you so 
many problems. I will not marry the sheriff, but he will be angry with 
me, not you. Listen. Tomorrow I will leave the house very early and 
stay with my uncle. The sheriff will come late in the morning. Tell your 
men to look for me. Look in every room. Be very angry. Then the 
sheriff will think that you know nothing!’ 
‘You are right, Marian,’ said her father. ‘You will have to marry the 
sheriff or leave here. Go then to my brother's house. But who will go 
with you?’ 
‘Good Friar Tuck is staying here tonight,’ answered Marian. ‘He will 
help me.’ 
‘That fat churchman ?’ said her father. ‘He is a strange friar. He 
fights too well for a churchman. People say that the Abbot of St Mary's 
hates him. The friar had to leave the abbey.’ 
 
 
 
18 
‘Friar Tuck does not like the abbot because the abbot takes a lot of 
money from the villagers,’ answered Marian. ‘Friar Tuck says that the 
church has to help poor people.’ 
‘Mm,’ said her father.! ‘The abbot does live very well. He is a greedy 
man. Friar Tuck is greedy too - he eats more than ten men! But he is a 
brave man and very strong. Yes, take Friar Tuck with you.’ 
Chapter 10    Marian Goes to Sherwood Forest 
Very early next morning, Marian put on boy's clothes and a boy's hat 
and woke up Friar Tuck. The friar took his staff and Marian took her 
bow and arrows. Then they left the house and walked on the Great North 
Road through the forest. 
After some hours, the friar suddenly left the road and sat down under 
a tree. 
‘Please let's stop, My Lady,’ he said. ‘We had no breakfast and I am 
very hungry!’ 
Marian laughed. 
‘I am sorry, Friar Tuck,’ she said, ‘You are right, we will eat now. 
Stay here. I will take your staff and my bow and arrow, and catch some 
animals. "We can cook them here in the forest.’ 
Marian left the friar and moved quietly between the forest trees. She 
saw a deer. Very quietly, she took out an arrow and put it to her bow. 
‘Stop there, boy!’ said a man behind her. The man spoke very loudly. 
The deer jumped at the noise and ran away into the trees. Marian was 
very angry. She turned to the speaker but he wore a big hood. She 
couldn't see his face. 
‘Well, boy,’ said the man. ‘Don't you know that you cannot eat the 
king's deer? The Sheriff of Nottingham killed two men last week 
because they caught a deer.’ 
 
 
 
19 
‘I am not afraid of the sheriff,’ said Marian, ‘or of you. Leave now 
- or fight!’ 
‘Fight with you?’ the man laughed. ‘But you are only a boy! Well, 
you have a staff and I have one too. I will fight with you -with one 
hand!’ 
Marian fought well. She was strong and quick. With only one 
hand, the man could not win. She hit him again and again on his head 
and across his back. 
‘Stop, stop!’ he laughed. ‘You are young, but you are a good 
fighter.’ He threw back his hood. ‘I am Robin Hood. Will you come 
with me, and be one of my men?’ 
‘Robin!’ said Marian, and threw back her hood too. Her lovely red 
hair fell down her back. 
‘Marian!’ answered Robin. ‘What are you doing here, in the forest 
? Is nobody with you ?’ 
‘I am with a friend, Friar Tuck,’ said Marian, ‘and he is very 
hungry! The deer was for him. But I think that he will be happy to eat 
at Robin Hood's table.’ 
She and Robin went back to the road and looked for Friar Tuck. 
They called his name but there was no answer. 
‘Poor man!’ said Marian. ‘Perhaps he is looking for me. Perhaps 
he thinks that the sheriff's men caught me!’ 
Then she told Robin about her father and the sheriff. 
‘I cannot go home now, Robin,’ she said. ‘I want to be with you 
here, in Sherwood Forest. Friar Tuck will marry us. Let's find him. 
Perhaps he will want to live with us.’ 
Chapter 11    Robin Hood and Friar Tuck 
They did not find Friar Tuck that day, so Marian stayed with her uncle. 
She came each day to the forest. 
‘Another friar lives at my uncle's home,’ she told Robin, ‘but he is 
a weak man. He doesn't want to marry us because he is 
 
 
 
20 
 
'Robin!' said Marian, and threw back her hood. 
afraid. And the sheriff will find me at my uncle's house. Oh, where is 
Friar Tuck? Only he can help us.’ 
♦ 
Then one day, about a month after the fight between Marian and Robin, 
Will Scarlet told them an interesting story. 
‘People in the village of River Dale are talking about a fat friar,’ he 
said. ‘They say he came to the village last month. Now he lives near the 
river. For one penny, he will take people across the river in his boat. 
When poor people cannot pay, he carries them across on his back! 
People say he loves good food and a good fight. He is a very strange 
friar, I think.’ 
‘And I think that man is Friar Tuck,’ laughed Marian. ‘Robin, please 
go to River Dale and bring him back with you.’ 
Robin and Will Scarlet walked with Marian to her uncle's house and 
then went back through the forest to the village of River Dale. 
‘Wait here, Will,’ said Robin. ‘Marian says the friar is a strong man 
and very brave. I'd like to try him!’ 
Robin then walked to the river and looked across it. He saw the friar's 
little house, and his boat. 
‘Good friar,’ he called, ‘where are you ? Will you take me in your 
boat? I have some money and I can pay you well.’ 
Friar Tuck came out of the house and got into the boat. He came 
quickly across the river. 
‘Show me your money first,’ said the friar. ‘Then you can get in.’ 
He jumped from the boat to dry ground and held out his hand. Robin 
gave him a penny and walked to the boat. But he didn't get in. He pushed 
the boat and it moved slowly away, down the river. 
‘You stupid man! What are you doing?’ shouted Friar Tuck. 
Robin took out his sword. 
 
 
 
 
 
22 
‘Now we have no boat, friar,’ he said. ‘Carry me across the river on 
your back and perhaps I will not kill you!’ 
The friar said nothing. He looked at Robin's sword and then walked 
into the water. Robin climbed onto his back and they went slowly to the 
middle of the river. Then the friar suddenly stopped, stood up, and threw 
Robin into the water. 
Friar Tuck could swim more quickly than Robin. He got out of the 
river and called, 
‘Come here, friend, and fight with me. I do not have a sword because 
I am a churchman. And I can kill a man with my two hands!’ 
Then Will Scarlet came out of the forest with ten of Robin's men. 
‘Robin, are you hurt ?’ he called. Robin climbed out of the river. 
‘What are you going to do now, friar?’ said Robin. ‘Will you         
fight us ?’ 
Friar Tuck did not answer him. He called loudly, ‘Hunter! Biter! 
Here, my boys!’ 
Two great dogs came out of the forest. 
‘My two dogs and I are ready to fight you!’ said Friar Tuck. ‘But tell 
me first, are you Robin Hood?’ 
‘I am,’ said Robin. ‘Lady Marian sent me. She is right - you are a 
good fighter! Will you come and live in the forest? Will you be our 
friar?’ 
The next day, Friar Tuck married Robin and Marian in the little 
church of River Dale. Then he left his house by the river. Now he was 
one of Robin's men. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23 
 
The friar looked at Robin's sword and then walked into the water. 
Chapter 12                                                     
The Two Churchmen and the Bags of Gold 
Another winter came and went. There was not much snow on the ground 
and people could again use the Great North Road. 
‘One day, Sir Richard of Lee will pay us the abbot's money,’ said 
Robin to Little John and Will Scarlet. ‘But perhaps we can get the 
money back from the church first.’ 
‘A good plan, Robin,’ answered Little John. ‘I will find a rich 
churchman and invite him to a forest dinner. Then he can pay us five 
hundred pounds. That is not too expensive for our best forest deer, our 
whitest bread and our finest wine!’ 
♦ 
The next evening, Little John went to the road and waited at the robbers' 
usual place behind a tree. He didn't have to wait long. Two churchmen 
on beautiful white horses were on the road. The two men wore 
expensive clothes. They were afraid, and they often looked into the 
forest. 
Little John came out of the forest and moved to the middle of the 
road. 
‘Good evening, brothers,’ he called. ‘Are you going to St Mary's 
Abbey?’ 
They stopped their horses and the younger churchman answered, 
‘Yes, we are going to visit the abbot. Are we near the abbey? We don't 
want to be on this road at night. People say robbers live in the forests 
near here!’ 
‘I am the abbot's man,’ said Little John. ‘I can show you a quick way 
to the abbey. Follow me!’ 
So the two men followed Little John into the forest. After a few 
minutes they saw smoke and then a fire. Robin's men were there. ‘Where 
are we?’ cried the churchmen. ‘Who are these men? This is not the 
abbey!’ 
 
25 
‘Good evening, brothers!’ said Robin. ‘Don't be afraid, we will not 
hurt you. We hope you will stay for dinner!’ 
The two churchmen were very unhappy but they could not leave. So 
they got down from their horses and sat at Robin's table. Robin's men 
brought them meat, wine and bread. The food was very good, but the 
churchmen couldn't eat. They were too afraid. 
‘Not hungry ?’ asked Robin. ‘Please eat more because we will ask 
you to pay something for your dinner. With a little church gold, we can 
help the abbot's villagers. On the abbot's land there are many poor 
families.’ 
The men's faces were very white. ‘We are only poor churchmen,’ 
they answered, ‘and we have no money. Please don't kill us!’ 
Little John went to the churchmen's horses and looked in their bags. 
Then he called to Robin Hood. 
‘They are right, Robin. There is no money in their bags.’ 
‘We told you that,’ said one of the men. ‘Please — it is very late and 
we want to get to the abbey. My Lord Abbot is waiting for us.’ 
‘Wait!’ answered Robin. ‘You are wearing some fine clothes. You 
can pay for your dinner with those. Take them off!’ 
‘What ? Here, in the forest?’ asked the men. ‘The night is very cold!’ 
‘Take them off,’ Robin repeated, ‘or do you want me to help you?’ 
He took out his sword. The two men slowly took off all their clothes. 
The robbers looked at the churchmen and began to laugh... Under 
their clothes, each man had five large money bags. 
‘Look at that,’ said Little John. ‘What do we have here? Aha! There 
is gold in these bags! One hundred pounds in each bag.’ 
‘We will take this gold,’ said Robin Hood. ‘It is not yours because 
you didn't have any money. Perhaps somebody put the gold there! Go 
now and tell the good abbot. Robin Hood found one thousand pounds!’ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 
The two men began to put on their clothes again. 
‘No, no,’ said Robin. ‘You can give us your clothes too - and your 
horses. You can wear our old clothes, and walk to the abbey.’ 
The two men ran away and Robin Hood's men laughed for a long 
time. 
‘I would like to see the abbot's face tomorrow!’ said Little John. 
‘This is more money than we gave him. He will not be a happy man.’ 
Chapter 13                                                            
Sir Richard of Lee Comes Back to the Forest 
The next day, Sir Richard arrived. 
‘Robin, my good friend,’ he said, ‘I have your money, and I am also 
bringing one hundred arrows for you and your men. My wife and her 
friends made them.’ 
‘You are a good man,’ Robin answered. ‘We are very happy about 
the arrows, but I will not take your gold. The abbot took that money last 
year - and yesterday the church gave it back to me!’ 
He told Sir Richard about the two churchmen and the bags of gold 
under their clothes. 
‘Now,’ said Robin, ‘I would like to give you and your lady 
something. I would like to give your wife this beautiful white horse. 
And for you, I have some fine clothes!’ 
The two churchmen arrived at the abbey later the next day and also 
told their story. The abbot was very angry. 
‘Robin Hood is laughing now,’ he said, ‘but one day, the sheriff or I 
will kill him for this.’ 
 
 
 
27 
Chapter 14    Robin Hood and the Gold Arrow 
Every day, the sheriff's men brought new stories about Robin Hood. 
Prince John heard the stories too. 
‘This man Robin Hood only has fifty men,’ he said to the sheriff.       
‘You have five hundred men but you cannot catch him. People are 
laughing at you! What are you going to do?’ 
‘I have another plan, My Lord,’ said the sheriff. ‘I will have a 
contest with bows and arrows. The winner will get a gold arrow. I know 
that Robin Hood will come. Everybody says that he is the best bowman 
in England. He will win the contest and take the gold arrow. Then I will 
take him.’ 
♦ 
Robin and his men heard about the contest. The sheriff was right — they 
wanted to go. 
‘You will have to stay at home, Robin,’ laughed Little John. ‘We 
want to win, and we are better than the sheriff's men. But you are a 
better bowman than all of us!’ 
‘Be careful, Robin,’ said Marian. ‘The sheriff is a dangerous man. He 
knows that you will go. He only wants to find you and kill you!’ 
‘I know that,’ said Robin. ‘This is a fine adventure. I will win the 
contest, but the sheriff won't catch me ...’ 
‘Then I will come too,’ said Marian. ‘I will wear boy's clothes again, 
and my boy's hat. The sheriff will not know me, and I will play in the 
contest. Perhaps I will win the gold arrow, not you!’ 
♦ 
On the day of the contest, many people came. Some people played and 
other people watched. One hundred of the sheriff's men were there too. 
‘The winner of this contest will be Robin Hood,’ the sheriff told his 
men. ‘He will come to take the gold arrow from me — 
 
 
 
 
 
28 
then you can take him. But do not kill him. Prince John wants to meet 
him first!’ 
The contest began. One man was the best. 
‘That man is Robin Hood,’ thought the Sheriff. ‘People say he is 
clever. But we will catch him easily. That big man with him is Little 
John and the fat man is Friar Tuck. We will take them too. But who is 
the boy? He is very good with a bow and arrow too.’ 
The contest finished and Robin Hood was the winner. He went to the 
sheriff and smiled. 
‘The arrow is mine, I think,’ he said. The sheriff smiled coldly and 
gave him the gold arrow. Then Robin turned away. 
‘Take him now!’ shouted the sheriff to his men. 
But twenty of Robin's men took off their hoods and moved behind 
Robin. A great swordfight began. Robin's men and the sheriff's fought 
for a long time. Marian fought too this time, and she fought well. Many 
of the sheriff's men died that day. The sheriff was very angry. 
‘Where are Prince John's men?’ he shouted. ‘They are late, and Robin 
Hood is winning!’ 
Then Prince John arrived with fifty men on horses. 
‘They are too many,’ called Robin to his men, ‘and they are on 
horses. Get back to the forest! Marian, come!’ 
Then Will Scarlet called out, 'Robin, Marian! They hurt Little John!' 
‘Don't wait for me,’ said Little John. ‘It is my leg. I cannot walk. Go! 
Go!’ 
‘Never!’ said Robin. 
With Will and Marian's help, he put Little John on his back and ran to 
the forest road. Suddenly a man arrived on a white horse. It was Richard 
of Lee. 
‘Quick, Robin, put Little John on the horse and follow me. The 
sheriff and his men will not look for you in my home!’ So 
 
 
 
 
 
29 
 
'That man is Robin Hood,' thought the Sheriff 
Sir Richard helped his friends Robin, Marian, Little John and Will 
Scarlet. They stayed at Sir Richard's house that night. Robin told Sir 
Richard and his wife about the contest and about other adventures in the 
forest. 
‘You have many adventures, My Lady,’ said Sir Richard's wife to 
Marian, ‘but you live dangerously. You cannot go home or visit your 
father. How will these adventures end? When will you leave                 
the forest ?’ 
‘One day, King Richard will come home,’ answered Marian. ‘Then 
life will be better for poor people and Robin and I will go home.’ 
 Chapter 15   The Tall Friar 
People loved King Richard because he was a brave man and a good 
king. But his brother, Prince John, only wanted to be king and to be 
rich. People hated him. 
When King Richard was in England, the prince and other important 
Norman lords had to listen to their king. They could not take land and 
money from weaker men. But Richard fought in Jerusalem for many 
years. When the king was away, Prince John and his friends were greedy 
and unkind. 
Then, one day, the prince got a letter from the Sheriff of Nottingham. 
‘My Lord Prince,’ wrote the sheriff, ‘the people are saying that your 
brother Richard is here in the North. They say he is going from town to 
town and asking questions about me - and about you. We will have to be 
very careful…’ 
‘So,’ thought the prince,  ‘Richard is in England again. Why isn't he 
dead? And why didn't he come here to London? What stories about me 
is he listening to? I think I too will go to Nottingham and visit my friend 
the sheriff. Perhaps he can tell me more.’ 
 
 
 
31 
So the prince took the Great North Road to the sheriff's house. A 
hundred strong men went with him. They took the road through 
Sherwood Forest, and there they met a churchman. The man was very 
tall and strong and he wore a great hood over his face. 
‘Well, friar,’ said the prince, ‘you are a brave man. Is nobody with 
you? Aren't you afraid? Don't you know that the robber, Robin Hood, 
lives in Sherwood Forest?’ 
‘People say that Robin Hood does not hurt poor men,’ said the friar. 
‘People say stupid things,’ answered the prince angrily. ‘They say 
that my brother Richard is in England. But I say that he is dead! I will 
be king then. Now move out of my way!’ 
The tall man moved out of the way of the horses. He looked back at 
Prince John and his men for some minutes. Then he left the road and 
walked quickly into the forest. The tall man walked for a long time. 
Evening came. Then he heard something up in the trees: 
‘Good evening, brother. Why are you walking in the forest? Is 
nobody with you? Are you not afraid?’ 
The tall man laughed. 
‘Another person asked me that question. I am not afraid. I am 
looking for Robin Hood.’ 
Will Scarlet jumped down lightly from the tree. 
‘Then I will take you to him,’ he said. 
When they arrived in the middle of the forest, Robin's men were 
there. There was good food on the tables again. 
‘Robin!’ called Will. ‘This good friar wants to meet you.’ 
‘We want to meet him too,’ said Robin. ‘We will eat with rich men, 
but we ask them to pay for their dinner. Poor people pay us with their 
stories. What is your story, friend? Why do you want to meet me ?’ 
‘This is my story,’ said the friar. ‘I left England with King Richard. 
Now the king is in England again, and I came too. 
 
 
 
 
 
32 
 
'What is your story, friend? Why do you want to meet me?' 
People everywhere tell me stories about Robin Hood, so I wanted to 
meet you.’ 
‘Oh, Robin,’ said Marian, ‘this is wonderful. The king is here in 
England! Let's go and find him. We can tell him everything about the 
sheriff and Prince John…’ 
‘I love no man in the world more than the king,’ said Robin. ‘But 
what will he think? His brother is a greedy man. I can tell him that. But 
Prince John will say I am a robber. I think, for now, that I will stay 
quiet.’ 
The tall churchman stood up. 
‘You are wrong, Robin,’ he said. Then he called loudly, ‘To me! To 
me!’ 
Suddenly fifty strong men came out of the dark night and stood 
behind him. 
‘What is this?’ said Robin. ‘Are you Prince John's man? Are the 
prince and his men here ? Are they really so brave ?’ 
‘Perhaps my brother is not a brave man. But I am Richard, your king, 
and I wanted to meet the famous Robin Hood. I hear many good stories 
about you, Robin. And other people also tell me bad stories about my 
brother. I know that John gave your lands to the sheriff. But from today, 
you will be Robin of Locksley again, and the king's friend.’ 
Chapter 16   The Last Adventure 
After his visit to Sherwood Forest, King Richard went back to London. 
Robin and his men left the forest. Will Scarlet went to London with the 
king, but Little John stayed with Robin and Marian at Locksley House. 
♦ 
34 
One day, two years later, Robin visited his old friend, Friar Tuck. They 
talked for a long time about their adventures. 
‘I eat too well now, Robin,’ said the friar. ‘I am too fat and I cannot 
fight. People say that King Richard is ill. I hope that he will live for a 
long time. I hope that John will never be king. I wouldn't like to sleep on 
a hard bed in the forest again!’ 
On the way home, Robin walked slowly and thought about Friar 
Tuck's words. Then he heard the noise of horses' feet on the road, and 
looked up. It was the sheriff and his men. 
‘Robin Fitzooth,’ called the sheriff, ‘I have here a letter from the 
king. It says that you will come with me!’ 
‘From King Richard?’ asked Robin. ‘Why does the king send you? 
He knows that we are not friends!’ 
The sheriff came nearer, but not too near. He was very afraid of 
Robin. 
‘Not King Richard,’ he answered. ‘Richard is dead! I am talking 
about King John. Take him, men!’ 
Robin pulled out his sword and began to fight. At the same time he 
moved slowly away from the road to the forest. There were too many 
men - he couldn't win. He had cuts on his right arm, and the arm hurt 
very badly. 
When he got to the forest, he ran. He could find his way through 
forest very well, and the sheriff's men lost him. 
Robin went through the forest to St Mary's Abbey. In front of the 
abbey, he fell to the ground. There, the abbot's men found him. 
‘It is Robin Hood!’ said the abbot. ‘I would like to kill him, but this 
is a church. Take him to one of the bedrooms. You, man, go to the 
sheriff. Tell him that Robin Hood is at the abbey.’ 
♦ 
Robin woke up. There was nobody in the room. He was very weak and 
couldn't move from the bed. Then he heard a friend. ‘I am coming, 
Robin!’ called Little John. ‘Where are you ?’ 
 
35 
 
‘Here! I am here!’ said Robin weakly. 
Little John broke open the door. 
Robin spoke very slowly. 
‘Little John, help me one last time. Carry me to the window. Good. 
Now give me your bow.’ 
Little John helped Robin to put an arrow in the bow. They pulled. The 
arrow flew a long way, into the forest. 
‘Take me to that place and put me in the ground there,’ said Robin. 
There is a place in the forest near the abbey. There you can find these 
words: 
Under this stone is Robin 
Hood. Remember Robin and 
his men — No braver man will 
come again. 
ACTIVITIES 
Chapters 1-5 
Before you read 
1 Robin Hood took money from rich people and gave it to 
people without money. How did he do it? Why did he do 
it? What do you think? 
2 Find these words in your dictionary. They are all in the story. 
abbey   abbot   arrow   bow   deer   forest   king   land   
prince sheriff sword 
a Find words for 
• people 
• places 
• an animal 
b  What did people use when they fought? 
3 Answer the questions. Find the words in italics in your 
dictionary. 
a  Which would you like to be? 
brave  greedy  poor                              
b  When John robs David, who loses?                                                        
c  Why do people like adventures?                                                  
d  What can you do with gold? 
After you read 
4 Why is: 
a  Lord Gamwell first angry and sad, and then happy? 
b  Prince John angry? 
c   the abbot angry and afraid? 
d   young Much sad and angry? 
5 In the fight between Robin and Little John, who is stronger? 
Who is cleverer? 
6 How is the story of Robin's parents the same as 
Shakespeare's story of Romeo and Juliet? How is it 
different? Talk about it. 
 
39 
Chapters 6-10 
Before you read 
7 How many of Robin Hood's men do you know? What do you know 
about them? 
8 What are a hood and a staff in your language? Which do you 
carry in your hand? Which do you put on your head? 
After you read 
9 Finish these sentences. Put in the right number of pounds. 
One year, the Abbot of St Mary's gave Richard of Lee £…. . The 
next year, Sir Richard had to pay the abbot £....... But he only had 
£ .... , so Robin Hood gave him £ ....... . 
10 Talk about Marian and her father. Who is braver? Why? 
11 What do you think about Friar Tuck? Is he a good churchman? 
Why (not)? 
Chapters 11-16 
Before you read 
12 What do you remember about Richard of Lee's story? Why will he 
come back to Sherwood Forest? 
13 Will Robin and Marian marry? Will they live happily in the forest? 
What possible problems are there for them? What do you think? 
14 What happens in a contest? Look in your dictionary. 
After you read 
15 Answer these questions. 
a  Why does Friar Tuck throw Robin in the river? 
b  What three things  does  Robin  take  from  the  churchmen?  
Who does he give them to?                                                                 
c  Who  is  the  tall  friar?  Why  is he on the Great North Road?                        
d  How does the sheriff catch Robin Hood? 
16 At  the  end  of  the  story,  have you  got  any  questions?  What 
would you like to know? 
 
 
 
 
40 
Writing 
17 Work with other students. Make pictures of the people in the 
Robin Hood adventures, and write about them. Put your work up 
on your classroom wall. 
18 Choose one adventure in this book, and tell the story. 
19 It is a year after the end of the story. What is Marian doing now? 
Write a letter from her to a friend. 
20 Write about an adventurer from your country. When did they live? 
What did they do? Who were they with? Who tried to stop them? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Answers for the Activities In this book are available from your local office or alternatively writs to: 
Penguin Readers Marketing Department, Pearson Education. Edinburgh Gate, Harlow Essex
CM20 2JE. 
 
Pearson Education Limited 
Edinburgh Gate, Harlow, 
Essex CM20 2JE, England 
and Associated Companies throughout the world. 
 
ISBN 0 582 421195 
 
This edition first published 2000 
 
5 7 9 10 8 6 4 
 
Copyright © Penguin Books Ltd 2000 
Illustrations by Chris Ryley 
Cover design by Bender Richardson White 
 
Typeset by Pantek Arts Ltd, Maidstone, Kent 
Set in 11/14pt Bembo 
Printed in China 
SWTC/04 
 
All rights reserved; no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored 
in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the 
prior written permission of the Publishers. 
 
Published by Pearson Education Limited in association with 
Penguin Books Ltd, both companies being subsidiaries of  Pearson Plc 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For a complete list of titles available in the Penguin Readers series, please write to 
your local 
Pearson Education office or to: Penguin Readers Marketing Department, 
Pearson Education, Edinburgh Gate, Harlow, Essex CM20 2JE. 
 
The story of Robin Hood is very famous. Robin Hood 
robbed rich people and gave the money to poor 
people. He loved adventure, and he was the best 
fighter in England.The greedy Sheriff of Nottingham 
hated Robin, and the beautiful Lady Marian loved him. 
His most famous adventures are in this book. 
Penguin Readers are simplified texts designed in association with Longman, 
the world famous educational publisher, to provide a step-by-step approach 
to the joys of reading for pleasure. Each book has an introduction and 
extensive activity material.They are published at seven levels from 
Easystarts (200 words) to Advanced (3000 words). 
Series Editors: Andy Hopkins and Jocelyn Potter 
NEW EDITION 
6 Advanced (3000 words) 
5 Upper Intermediate (2300 words) 
4 Intermediate (1700 words) 
3 Pre-Intermediate (1200 words) 
2 Elementary (600 words) 
1 Beginner (300 words) 
Easystarts (200 words) 
Contemporary 
Classics 
Originals 
British English 
American English 
Book/cassette pack also published 
www.penguinreaders.com 
Cover photograph © HTV (courtesy of The Ronald Grant Archive) 
Published and distributed by 
Pearson Education Limited 
ISBN 0-582-42119-5 
P E N G U I N R E A D E R S L E V E L 2 
