                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    1
       Ramiz Daniz 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       The scientist passed  
        ahead of centuries  
        – Nasiraddin Tusi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                             Baku -2014 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    2
Scientific editor – the Associate Member of ANAS, Professor        
                                                                     Eybali Mehraliyev 
Preface – the Associate Member of ANAS, Academician 
                                                                     Ramiz Mammadov 
Scientific editor – the Associate Member of ANAS, Doctor of   
           physics and mathematics, Academician Eyyub Guliyev 
Reviewers –the Associate Member of ANAS, Prof. Rafig Aliyev  
      Associate Member of ANAS, Professor Rehim Husseinov  
                                                             Professor Ajdar Agayev  
senior lecturer                                                  Vidadi Bashirov  
Literary editor –                   the philologist Ganira Amirjanova 
Computer design – Sevinj 
Computer operator – Sinay  
    Translator - Hokume Hebibova   
 
      Ramiz Daniz “The scientist passed ahead of centuries – Nasiraddin 
Tusi”. “MM-S”, 2014, 306 p 
İSBN 978-9952-8230-3-5 
Writing about the remarkable Azerbaijani scientist Nasiraddin Tusi, 
who has a great scientific heritage, is very responsible and honorable. 
Nasiraddin Tusi, who has a very significant place in the world 
encyclopedia together with well-known phenomenal scientists, is one of 
the most honorary personalities of our nation. It may be named precious 
stone of the Academy of Sciences in the East. Nasiraddin Tusi has 
masterpieces about mathematics, geometry, astronomy, geography and 
ethics and he is an inventor of a lot of unique inventions and discoveries. 
According to the scientist, America had been discovered hundreds of years 
ago. Unfortunately, most peoples don’t know this fact. I want to inform 
readers about Tusi’s achievements by means of this work. 
           
      D  4702060103                                      © R.Daniz 2014         
          M 087-2014 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    3
 
 
 
 
           I’m grateful to leaders of the  
State Oil Company of Azerbaijan Republic  
  for their material and moral supports  
        for publication of the work  
 
 
 
         The book has been published  
     in accordance with the order of the 
“Partner” Science Development Support   
     Social Union with the grant of the  
State Oil Company of Azerbaijan Republic 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    4
     Courageous step towards the great purpose 
 
I’m editing new work of the young writer. This work is 
an explanation of innovations made by Nasiraddin Tusi in 
the field of astronomy. The author has explained role of 
Nasiraddin Tusi’s scientific activity in realization of great 
geographic discoveries in “Christopher Columbus, Nasi-
raddin Tusi and discovery of America” written after his 
previous trilogy. He has written that, Nasiraddin Tusi’s 
works were taken to Columbus’s motherland – Italy, 
Columbus had analyzed them and went to Spain with those 
materials in order to organize his travel to India. N. Tusi’s 
activity, which supported science in Western Europe and 
global discoveries, has been discovered in the work. I’m 
editing Ramiz Daniz’s work “The scientist passed ahead 
of centuries – Nasiraddin Tusi”. What made him to write 
this book? He has gathered a lot of materials about the 
scientist’s activity and decided to write the second book 
about Nasiraddin Tusi. He named his work “The scientist 
passed ahead of centuries – Nasiraddin Tusi”. People 
haven’t been informed enough about works of the scientist 
written about astronomy, mathematics, geometry, ethics, 
pedagogy, philosophy and other sciences. So, the author 
wrote in the book: “… I began to investigate activities of 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    5
genius personalities of Azerbaijan… Especially activity and 
scientific heritage of the notable scientist of Azerbaijan 
Muhammad Nasiraddin Tusi are very interesting. Though 
he is an author of very significant scientific discoveries, he 
isn’t known enough in the world”. The author expresses his 
regret and writes that, Nasiraddin Tusi’s works have been 
published by most scientists as their own works. Readers, 
please, be attentive! The well-known Pole scientist N. 
Copernicus, who lived 250 years before Nasiraddin Tusi, 
had written the scientist’s theorem “Two circles, diameter 
of one of which is equal to half of the other one, are on one 
plane” in his work “Rotation of celestial spheres”. For the 
first time, this theorem was proved by Nasiraddin Tusi and 
included in his work “Memories about astronomy”. The 
wall quadrant used in the observatory of the Dane scientist 
Tycho Brahe was invented in Maragha observatory as well. 
Nasiraddin Tusi’s devices and works had influenced the 
development of astronomy and mathematics in Western 
Europe, Chine and India. But these facts are unknown for 
us – N. Tusi’s countrymen. So, Ramiz Deniz tried to give 
enough information about Nasiraddin Tusi by means of this 
work.  
The author has used historical facts in order to describe 
Nasiraddin Tusi’s activity. He has analyzed the 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    6
development of cosmography in the world and mentioned 
roles of Azerbaijani scientists and especially Nasiraddin 
Tusi in this field. He especially investigated Tusi’s activity 
in fields of astronomy, mathematics and diplomacy. The 
author has proved that, devices invented by N. Tusi are 
kept in most museums of the world and they had a great 
role in the development of scientists all over the world. He 
has named one of headings of the book “N. Tusi’s scientific 
achievements of global importance”. He has mentioned 
that, N. Tusi’s “Tahriru Uglidis” (“Recension of Euclid’s 
Elements”), “Shaklul-qita” and “Collection of Counts” 
were basis for the development of geometry. The author 
has mentioned B. A. Rozenfeld’s following thought in 
order to prove this assumption: “Nasiraddin refused to 
prove the postulate of parallelism by means of two axioms 
and postulates and used only one simple postulate and it 
was an important step for Lobachevski’s proof”. He has 
proved his ideas by means of 24 items written at the end of 
the book. 
The work of the writer Ramiz Deniz has been written on 
the basis of rich materials and it explains influence of the 
Azerbaijani scientist on the development of astronomy, 
mathematics, geodesy, ethics, geography, philosophy and 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    7
other sciences. The work has been written in accordance 
with ideas of patriotism.  
Readers will have an opportunity to read interesting 
scientific facts very easily. But it is necessary to read it 
attentively. We name the fifth investigation work of the 
young innovator writer Ramiz Deniz “Courageous step 
towards the great purpose” and wish him great future of 
creation.  
 
The Associate Member of ANAS,  
Doctor of geographical sciences,  
Professor Eybali Mehraliyev 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    8
                                  Preface 
 
I got acquainted with the author of this book in June of 
2002. The society of “Education” invited me to the 
scientific-practical conference about “Scientific services of 
Nasiraddin Tusi and N. Tusi in the activity of the writer and 
researcher Ramiz Gasimov (Daniz)” and offered me to 
make speech about his book “Christopher Columbus, 
Nasiraddin Tusi and discovery of America”. To say the 
truth I was surprised when heard the author’ name.  
Probably, readers know that, R. Gasimov works in the 
Oil Refining Factory of SOCAR as a worker and isn’t high-
educated, but I don’t want to speak about his autobio-
graphy. As the name of the book was too haughty, I 
investigated the author’s previous activity and it turned out 
that, he is the author of several books and trilogy written in 
this field. After reading his books I asked myself: Who is 
R. Gasimov? Is he a writer or researcher and what does he 
want to gain? I understood that, he has his own style and 
tries to combine notions of “writer” and “researcher” and is 
the first author, who has achieved it. For example, he is a 
researcher in the above mentioned book and books used for 
this work prove it. Of course, most of issues mentioned in 
the book are disputable. But the author shouldn’t be 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    9
accused for it as his purpose was to lay bare the truth by 
means of discussions and investigations.  
R. Gasimov tried to describe different ages together. So, 
his books resemble scientific annals and historical 
adventure novels. This style can be considered one of new 
directions of our literature.  
Of course, I’ll not describe the book in the preface. But 
as the acquaintance with books starts in the preface, it will 
be advisable to describe main purposes of the book. The 
book, which is about Tusi’s activity mainly, includes brief 
information about main results achieved in fields of 
geography, philosophy, astronomy, mathematics, physics 
etc., their history, conditions of development and authors of 
those results. The activity of the Azerbaijani traveler and 
researcher Sheikh Muhammadali Babakuhi Bakuvi has also 
been described in detail. It is important to know these facts 
in order to understand Tusi’s activity. Thus, if you want to 
learn Tusi’s activity, you should learn scientific-social 
conditions existed in the ancient time and middle ages and 
role of Eastern scientists in development of world. I think 
that, the author could overcome this difficult and honorable 
work.  
He has described historical conditions of the age of Tusi, 
Hulegu khan’s victory on Abbasids and mentioned that, he 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    10
used advices of scientists before attacking Baghdad. Other 
skills of Nasiraddin Tusi were discovered after being freed 
from prison. It turned out that, he was skilful organizer and 
statesman. He could get permission of the ruler of 
Mongolia for construction of Maragha observatory and 
organized this construction. Of course, previous inventions 
of the scientist had significant role in this achievement. The 
book includes detailed information about Maragha 
observatory and scientists, who worked there. The author 
has compared “Zij-i Ilkhani” and “Zij-i Ulugbek” and 
proved that, the first work wasn’t worse than the second. 
Scientific achievements of Nasiraddin Tusi also were 
mentioned in the book. The author has mentioned that, the 
scientist’s “Tahriru Uglidis” was used as a source by most 
well-known scientists of Europe. According to the author, 
Tusi had developed trigonometry as an independent branch 
of science.  
Geographical coordinates determined by Tusi by means 
of simple astronomical equipments were determined more 
precisely afterwards. It is known that, the world map was 
made in accordance with coordinates fixed in “Zij-i 
Ilkhani” and America was described on that map. So, R. 
Gasimov tries to prove that Columbus had used Nasiraddin 
Tusi’s map during the discovery of America. Readers may 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    11
ask following question – Was it necessary to write such 
book about Tusi? The initial answer may be “No”. But it is 
an unconsidered answer. Thus, how many Azerbaijanis 
have enough information about great Azerbaijani scientist 
Nasiraddin Tusi? Unfortunately, the answer of this question 
is certainly negative. 
Investigations prove that, H. Mammadbayli’s book is 
almost the only monumental work written about Nasiraddin 
Tusi. It turns out that, we can get the most detailed 
information about N. Tusi by means of the encyclopedia 
“Cambridge history of Iran”. It is a great gap for 
Azerbaijani science. R. Gasimov gives interesting informa-
tion about Tusi’s activity in mentioned book. It shouldn’t 
be forgotten that, he is a writer and has his own style. I 
think that, it is necessary to inform readers about the 
Azerbaijani scientist in an interesting and new way.  
As it was mentioned above, the author tries to prove 
that, the map made by Tusi had an important role in 
discovery of America by Columbus. This thought should be 
proved by means of additional researches. So, the author 
has created new issue for researchers though he is a writer.  
The author’s style and morphology of sentences are 
satisfactory, don’t tire readers and the book is read easily. 
All these facts prove that, the author is talented enough, 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    12
though he is not high-educated. But education could help 
him to work on more complicated issues.  
R. Gasimov is hard-working writer and so, we can wait 
for his next books soon. I wish him success.  
 
The Associate Member of ANAS,  
Doctor of technical sciences, oceanologist,  
Academician Ramiz Mammadov 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    13
                                     Ink used by scientists was compared                     
                                                     with blood of martyrs and  
                                                   scientists’ ink  was heavier.  
                                                        Prophet Muhammad  
 
 
             Development of the astronomy in     
     ancient times 
 
Perfect thoughts of sage people are guides to 
understanding processes, which were incomprehensible for 
ordinary people for hundreds of years. Almost all scientists 
have investigated the structure of Earth, biological, 
physiological and geological processes of the planet and 
tried to elucidate these global questions since the age of 
pharaohs’. İmprovement of existing science branches, 
development of the education mechanism support 
formation of human thinking and increase of intellectual 
potential. İt is impossible to deny that, scientists directly 
support realization of the dynamical phase according to 
laws of the nature.   
We meet with names of notable personalities of ancient 
times and early middle ages – Aristotle, Platoon, 
Eratosthenes, Herodotus, Archimedes, Al-Biruni, Ibn Sina, 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    14
Euclid, Strabo, Hipparchus and others in encyclopedias 
published in every country of the world. Activities and 
scientific heritages of these scientists have been learnt by 
international experts and explained to the world 
community. But sometimes names of authors of significant 
scientific discoveries and inventions aren’t mentioned 
properly.   
After investigating activities of historical personalities 
having significant roles in intensive development of 
science, culture, art and literature, I understood that, most 
personalities’ life and scientific heritage haven’t been 
investigated and appreciated properly. I wanted to 
investigate activities of genius personalities of Azerbaijan. 
Especially activity and scientific heritage of the notable 
scientist of Azerbaijan Muhammad Nasiraddin Tusi, who is 
well-known in the Near East, are very interesting. Though 
he is an author of very significant scientific discoveries, he 
isn’t known enough in the world. Enough attention isn’t 
paid to scientific works of Tusi – well-known scientist and 
historical figure of his time, which had special role in 
development of most branches of the science and they have 
been forgotten as extinct volcano. That volcano erupted 
owing to the Professor Habibulla Mammadbayli about 50 
years ago. That is, Nasiraddin Tusi, who hasn’t been 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    15
propagated enough because of investigators’ indifference 
and has been forgotten by most people, began to be 
remembered at the result of H. Mammadbayli’s efforts.  
It became clear that, Nasiraddin Tusi wrote masterpieces 
in fields of astronomy, mathematics, geometry and ethics, 
played a significant role in development of these sciences 
and passed ahead of well-known scientists for hundreds of 
years. He wrote most of his works in Arabic and Persian, 
but they have been translated into many languages. 
Unfortunately, only two works of the scientist – “Akhlagi 
Nasiri” and “Tahriru Uglidis” (2002) have been translated 
into Azerbaijani and presented to readers. It isn’t difficult 
to notice brilliance of N. Tusi after reading “Akhlagi 
Nasiri”, which is about topical problems of education and 
morality. This work is immortal, because though it was 
written 770 years ago, is still used as educational 
equipment for educating Muslim generations. That is, N. 
Tusi has a significant role in preparation of pure society in 
eastern countries. The scientist’s works are more 
comprehensive for their topicality, essence and significance 
in comparison with works of previous well-known 
scientists. N. Tusi is one of important personalities of the 
Muslim Renaissance. He has combined three Renaissance 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    16
zones of the Near and Middle East in his activity – Arab, 
Persian and Turkish.  
Scientists usually use scientific heritage of their 
predecessors in order to develop their scientific 
investigations and discoveries. 
Utilization of the ancient Arab culture has been 
developed since the age of Selevkies in the East unlike Italy 
and Western Europe, was continued till formation of Islam 
in the Near and Middle East, so peripatetism became an 
important criterion of the eastern thinking, philosophers 
began to be divided into its supporters and objectors, 
intensive polemics began to be made.  
The genius scientist of the east – Nasiraddin Tusi 
defended peripatetic philosophy of Ibn Sina against 
criticism of the Muslim theologian Fakhraddin Razi, 
investigated the polemic about peripatetism between 
Ghazali and Ibn Rushd.1  
Many scientists have benefited by Tusi’s works and 
enriched their intellectual potentials using them as a source. 
Even some of them have demounted his works and 
published as their own achievements. In spite of it, serious 
efforts aren’t made in order to propagandize N. Tusi and he 
                                                 
       
1
 Azərbaycan Beynəlxalq Universiteti. Nəsirəddin Tusinin 800 illik 
yubileyinə həsr edilmiş Respublika konfransının materialları. Bakı, 2001. 
Professor Y. F. Qaraməmmədlinin məruzəsi, səh. 267 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    17
is being gradually forgotten. That’s why I do my best in 
order to investigate scientific activity, achievements and 
heritage of N. Tusi – honorary scientist of Azerbaijan and 
whole east.  
First of all, I’ll give some information about scientific 
achievements of several well-known scientists of ancient 
times as they are considered founders and improvers of all 
sciences, which were known then. Development of mathe-
matics, geometry, philosophy, astronomy and geography 
was realized by them.  
Following questions have been causing people to think 
since the beginning of civilization on Earth: how did life 
start on Earth, what is the shape of the Earth, does the Earth 
have more water than land? At first they thought that, the 
Earth was only a small territory. But when they began to 
travel from one settlement to another, understood that it 
isn’t as small as they imagined.  
After new settlements and geographical areas were 
discovered, people began to think that, the Earth is endless. 
This opinion appeared because there weren’t high-speed 
vehicles in ancient times. All distances were overcome by 
feet. So scientists of ancient times carried out scientific 
investigations in order to get information about the shape 
and area of the Earth.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    18
As years passed, people’s thoughts about the Earth and 
Sky changed. So, astronomy and geography began to be 
developed and number of scientists investigating these 
fields began to increase.  
In ancient Babylonia people thought that, the Earth was 
swollen round island and sailed in the ocean, the universe 
stood on the Earth as a durable stone, planets and stars had 
been stuck on it and the Sun revolved around them.  
It is known that, scientists of ancient Babylonia could 
determine solar and lunar eclipses in 18th century BC. It is 
obvious that, it was necessary to know elements of 
trigonometry for it. It means that, geometry, mathematics 
and astronomy had developed in Babylonia.  
Scientists as Heraclitus, Democritus and Pythagoras 
tried to determine movements of celestial bodies in ancient 
Greek before Aristotle. The Greek thinker Heraclitus (544-
470 BC) thought that, the world developed comprehen-
sively.  
Democritus thought that (460-370 BC), the universe 
consisted of infinite number of worlds including collision 
of atoms. He mentioned that, some worlds formed newly, 
some were in the stage of development and others 
disintegrated. Democritus thought that, the Milky Way 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    19
consisted of many stars. That’s why cosmic explosions 
occurred in the universe.1 
 
                   
                            Democritus (460-370 BC) 
 
The Greek scientist Pythagoras (580-500 BC) had got 
lessons of Hermodamast, philosophers Ferekid and Fales 
(founder of the first school of philosophy).  
                                                 
        
1
 Д. К. Самин. Сто великих научных открытий. Москва, «Вече», 
2002. стр. 257 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    20
Fales, who had received his first education in Egypt, had 
learned to determine solar and lunar eclipses and geometry 
there. He was able to determine the distance between the 
coast and stopped ship exactly. Fales and his students 
played special role in spreading knowledge of mathematics 
and astronomy learned by them in Egypt in Greece.   
 
             
                       Fales Miletus (640-556 BC)     
 
The student of Fales, well-known geographer and 
astronomer Anaximander taught Pythagoras everything he 
knew (640-556 BC) in Miletus. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    21
Some scientists mentioned that, Anaximander (VI 
century BC) was an author of the first world geography 
map. Probably, he determined sides of the horizon and then 
fixed poles of the Earth on the map by means of them.1 
Pythagoras was in Lesbos Island, Phoenicia, Egypt and 
Babylonia in that period and could enter the building, 
where historical documents had been kept.  
Pythagoras learned astronomy, astrology, medicine and 
mathematics with the teaching method of Hadley scientists 
when he was in Babylonia.2 He opened his school in 
Croton in Sicily Island and declared that, the Earth was 
round. Pythagoras mentioned that, there were ten planets in 
the universe. Nevertheless only the Sun, the Moon and five 
planets were known then (besides the Earth).  
Pythagoras mentioned that, the Earth was round and was 
in the air without any bearing. Aristotle (384-322 BC) had 
written length of the equator in his work “About the sky” 
and noted that the Earth radius was equal to 10000 km. He 
thought that land, water, air and fire were formed of ether 
and were located on each others as a sphere.  
 
 
                                                 
       1 
И. П. Магидович, В. И. Магидович. Очерки по истории географи-
ческих открытий. I том. Москва, «Просвещение», 1982. стр. 126 
 
     2  
Д. К. Самин. Сто великих ученых. Москва, «Вече», 2002. стр.8 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    22
       
                           Pythagoras (580-500 BC) 
 
Greeks thought that, the land was surrounded by the 
ocean and its waters circulated around the Earth as an 
eternal whirlpool.1  
                                                 
      
1 
Н. А. Кун. Легенды и сказания Древней Греции и Древнего 
Рима. Москва, «Правда», 1990. стр.25 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    23
Aristotle and his predecessors rejected ideas about the 
Earth’s rotation about its own axis and its revolution in the 
universe. They explained it as following: if the Earth 
rotates about its own axis, wind can carry along everything 
on the Earth towards the west.1 Scientists had several 
arguments about it.  
There is no doubt that hypothesises and scientific proofs 
of ancient times on the astronomy and the Earth’s structure 
simplified work of future scientists. Several works of 
Aristarchus (320-230 BC) have remained still. He could 
determine angular size of the Moon and the Sun. Besides it, 
Aristarchus tried to calculate the distance to the Moon and 
the Sun. According to his calculations, the distance 
between the Earth and Moon is equal to 19 Earth radiuses. 
The distance to the Sun is 19 times more than this distance. 
As the scientist took the distance between the Earth and 
Sun into consideration, he was obliged to mention that, 
stars and the Sun don’t change their places in the space and 
the Earth revolves round the Sun. Archimedes also 
explained his thought about it. Thus, Aristarchus explained 
his thoughts about the Earth’s revolution round the Sun 
                                                 
          1  
Д. К. Самин. Сто великих научных открытий. Москва, «Вече», 
2002. стр. 257 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    24
before Nicolaus Copernicus. But he couldn’t prove it 
scientifically unlike the Pole scientist.  
It was necessary to develop mathematics, astronomy and 
geography in order to achieve mentioned scientific goals. 
Well-known scientists as Aristotle, Hipparchus, Ptolemy, 
Euclid, Archimedes and Eratosthenes played matchless role 
in improvement of this field. Even the smallest scientific 
achievements were considered great discovery for experts 
at that time.  
Very interesting achievements were got in the field of 
ancient geography in V-IV centuries BC. Main achieve-
ments of scientists were results got in investigation of the 
Earth’s shape and the theory about the unity of the world 
ocean. For the first time, Parmenides declared that, the 
Earth was spherical (V century BC), but his idea was 
scientifically weak.  
According to the German scientist D. B. Ditmars, for the 
first time, astronomer, geographer and philosopher Eudox 
Knidli (408-353 BC) proved that, the Earth was round.1 
Probably, he used the term “horizon” and determined 
geographical latitude for the first time. Some historians and 
geographers think that the equator’s length was determined 
                                                 
   
  1
 И. П. Магидович, В. И. Магидович. Очерки по истории географи-
ческих открытий. I том. Москва, «Просвещение», 1982. стр. 129 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    25
by Eudox too. Though the length determined by him was so 
great – 400 thousand stades (if we consider that, 1 stade is 
equal to 157.5-176 meters, this length was equal to 63-70 
thousand kilometers), it was an important step made in this 
field.  
His arguments were as following: As the Earth was seen 
round in the Moon during a lunar eclipse, the Earth’s 
surface became wider when ascending a mountain, view of 
stars changed when going towards the South or North 
(Aristotle had used this method (384-322 BC)), it wasn’t 
difficult to understand that, the Earth was round.  
It is known that, a very large library was established in 
Alexandria, when the city was founded in the delta of the 
Nile in accordance with the order of Alexander the Great 
and probably, it was filled with manuscripts brought from 
most cities of Egypt, Babylonia and Greece. That’s why 
most well-known scientists of ancient times tried to go to 
Alexandria in order to increase their knowledge.  
The Greek scientist, well-known astronomer, geographer 
and mathematician Eratosthenes Kerensky, who lived in 
Alexandria (end of III century and beginning of II century), 
had determined by means of “roughly made things” that, 
the length of the equator was equal to 252 thousand stades 
– about 39690 km (today’s length is 40076 km) and the 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    26
Earth radius was 6311 km (today’s length is 6378 km). 
Besides it, he had written that, 1 degree was equal to 700 
stades. Several scientists write that, Eratosthenes had 
written this information in accordance with Pytheos’s 
calculations. According to Pytheos’s calculations, 1 degree 
of the meridian was equal to 105-112 km.  
 
         
         Platon (427-347 BC)               Aristotle (384-322 BC)                     
 
The Syrian geographer, historian and traveler Posidonius 
calculated length of the equator at the end of II century and 
beginning of I century. He thought that, his first result – 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    27
180 thousand stades was correct. This result surprised some 
geographers and travelers of XV-XVI centuries.  
First scientists of ancient times tried to divide known 
land areas of the Earth into continents. According to 
historical sources, geographers of Miletus used words 
“Europe” and “Asia” for the first time when spoke about 
division into continents.  
Young contemporary of Anaximander Hekatey Miletli 
(VI-V century BC) mentioned Libya (Africa) besides those 
continents. First two islands had almost been forgotten till 
the age of Herodotus.  
Herodotus described Arabia, Syria, Small Asia, 
Mesopotamia, Iran Mountains and Northwestern India as 
Asia in his work. He declared that, the territory, which was 
located in the East, was unknown desert, Europe was 
situated in the north of Asia, Egypt and Libya were situated 
in the west. Egypt was connected with Asia by means of 
the “narrow cape” (Isthmus of Suez and Sinai Peninsula).  
Herodotus wasn’t aware of existence of the word 
“Africa”. This word was met for the first time in the ancient 
literature, remained parts of the poem “Annales” of 
Quintus Ennius at the end of III century. But this name 
concerned only main province of Carthage. Occupiers 
founded province by name Africa after Carthage was 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    28
destroyed by Romans (146 BC) and then the whole 
continent was called Africa.1 
 
 
         The Earth’s appearance according to Herodotus 
 
Scientists of ancient times made significant discoveries 
in astronomy by means of primitive methods. For the first 
time, Aristotle had explained his idea about the unity of the 
                                                 
       1
 И. П. Магидович, В. И. Магидович. Очерки по истории географи-
ческих открытий. I том. Москва, «Просвещение», 1982. стр. 126 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    29
World Ocean. But the theory about the global World Ocean 
was founded by Eratosthenes. He wrote: “… If largeness of 
the Atlantic Ocean wasn’t an obstacle, it could be possible 
to sail from Spain to India through the same parallel” 
(Strabo I, 4, §6). It was known in 200 BC that, Spain was 
situated on the same parallel with India. Posidonius had 
explained this theory exactly: “… It is known that, settled 
land is surrounded by the ocean. It isn’t surrounded by any 
land area” (Strabo I, 3, §5). Strabo also agreed with this 
thought (I, 1, §8).  
Global changes occurred in geographical structure of the 
Earth in ancient times, but those changes couldn’t be 
analyzed theoretically. Scientists of that time accepted the 
theory, which noted that the Earth was round and there was 
global World Ocean.  
Pompony Mela defended the idea about the World 
Ocean in the middle of I century and mentioned that, West 
and East Oceans were connected with Britain and Skiff 
Oceans in the North and with Ethiopia, Red and Indian seas 
in the South.1 We may look through the map made by 
Pompony Mela. He named part of the Indian Ocean and the 
territory between the Red Sea and rank of the Indian River 
                                                 
       1
 И. П. Магидович, В. И. Магидович. Очерки по истории географи-
ческих открытий. I том. Москва, «Просвещение», 1982. стр. 131 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    30
as the Red Sea and the territory between the rank of the 
Indian River and south-eastern part of Asia as the Indian 
Sea.  
           
    
        The Earth’s appearance according to Pomponius Mela  
 
The Indian Ocean, Ephiop and Red seas separate Euro-
pe, Asia and Africa with the hypothetic land surrounded by 
water and settled by people, who lived on the opposite side. 
Most scientists don’t agree with this thought and there 
weren’t ocean in the East and North of Asia and in the 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    31
south of Ethiopia in Ptolemy’s “Geography” after 100 
years. Thus, in Ptolemy’s world map, the territory of Asia 
extended towards the North and North-east, but Africa 
extended towards the south. The south-east of Asia and 
south-eastern part of Africa were connected with the 
hypothetic land located in the south. At the result of it, the 
Indian Ocean became large lake. Ptolemy was very talented 
scientist of Europe before Renaissance and his map was 
demonstrated in all cartography and geography circles. In 
that case it was impossible to go to India from Europe 
through the south of Africa. It was possible to go to India 
through the sea by going round the Earth. But that way was 
very long for seamen.  
That’s why land road began to be used for going from 
Europe to India at first. Travelers and merchants used to 
make maps even with primitive methods in order to 
appropriate the most convenient way going to the east of 
Asia. Any effort wasn’t made in order to discover seaway 
to India even during development of navigation and 
improvement of ship constructions. Even when the Roman 
Empire intensified its occupation policy towards the East, it 
didn’t do anything for discovery of a seaway to India 
though it had powerful navy (led by Gnaeus Pompeius and 
other well-known Roman commanders). It means that, 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    32
information about the Earth’s structure was very little. 
Land road was still considered convenient for going to 
India.  
Astronomy is one of the most ancient sciences of the 
world. The Greece scientist Aristotle had developed a new 
system about the Earth’s structure. What did that system 
look like? He thought that, the Earth stood motionlessly at 
the center of the universe and planets revolved round the 
Earth. It had a special rule. Each planet had its sphere and it 
was pinned on its sphere. Each planet’s sphere revolved 
round the Earth with certain speed. As planets were pinned 
on their spheres, they revolved round the Earth by means of 
those spheres. Aristotle explained that, as planets’ spheres 
were transparent crystals, it was possible to see other 
planets, which were located behind each others. During the 
age of Aristotle and after it people thought that, there were 
7 planets. They were Mercury, Venire, Mars, Jupiter, 
Moon, Sun and Saturn. For example: this thought existed 
during the age of Nasiraddin Tusi and Ulugbek (XIII-XV 
centuries) too. For the first time the Earth was considered a 
planet by Copernicus (1473-1543), but he thought that, the 
Moon and the Sun weren’t planets. There was the sphere of 
“constant stars” besides the sphere of planets in the system 
of Aristotle.   
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    33
Two of ancient Greek astronomers differ for their 
activities – Hipparchus and Ptolemy.  
Hipparchus, who lived in II century BC, was remarkable 
scientist of his time, but there is very little information 
about him. It is known that, he was born in Nicaea and 
Rhodes Island and had made some astronomical 
observations in Alexandria. 
The Greek scientist had calculated measurements of the 
Moon very exactly. According to Hipparchus, radius of the 
Moon was equal to 0.27 Earth radiuses. It is approximately 
equal to today’s radius of the Moon. Well-known 
astronomer of ancient times had written that, the distance 
between the Earth and Moon was equal to 59 Earth radiuses 
(real average measurement is equal to 60.3 Earth radiuses).  
Hipparchus is the author of the first astronomical 
catalogue after Chinese astronomers. Coordinates of 1080 
stars had been noted in the catalogue. There is no doubt 
that, he had used elements of trigonometry for this purpose. 
For the first time, Hipparchus separated stars for their 
brightness. 
The distance between the Earth and Sun was considered 
equal to 1120 Earth radiuses from the age of Ptolemy till 
XVII century. This measurement is 20 times less than the 
real measurement. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    34
 
Ptolemy’s world map 
  
The Greek scientist Claudius Ptolemy is the remarkable 
astronomer of ancient times. He lived in Alexandria in II 
century.  
His main works are “Almagest” and “Geography”. 
Besides it, he has several works about optics.  
“Almagest” of Ptolemy was considered the most impor-
tant work in the history of astronomy during about 1400 
years. People who had read his work and Euclid’s 
“Principles” were considered remarkable experts on 
astronomy and mathematics.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    35
Ptolemy mentioned methods of determination of 
longitudes offered by Hipparchus of Nicea three hundred 
years ago in the general instruction of making maps. 1  
“Almagest” consists of 13 articles. The first and second 
articles are about the simplest astronomical events and the 
Earth, the third article is about movement of the Sun, the 
forth is about movement of the Moon, the fifth is about the 
astronomical instrument – astrolabe, the sixth is about lunar 
and solar eclipses. The seventh and eighth articles are star 
catalogues. These catalogues consist of the list of 1028 
stars. 
Other five articles of “Almagest” are about movement 
of planets. Ptolemy wrote in the second edition of 
“Almagest”: “Generally, we can accept that, the sky is 
spherical and moves spherically. The Earth is spherical too 
and it is situated in the middle of the sky, it looks like a 
point without any motion in respect of stars”. 2 
   Ptolemy is well-known in the history of astronomy for 
his theory by name “Geocentric system”.  
Ptolemy had determined cycle of movement of every 
planet on its epicycle, measurements of those epicycles and 
                                                 
       1
 Д. Хауз. Гринвичское время и открытие долготы. Москва, «Мир», 
1983. стр. 17-18 
      2
 Н. Веселовский, Ю. А. Белый. Николай Коперник. Москва, 
«Наука», 1974. стр. 198 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    36
cycle of movement on depherents. After it, movements of 
planets could be prognosticated beforehand, but of course 
with some mistakes.  
          
  
                     Claudius Ptolemy (90-160) 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    37
      Astronomers of the Eastern world 
 
Observatories should be built for improvement of the 
astronomy. In accordance with the order of Abbasids’ 
representative – caliph Mamun, grandiose observatory was 
built in Baghdad.  
Professor S. Klasco Ryndzune mentioned: The book 
“Short course on Algebra and Almugabele calculation” 
was written at the most ancient university of the world by 
name “House of wises” (Baith Al-Hakim) founded in 830 
by the caliph of Baghdad Abdullah Al-Mamun ibn-Harun 
ar-Rashid (786-833)... As ar-Rashid had organized a 
department for Indian, Turkish Professors and Greek 
Professors moved from Byzantine at Baghdad University, 
those Professors’ Arab students could achieve significant 
successes in philosophy, medicine and other sciences and 
translated the most important books and works of ancient 
Greek authors into Arabic.1  
                                                 
          1
 Журнал Ассоциации искусственного интеллекта. Новости 
искусственного интеллекта. С. Клатско-Рындзиун. Москва, 1993, стр. 
136. Bu Almaniyada ingilis dilində yazılmış R. A. Əliyev, F. Əliyev, M. 
Babayev “Fuzzy proqress control knowledge engineerinq in petrochemical 
and Robotic manufacturing” adlı kitabdakı ön sözün pus dilindəki 
tərcüməsidir. Ed. by S. Klaczko. Koln: Verlaq “TUV Rheinland”. 1991. 
səh. 150   
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    38
Muhammad Khwarizmi, Muhammad Kathir Al-Farghani 
from Fergana, Ahmad ben Abdullah Al-Marwazi were 
well-known astronomers.  
 
          
        Muhammad ibn Musa Al-Khwarizmi (780-850) 
 
Al-Khwarizmi had played a significant role in 
development of astronomy and mathematics. He had 
written first book of algebra and founded this science. 
Scientific heritage of Al-Khwarizmi are learnt by European 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    39
scientists and he is famous in Europe with names “Alga-
rizmus”, “Alkhorezemos”, “Alkarethmus”, “Alkhvarith-
mus”, “Algo-rithmus”, and “Algorithm”.  
Author of “Addition and deduction with an Indian 
method”, “Short course on Algebra and Almugabele 
calculation”, “Tables of astronomy”, “Book of land 
descriptions” Abu Abdullah Muhammad ibn Musa Al-
Khwarizmi Al-Majousi (780-850) had led calculation of 
degrees near Baghdad in 827. Length of one-degree 
meridian arch of the Earth was equal to 111815 meters 
according to results of those calculations. Today’s result is 
110938 meters (difference is 877). This result was very 
important for determination of the Earth’s measurements. 
First degree calculation was carried out by the Greek 
scientist Eratosthenes in 250 BC in Egypt. But results got 
by Eudox weren’t accepted by scientists seriously. 
Khwarizmi had become the leader of “Beytul hukema” 
(house of scientists), which was the academy of sciences of 
Baghdad, when he was 35 years old.   
“Book of land descriptions” of Khwarizmi is considered 
the most valuable work in the history of geography. There 
were a lot of information about most countries, seas, rivers 
and mountains. Khwarizmi travelled along Volga and in 
Byzantine.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    40
Some western historians or scientists used wrong 
information by presenting Al-Khwarizmi as an Arab 
scientist without using primitive methods. Professor S. 
Klasco Ryndzune mentioned that, he was one of the 
greatest scientists of the Turkish world. He wrote: “As the 
notion “algorithm” is used in modern mathematics, we 
understand that, this word has been formed of Latin 
transliteration of the name of well-known librarian and 
mathematician Abu Abdullah Muhammad ibn Musa Al-
Khwarizmi Al-Majousi (780-850), who was born in 
Khiva”. Turkish region Khiva was independent till 1873, 
before marches of the Russian Empire to Middle Asia.1  
The European scientist was very just when spoke of Al-
Khwarizmi.  
Ahmad ben Abdullah Al-Marwazi was well-known with 
the name Habash Al-Hasib in the history of astronomy. He 
had noted main achievements of the Indian astronomy in 
his book “Zic” written with the method of “Sindihind”. 
Sabit Ben Guerra (821-901), who was one of the most 
remarkable  mathematicians  and  astronomers of IX 
century, become popular as a skilful scientist after he 
moved to Baghdad. As the scientist knew Syrian and Greek 
                                                 
        1
 Журнал Ассоциации искусственного интеллекта. Новости искус-
ственного интеллекта. С. Клатско-Рындзиун. Москва, 1993. стр. 136 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    41
besides Arabic, he had some scientific translations too. 
Sabit had a significant role in translation of “Principles” of 
Euclid and “Almagest” of Ptolemy into Arabic and their 
distribution in the Eastern world. His translations were the 
most smooth and exact translations. He was the author of 
more than 150 works and translations.  
 
         
                      Sabit Ben Guerra (821-901) 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    42
Abul Abbas Tabrizi also was well-known astronomer 
and mathematician of IX century.  
Well-known Arab scientist Battani, who lived in Syria 
(the second part of IX century – 929), had built an 
observatory in Rakka on his own account and in 878-918 
he used to make astronomical observations there. He had 
determined values of some important astronomical 
quantities and got more exact results. The astronomy book 
of Battani had been translated into Latin by the German 
scientist Johann Muller (Regiomontanus) in XV century. 
The book’s title was “Mohametis Albetini de Scienta 
stellarum Liber” (Muhammad Al-Battani’s scientific 
book on stars) in Latin. 
Battani (Abu Abdullah Muhammad ben Jabir ben Sinaya 
Al-Harrani Ali Sabi) was born in the family of the rich 
Arab nobleman and was called “Arab Ptolemy”. “Zic Sabi” 
written by Battani on the basis of translations of Plato 
Tyvalsky, Maslama Ahmad Al-Majriti and Regiomontanus 
was known by European astronomers in the middle ages.  
Abu Nasr Muhammad ibn Muhammad Al-Farabi (870-
950) was one of the most well-known scientists of the 
middle ages. The scientist, who was born in Uzbekistan, 
Farab, had travelled a lot. He had written many works on 
philosophy, medicine, mathematics, astronomy and music. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    43
Well-known Arab scientist Ibn Hallikan wrote about him: 
“… Turkish scientist Al-Farabi is well-known philosopher 
and author of interesting works on logic, music and other 
sciences. He is the most genius Muslim philosopher”.  
Al-Farabi’s commentary about “Almagest” of Ptolemy 
made him more popular. Al-Farabi is well-known in the 
world, but it is not serious to call him the most genius 
Muslim philosopher.  
Well-known scientist Ebul Vefa Al-Buzcani (939-998) 
had worked on theoretical and practical problems of 
astronomy. He had written several valuable works on 
mathematics, algebra, geometry and astronomy. Ebul Vefa 
had worked on the theory of the Moon and discovered 
“variation” of its movement.  
Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya ibn Ismail ibn 
Al-Abbas Al-Buzcani had come to Baghdad in 960 and 
carried out investigations in the observatory located there. 
Most of his valuable works were lost. 
Ebul Vefa had a very significant role in development of 
mathematics and astronomy.  
  
 
 
 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    44
Sheikh Muhammadali Babakuhi Bakuvi  
 
Though Azerbaijan isn’t very large country, it is always 
notable for its poets and thinkers. Because science, culture, 
art and literature were the focus of attention there in the 
early middle ages and skilful experts were prepared for 
development of these fields. Besides it, Azerbaijani 
scientists were interested in scientific processes of 
countries located near borders of Azerbaijan and continued 
their investigations in those countries too.  
The academician Ziya Bunyadov mentioned that, some 
Azerbaijani scientists had taught different sciences and 
carried out investigations in Baghdad, Mosul, Alexandria, 
Eden, Cairo and other Arab countries in early middle ages. 
It means that, there were high-level education centers in 
most cities of Azerbaijan at that time.  
Professor N. K. Keremov had mentioned that, Azer-
baijani geographers and travelers had a significant role in 
collection of correct and exact information about nature, 
population and economy of Caucasus and Middle Asia, 
Near and Far East, India and Northern Africa.1  
N. K. Keremov was right. Because most remarkable 
personalities of Azerbaijan travelled to different countries 
                                                 
     1
 Керемов Н. К. Путешествие Гудси. Москва, «Мысль», 1977. стр. 5 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    45
and collected very interesting information since early 
middle ages. One of them was the poet, scientist, philo-
sopher, traveler and cosmographer Sheikh Muhammadali 
Babakuhi Bakuvi (931/32-1051). The orientalist and 
researcher Y. E. Bertels had written his whole name as 
“Sheikh Muhammadali Abu Abdullah Muhammad ibn 
Abdullah ibn Ubaydullah ibn Ahmed Shirvani Babakuhi 
Bakuvi”.  
Sheikh Abdullah Ansari, Abdurrahman Jami and 
Aliajdar Saidzadeh thought that, Babakuhi had travelled to 
Iran, Middle Asia, Arabia and India. Professor Eybali 
Mehraliyev also had written about it: “Sh. M. Babakuhi had 
travelled to Iran, Middle Asia and India during more than 
20 years. He had met local scientists, shared his opinions 
on development of some movements in the Muslim world 
and learned traditions of indigenous population during his 
travels…”1 
Babakuhi was aware of existence of the World Ocean as 
scientists of ancient times. It may be understood after 
reading his poem too: 
 
 
                                                 
  1 
E. Mehrəliyev. Babakuhi Bakuvi (Nişapuri, Şirazi) və Pirhüseyn 
Şirvani. Bakı, “Nafta-Press”. 2002. səh. 37  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    46
                There is a very rich nature 
                In the endless and large sea 
                So sages know its value. 1 
 
    Sh. M. Babakuhi used to describe the nature and travel 
routes in his ghazals. He had described shape of the Earth 
in one of his poems too: 
 
                 Your love was a white cock, 
                 The Earth resembled an egg,  
                 Its yolk is the Sun,  
                          The nature has put it in the centre. 2 
  
E. Mehraliyev explained the poem as following: 
“Scientific explanations of the poet have been made as love 
explanations. When the poet described the Earth as an egg, 
he explained main features of the universe’s heliocentric 
system. Besides it, he has explained it as a natural law. His 
scientific thoughts haven’t lost their significances still. It 
was impossible to write such ideas in a different way at the 
time when Islam had begun to be spread newly. Babakuhi’s 
explanation was made 30-40 years before Abu Raihan Al-
                                                 
           
  
1   
Перевод на Азербайджанский Э. Мехралиев.  
              2   
Перевод на Азербайджанский Э. Мехралиев.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    47
Biruni from Khwarezm and was very resolute thought 
about heliocentric structure of the universe. Besides it, this 
explanation was made 500 years before the corresponding 
discovery of the Pole scientist Nicolaus Copernicus… 
On the other hand, the poet has described the Earth as an 
egg, the Sun as an egg yolk and he has hinted at the creator 
of biological processes by emphasizing the word “cock”. 
But Babakuhi’s thoughts haven’t been described openly”.1 
The word “world egg” is used for the Earth in Sufism 
cosmography.2 
But to my mind, Babakuhi has described the universe in 
the above mentioned poem. He has called human love 
white cock. And the word “white cock” may be used for 
our Galaxy.  
The scientist has described the world as the universe and 
the Sun as an egg yolk located inside it in the hemistich 
“The Earth resembled an egg”. In the hemistich “The 
nature has put it in the centre” Babakuhi wanted to note 
that the Sun was a fixed planet. It means that, the Sun 
couldn’t revolve round the Earth, but the Earth could 
revolve round the Sun. The scientist had passed ahead of 
                                                 
          1
 E. Mehrəliyev. Babakuhi Bakuvi (Nişapuri, Şirazi) və Pirhüseyn 
Şirvani. Bakı, “Nafta-Press”. 2002. səh. 37  
            2
  Е. Я. Бертельс. Суфизм и Суфийская литература. Москва, 1965. 
стр. 283, 284 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    48
Copernicus for 500 years with this poem. Probably, 
Babakuhi was the author of scientific treatises too. He 
knew astronomy as well as the most well-known scientists 
of the Near East. Probably, Babakuhi had improved his 
knowledge about the structure of the Earth and Sky owing 
to Ebul Vefa, Abdurrahman Al-Sufi, Abu Raihan Al-
Biruni, Hamid Al-Khojandi and Abu Nasr ibn Iraq. There 
isn’t any information about direct meeting of Babakuhi and 
mentioned scientists in known historical documents. But it 
is possible to assume that he had contacted with them. 
Orientalists have to carry out researches in state libraries 
and manuscript funds of Tehran, Shiraz and Hamadan in 
order to find historical documents. Babakuhi had read 
works of Hussein Al-Khwarizmi, Al-Farabi, Abu Ali ibn 
Sina, Al-Balkhi, Abu Raihan Al-Biruni, Naser Khosrow 
and other scientists when he was in Khwarezm. He had met 
some scientists there. It means that, Babakuhi had 
contacted with well-known scientists of the East.  
Most works of the scientist is still remaining. It 
shouldn’t be forgotten that, the scientist, who lived 120 
years, had visited Maragha, Hamadan, Khorasan, Baghdad, 
Isfahan, Rey and other cities and participated in scientific 
meetings held there. There is no doubt that, works of the 
scientist could be kept in libraries located in Maragha 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    49
observatory founded by Rashidaddin and N. Tusi. Tusi’s 
cosmographic thoughts couldn’t influence on thoughts of 
the remarkable astronomer and mathematician.  
Though there wasn’t any observatory in Azerbaijan in X 
and XI centuries, astronomy and geography had developed 
highly. Babakuhi had described the Earth, Universe and 
Galaxy before N. Tusi in his poems.  
He had mentioned that, the universe was surrounded by 
cosmic bodies and the Earth was part of it. The Sun was a 
fixed planet. Most parts of the Earth were covered with the 
World Ocean – great sea. It means that, Babakuhi was 
aware of existence of the heliocentric system.  
It is necessary to note that, Greek scientists had a 
significant role in intensive development of astronomy by 
scientists of the East. Because well-known scientists of the 
East used to read works of Greek scientists before they 
started their activities. The influence of Greek scientific 
schools was very important in regions of the Near East in 
early middle ages. Most scientists accepted this fact.  
… Though some authors approached to establishment of 
the Islamic union positively, science and philosophy of 
Greeks had spread in the Near East and Iran by means of 
political and economic relations of Byzantine after the first 
part of V century. Nestorian teachers taught Greek 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    50
philosophy in Syria and Lebanon. As the Nestorian school 
was closed in 431 because of the church, those teachers 
moved to Iran and began to translate works of Greek 
scientists into Arabic.1  
Even in 1149 Khaghani Shirvani was a friend of the 
Byzantine princess Comnenus.2 
 
 
 
 
 
          Main scientific works of well-known  
                      scientists 
 
Cairo observatory of Egypt, Rey observatory of Iran and 
Mamun Academy of Central Asia were important scientific 
centers of the East.  
The founder and scientific leader of the Cairo 
observatory was Ibn Yunus (died in 1009) in X century and 
the astronomical catalogue “Zij-i Al-Kabir” was made in 
that observatory under his leadership. N. Tusi had praised 
                                                 
      1
 Исаченко А. А. Развитие географических идей. Москва, «Мысль», 
1971. стр. 11 
        2
 Q. Kəndli-Herisçi. “Xaqani Şirvani”. Bakı, 1988. səh. 517 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    51
mentioned astronomical catalogue in his work “Zij-i 
Ilkhani”.  
Well-known scientist of his time Abdurrahman ben 
Omar Abdul Hussein Al-Sufi (903-986) had established the 
Rey observatory. Observations carried out there, were 
efficient and a star catalogue had been made according to 
them. In 1874 that catalogue had been published in 
Petersburg by Shellerup with the title “Decreption des 
etoiles fixes” (List of fixed stars).  
Al-Sufi is the author of many valuable works. Besides 
him, inventor of the sextant, well-known scientist Khojandi 
also had participated in establishment of the Rey 
observatory. 
Mamun Academy was established by Khwarezm-Shah 
Mamun II in the second half of X century. Cultural and 
economic life of Khwarezm began to develop and large 
cities as Urganj and Kyat began to be founded at that time. 
Mentioned cities were popular for their cultural and 
scientific centers having rich libraries.  
Remarkable scientists as Harachi and Hamdaki, who 
were teachers of Al-Biruni, Abu Ali ibn Sina, Abu Nasr 
Iraq, Khojandi, Abu Sahl Masihi, Abul Hasan Hammar and 
Al-Biruni worked in Mamun Academy.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    52
Abu Raihan Muhammad ben Ahmad Al-Biruni 
(04.10.973-13.12.1048) got his education in Kyat with Abu 
Nasr Mansur ibn Ahmad ibn Iraq and started his first 
astronomical observations there. Al-Biruni left Kyat and 
went to Jurjan when he was 22 and wrote his well-known 
work “Al Athar, al Baqqia” (“Chronology of ancient 
nations”). The book is about histories of culture, art and 
literature of some nations, their calendars, traditions, 
holidays etc.  
The book brought great fame to Al-Biruni and he was 
invited to the Academy founded by Khwarezm-Shah 
Mamun II. He worked there for seven years. Mamun 
Academy carried out its activity till invasion of Khwarezm 
by Mahmud Ghaznavi in 1017.  
I want to remember two paragraphs of “Muhammad 
Nasiraddin Tusi” written by H. Mammadbayli. Some 
scientists of Mamun Academy could move from Khwarezm 
after the invasion. But a group of scientists and Al-Biruni 
were arrested. He was accused of being against Islam. Al-
Biruni was freed by means of palace members and became 
the most popular scientist in the palace of Mahmud 
Ghaznavi. He named one of his astronomical works 
“Massoud Qanuni” in honor of Mahmud Ghaznavi’s son. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    53
Mahmud Ghaznavi and his son used to benefit by 
knowledge of Al-Biruni.  
Once ambassador of Turks came to the Sultan Mahmud 
Ghaznavi and said that, there was an interesting country in 
the North and it was always daylight there. Sultan didn’t 
believe it and asked Abu Raihan’s opinion. As Al-Biruni 
explained this fact very convincingly, Sultan believed him 
and gave many presents to the ambassador.  
Mahmud Ghaznavi marched to the north of India and 
took Al-Biruni with himself. The scientist learned Sanskrit 
perfectly during a very short time and got acquainted with 
scientific achievements and traditions of Indian nations. Al-
Biruni wrote scientific works in Sanskrit, translated 
different works from Arabic and Persian to Sanskrit and 
from Sanskrit to Arabic and Persian. 
 Mathematics and astronomy had developed enough in 
India before Al-Biruni moved there. Trigonometry also had 
been learned. The Indian astronomy book “Surya-
Siddhartha” was translated into English in 1860. This book 
was written in IV century. Other work – “Siddhartha-
Chiromani” was written in XII century by Bascar Acaria.  
Mentioned works had been investigated exactly by 
Reynaud, Albrecht Weber, Moritz Cantor and others. Later 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    54
it became clear that, Indians had learned mathematics and 
astronomy owing to Greeks.  
The time spent by the scientist in India was very 
efficient as Ptolemy’s “Almagest” and Euclid’s “Princip-
les” translated by him into Sanskrit played a significant 
role in development of the science in India.  
 
           
                  Abu Raihan Al-Biruni (973-1048) 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    55
The book “İndia” written by Al-Biruni in 1030 is very 
valuable work and half of that book (forty of eighty 
chapters) is about astronomical knowledge of Indians. The 
book was named by Al-Biruni as “Book containing 
explanations of instructions accepted and rejected by the 
“Indian” sense”. Well-known Russian orientalist Barthold 
had written that, mentioned work of the scientist hadn’t any 
analogue in scientific literature of ancient and middle ages.  
That book was translated into Arabic in London in 1887 
and into English in the next year. 
As Al-Biruni’s scientific heritage is very rich, we can 
look through a small list of his valuable works:  
1. Determination of the Earth’s measurements at the 
result of observation of descent of the horizon seen from 
the top of the mountain. 
2. Astronomy equipments and use of them. 
3. Different ways of preparation of the astrolabe.  
4. Projection of star specters. 
5. Comets. 
6. About investigation of sky events.  
7. An effort to check movement of the Sun. 
8. Notes on Euclid’s works.  
9. Notes on Ptolemy’s astronomy.  
10. About Khwarezm’s works on astronomy.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    56
11. About Arabs’ theory on movement of the Earth. 
Al-Biruni was one of main defenders of the heliocentric 
system in spite of uninterrupted persecutions of Muslim 
confessors because of his scientific activity. He struggled 
against people, who considered the geocentric system basis 
of the astronomy and thought that, the astronomy would be 
idle without that system.  
Al-Biruni used to say: “The theory on fixedness of the 
Earth is one of bases of astronomy and this fact is one of 
dogmas of Indian astronomers. It makes the astronomy 
more difficult”.  
Al-Biruni mentioned that, the Earth’s revolution didn’t 
reduce importance of the astronomy. Actually, all kinds of 
astronomical events may be explained on the basis of this 
theory. 
Well-known scientists tried to improve some scientific 
discoveries of Al-Biruni after several centuries. But some 
discoveries are still out of attention. The remarkable 
scientist Professor R. Husseinov wrote about Al-Biruni: 
“Al-Biruni – well-known scientist of Middle Asia, who was 
popular for his theory on the Earth’s rotation in XI century, 
is the author of some astronomical tractates and there is a 
very interesting thought in these tractates: Earth’s rotation 
about  its  own  axis  don’t contradict  any  provision of the  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    57
astronomy”.1 
But Sheikh Muhammadali Babakuhi Bakuvi had tried to 
change the astronomy fundamentally by describing 
heliocentric structure of the universe before mentioned two 
scientists. His idea was advanced 500 years before the 
discovery of Nicolaus Copernicus.  
This thought was mentioned by other eastern scientist 
Nasiraddin Tusi and is available in German sources too. 
But the corresponding scientific investigation wasn’t 
completed because of unknown reasons.  
It means that, before the Pole scientist Nicolaus 
Copernicus (1473-1543), eastern astronomers had advanced 
an idea about movement of the Earth. “About rotations of 
celestial spheres” was published in 1543 – when Nicolaus 
Copernicus died. Copernicus had explained his heliocentric 
system in this work. According to this system, there isn’t 
fixed Earth in the center of the world, there is the Sun, 
which rotates about its own axis. The Earth rotates around 
the Sun and about its own axis as all other planets.  
                                                 
       
1
 Azərbaycan Respublikası “Təhsil” Cəmiyyəti 2002 il 28 iyunda dahi 
Azərbaycan alimi Nəsirəddin Tusinin 800 illik yubileyinə həsr olunmuş 
“Nəsirəddin Tusinin elmi xidmətləri və Nəsirəddin Tusi yazıçı-tədqiqatçı 
Ramiz Qasımov yaradıcılığında” mövzusunda keçirilən elmi-praktik 
konfransda professor Rəhim Hüseynovun məruzəsi. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    58
Al-Biruni defended ideas of the heliocentric system in 
his works “India”, “Different ways of preparation of 
astro-labe”, “The key to astronomy”, “Does the Earth 
rotate or not?” and “About Arabs’ theory on movement of 
the Earth”.  
The scientist had prepared a wall quadrant with 7.5 m 
diameter in 995 in order to make detailed astronomical 
observations. One of quantities determined by means of 
that equipment was inclination of the ecliptics. He had 
twice made observations for determination of inclination of 
the ecliptics (in 995-996 and 1020) and got 230 35/ 45// and 
23035/ 50// at the result of these observations.  
H. Mammadbayli wrote: “Al-Biruni had offered new 
method for determination of the Sun apogee’s longitude. 
He was the author of significant works on mathematical 
cartography and geography. The idea on the shape of the 
Earth wasn’t advanced by Al-Biruni as some authors 
mention. Al-Biruni’s main scientific service was 
preparation of the new method for determination of the 
Earth’s measurements”.1  
The scientist explained this method as following:  
                                                 
           1
 H. C. Məmmədbəyli. Mühəmməd Nəsirəddin Tusi. Bakı, “Gənclik”, 
1980. səh.25-26  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    59
“I have offered a new method different from methods of 
Greek, Indian scientists and scientists of Mamun for 
determination of the Earth’s meridian arch. I found a high 
mountain in India for this purpose. Then I found the 
horizon by means of the tool (astrolabe) on the top of the 
mountain, it was located along the east-west line. The angle 
was 34 degrees. The height of the mountain was equal to 
652.05 elbows”.  
According to calculations of the scientist, the Earth 
radius was equal to 12851369 elbows, the Earth’s length 
was 80780039 elbows and one-degree arch of the Earth 
was equal to 50.2 Arab miles. 
Nallino and Shoy had determined that, an elbow was 
equal to 0.493 m and an Arab mile was 4000 x 0.493 m = 
1972 m.  
Al-Biruni had determined that, the length of one-degree 
meridian arch was 111.6 km (today’s value is 111.1 km). 
Experts mention that, Al-Biruni had prepared a new 
method, which corresponded technical level of his time, for 
calculation of the longitude and by the way improved 
mathematical geography. Though this method was 
theoretically correct, hadn’t satisfactory results as had 
many observational errors.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    60
Al-Biruni had offered a method for finding difference of 
longitudes and determined difference of longitudes of 
Shiraz, Gorgan, Gazna and Baghdad. 
Al-Biruni had prepared table of longitudes and latitudes 
of several cities. It should be mentioned that, he had used 
the length of the meridian calculated before. The Tajik 
scientist H. U. Sadigov wrote about services of Al-Biruni: 
“Al-Biruni, who was one of remarkable astronomers of the 
East, is the author of very significant works”.  
      
          Al-Biruni works on the following scientific work 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    61
We can’t deny that, the astronomy is an ancient science. 
It was spread widely in the East in the early middle ages 
and Muslim astronomers had made great efforts in order to 
discover its details. According to above mentioned facts, 
this science was developed in Azerbaijan in the age of 
Babakuhi Bakuvi. It was developed in the northern part of 
Azerbaijan – in Shirvan before other regions. Professor 
Eybali Mehraliyev’s notes prove it.  
According to works on the history of mathematics, 
Shirvan was the astronomical center and high-level 
investigations were carried out there as Shirvan had 
relations with Khwarezm since IX-X centuries… 
The astronomer and poet Falaki Shirvani wrote about 
services of Vahidaddin Shirvani (1100-1159 – R. G.) and 
citizenship ideals of Kafiaddins. 1  
Abu Ali ibn Sina (980-1037) was invited to the Mamun 
Academy when it was established. His main works on the 
astronomy and mathematics are:  
 
1. About characteristics of the equator.  
2. Answers of ten questions of Al-Biruni. 
3. Answers of sixteen questions of Al-Biruni. 
                                                 
    
    
 1
 E. Mehrəliyev. Şirvan Elmlər Akademiyası. Bakı, “Çaşıoğlu”, 2000. 
səh. 52-53 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    62
4. About speeds of the Earth and Sky.  
5. About celestial bodies and their movements.  
6. About astronomy equipments made for observation in 
Isfahan.  
7. About the sky, stars and meteorites. 
 
     
                      Abu Ali ibn Sina (980-1037) 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    63
Hamis ben Al Hazar Abu Mahmud Al Khojandi, who 
was the teacher of Al-Biruni, also worked in the Mamun 
Academy. He is the author of several scientific treatises and 
his treatise about application of the astrolabe is one of the 
most significant astronomical works.  
Khojandi worked in the observatory of Rey located near 
Tehran. He had invented a sextant, which’s diameter was 
equal to 80 elbows (40 m), and that tool was able to 
measure angles with exactness of 1//. Khojandi had 
determined inclination of the ecliptics as 230 32/ 21// with 
exactness of 2/ 01//.  
He wrote about those observations: “We made 
observations in Rey with the sextant, which I had invented 
in 384th year of the Islamic calendar and 363rd year of the 
Yezdicurd era. It consists of the circle arch, which’s 
diameter is equal to 80 elbows. I have named it “Suds 
Fakhri” in honor of the ruler of Rey, Hamadan and Isfahan 
– Fakhriddovl. 
We could get following results after successful 
observations and exact calculations. My sextant is able to 
measure inclination of the ecliptics with degrees, minutes 
and seconds unlike other tools, which measure correspond-
ding quantity with degrees and minutes”. It proves that, 
Khojandi was the first person, who could determine that, 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    64
inclination of the ecliptics was a variable quantity. Indians 
had determined exact value of the inclination (240). 
Khojandi wrote: “Ptolemy determined it as 230 51/, the 
author of the “Examination table” (Habashul Hasid) 
determined it as 230 35/, but I determined this quantity as 
230 32/ 21//”.  
Difference between values determined by Indians and 
me is approximately equal to half degree. It can’t be error 
of tools because all determined values varied insignifi-
cantly.  
The teacher of Al-Biruni – one of advanced scientists of 
the Mamun Academy Abu Nasr ibn Iraq (died in 1035) 
lived in Khwarezm before the Mamun Academy was 
destroyed and continued his scientific activity in the palace 
of Mahmud Ghaznavi after it. He is the author of some 
significant works on astronomy and mathematics. 
His most significant astronomical works are:  
1. Preparation of astrolabe with artificial way.  
2. About difficult parts of Euclid’s XIII book. 
3. Astronomical table of the shah. 
4. Table of minutes.  
The teacher of Abu Ali ibn Sina Abu Sahl Isa ben 
Masihi Gorgani also worked in the Mamun Academy. The 
scientist, who was the author of some scientific works on 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    65
astronomy and medicine, died in desert when tried to hide 
from persecution of Mahmud Ghaznavi’s troops.  
Omar ibn Ibrahim Al-Hayyam Giyasaddin invited Abul 
Fath (1048-1123) to the palace of his friend – Nizamulmulk 
Jalaluddin Malik shah Saljugi in 1074. Malik shah chose 
Isfahan as the capital and established observatory there. 
 
        
                     Omar Hayyam (1048-1123) 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    66
Omar Khayyam was the head astronomer, Abu Muzaffar 
Sfaran and Mamun ben Al-Najab Al-Vasiti were 
astronomers of the observatory as they planned reforms in 
astronomical calendar.  
Western scientists began to know well-known poet 
Hayyam as a great scientist owing to the French scientist 
Vopke.  
The astronomical catalogue “Zij-i Malik Shah” was 
prepared in Isfahan observatory under the leadership of 
Hayyam. A copy of that catalogue is kept in the national 
library of Paris (manuscript № 5669). Coordinates of 100 
stars have been described in the catalogue. 
 
 
 
 
  The founder of Maragha observatory  
               – Nasiraddin Tusi 
 
Azerbaijani scientist, Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn 
Hasan Nasiraddin Tusi (1201-1274), who was remarkable 
philosopher, astronomer, mathematician, historian, 
geographer, financer and lawyer of XIII century, founded 
an observatory in accordance with his own project in 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    67
Maragha located at the center of Azerbaijan. His first 
teacher was his father, but then he got lessons of teachers of 
Bahmanyar’s and Abu Ali ibn Sina’s schools. Names of N. 
Tusi’s teachers have been written in historical documents. 
The student of his first teacher – Sadraddin Sarkhas was 
Fakhraddin Damady. The teacher of Sarkhas was the 
student of Abul Abbas Lovkari – Afzaladdin Gilani and he 
had got lessons of the student of Abu Ali ibn Sina – 
remarkable Azerbaijani scientist Bahmanyar. The second 
teacher of Tusi was Gutbattin Misri and his third teacher 
was the inventor of the dancer clock and the author of the 
astronomical catalogue “Zij-i Akbar al Hakimi” – Yunis 
Misri. Tusi’s comprehensive and profound knowledge 
made him famous in the world of science during a very 
short time. 
Nasiraddin Tusi’s heritage is an encyclopedic source for 
the whole Near and Middle East and has a special role in 
formation and development of Azerbaijani people’s 
thoughts. We may evaluate his scientific-literary heritage as 
part of the spiritual wealth of the Renaissance period.1 
The most characteristic feature of N. Tusi’s activity is its 
encyclopedic specification. Nasiraddin Tusi was famous in 
                                                 
        
1
 Azərbaycan Beynəlxalq Universiteti. Nəsirəddin Tusinin 800 illik 
yubileyinə həsr edilmiş Respublika konfransının materialları. Bakı, 2001. 
Professor M.F. Bayramovun məruzəsi, səh. 264 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    68
the whole Eastern world as genius scientists Abu Ali ibn 
Sina, Abu Raihan Al-Biruni and Hamid Al-Khojandi.  
Authors of the many-volumed encyclopedia “Cam-
bridge history of Iran” (in English) had played a signi-
ficant role in investigation of Nasiraddin Tusi’s heritage. 
Compre-hensive scientific activity of the scientist and 
scientific achievements of Maragha observatory have been 
analyzed in articles of B. Bail (Manchester University), A. 
Bauza (Naples Institute of Orientalism) and other scientists.  
Everybody was aware of N. Tusi’s encyclopedic 
knowledge. That’s why the leader of Kuhistan Nasiraddin 
Mohtasham invited him to his palace as the honorary guest 
and asked to translate “Tahzibul akhlaq” (“Purity of 
moral”) of Abu Ali Miskvih, who was the scientist of the 
Mamun Academy, from Arabic into Persian. But N. Tusi 
dodged that responsibility and said that, he was able to 
write more valuable work in that theme.  
N. Tusi kept his promise in 1235 and wrote “Akhlagi 
Nasiri”, which became very popular in the East, and 
presented it to the ruler. Copies of the work spread in the 
Caucasus, Iran, Middle Asia, India and other countries in a 
very short time. Mongke khan and Hulegu khan also read 
one of copies.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    69
N. Tusi went down in history as the moral theorist of 
eastern nations after he wrote “Akhlagi Nasiri”.  
It should be noted that, if Nasiraddin Tusi could achieve 
fame in the world owing to “Zij-i Ilkhani” and Maragha 
observatory, he was famous among eastern nations after 
“Akhlagi Nasiri” was written. This work was significant 
for its content’s public, economical, political, moral, 
philosophical and educational essence. So the work became 
popular as the textbook of moral in schools of the Middle 
and Near East during more than 700 years. Many copies of 
the work were spread among people. “Akhlagi Nasiri” is a 
summary of moral, philosophical and pedagogical thoughts 
existing in the Near and Middle East. According to 
researches, any other work as “Akhlagi Nasiri” hasn’t been 
written in Persian during recent 700 years.  
The scientist had proved himself as a skilful teacher and 
remarkable educator with this work. He had described 
talents of people, influence of the environment and 
conditions on people and emphasized role of the education 
in human life.1 
                                                 
     
1
 Azərbaycan Beynəlxalq Universiteti. Nəsirəddin Tusinin 800 illik 
yubileyinə həsr edilmiş Respublika konfransının materialları. Bakı, 2001. 
Professor  H.M. Əhmədovun məruzəsi, səh. 3 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    70
“Akhlagi Nasiri” consists of three articles, 30 chapters, 
“Introduction and reason why the book is written” and 
“First notes and division of sciences”.  
“Akhlagi Nasiri”, which is considered immortal work in 
the field of ethics and education, might be written by a very 
educated person. People all over the world may be proud of 
the author of such book. 
The scientist was arrested and sent to the Alamut (“The 
eagle’s nest”) castle after the work was published. Though 
several reasons of the arrest were listed, the most real 
reason was as following: progressive ideas of “Akhlagi 
Nasiri” had infuriated Muslim confessors, so the scientist 
was arrested. 
Tusi wrote: “Defeated people shouldn’t be annihilated 
wholly because they are slaves already”. 1  
N. Tusi was in prison at the Alamut castle. Though the 
scientist’s moral situation was unbearable during more than 
20 years spent in prison, he could write several scientific 
works there: “Sherhul-Isharet”, “Tahriru Al-Majisti” 
(Almagest), “Tahriru Uglidis” (first edition). He wrote the 
last book in 1248 and its last edition (consisted of 13 parts) 
was written later.  
                                                 
             1 
Xacə Nəsirəddin Tusi. Rəhim Sultfnovun farscadan tərcüməsi. 
Əxlaqi-Nasiri. Bakı, “Lider nəşriyyat”, 2005. səh.235 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    71
Nasiraddin Tusi wrote following thoughts at the end of 
“Sherhul-Isharet” (Commentaries on the philosophical 
treatise of Abu Ali ibn Sina “Isharet”), which was comple-
ted by him in 1242: “I have written most chapters of this 
book under very hard conditions. I was in a very difficult 
situation. I have written this book in front of the hell”.1  
Nasiraddin Tusi’s torment is understandable. He was 
deprived of important libraries, which he needed for his 
investigations. All works written by the scientist in the 
prison were controlled. But in spite of it, he could write his 
immortal works at the Alamut castle under very difficult 
conditions. 
L. V. Stroeva gave interesting information about 
foundation of the state of Ismailis: “The rebellion of 
Ismailis caused establishment of ismailism, which was a 
branch of shiitism, in Iran. In the middle of VII century 
Shiites thought that, only Imam Ali and his relatives had 
the right to be political leader of the caliphate as Imam Ali 
was considered religious leader of Muslims”.2 
                                                 
         
 
1 
Nəsirəddin Tusi. “Şərhül İşarət”. Bu ifadələri profeccor Ə. K. Zəku-
yev tərcümə edibdir.  
       
 
  2 
Л. В. Строева. Государство Исмаилитов в Иране в XI-XIII вв. 
Москва, «Наука», 1978. стр. 32 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    72
According to I. Goldsier, later thoughts about Imam’s 
personality broke relationship between Shiites.1  
Their relationship was broken in VIII century after the 
sixth Imam Jafar Al-Sadiq deprived his elder son Ismail of 
the title of Imam. As he died before his father, he couldn’t 
be an Imam. After it, part of Shiites, which considered that, 
his son Muhammad ibn Ismail was Imam, began to be 
called as Ismailis. They carried out their activities illegally 
as tried to avoid Abbasis’ persecutions. Imam Ubeydullah – 
the successor of Imam Ali and Fatima (prophet’s daughter) 
founded the Fatimid Caliphate (909-1171) independently. 
Ismailism was declared official religion of the Fatimi 
Caliphate.2  
In spite of all these, the state of Ismailis was considered 
the partner of the Abbasid Caliphate and became one of 
distinguished states of the region.  
When Genghis khan’s grandson – Hulegu khan 
approached borders of Azerbaijan with his army, spies sent 
by the khan explained him that, Nasiraddin Tusi was genius 
scientist and wise person. Hulegu khan had heard a lot 
about the Azerbaijani scientist before too. He encircled the 
                                                 
           1  
И. Гольдциер. Лекции об Исламе. СПб, 1912 
            2 
Л. В. Строева. Государство Исмаилитов в Иране в XI-XIII вв. 
Москва, «Наука», 1978. стр. 32 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    73
Alamut castle as felt reverence for scientists and wise 
people.  
His troops occupied the castle in 1256 and freed N. Tusi 
and other scientists, who were in prison there.  
While N. Tusi was at the Alamut castle, his family and 
most relatives lived in Hamadan. Well-known Azerbaijani 
historian Rashidaddin Fazlullah (1247-1318), who was N. 
Tusi’s contemporary, wrote that Hulegu khan respected the 
scientist very much: “Hulegu khan respected Nasiraddin, 
sons of Rashiddovl and Muvafiqaddovl as they were from 
Hamadan and were great doctors. He had given them 
means of conveyance for taking their families, relatives and 
followers to the palace”.1  
The scientist became adviser of the Mongolian ruler as 
soon as he was freed from the castle. He assumed the 
responsibility for holding a number of political events of 
Hulegu khan after he was freed. Khan had to occupy the 
capital of the Abbasid Caliphate – Baghdad in order to 
broaden borders of his new state. N. Tusi gave him 
necessary advices. Though Hulegu khan thought that, it 
was dangerous to attack Baghdad, which was considered 
holy city of the Muslim world, he became more decisive 
owing to N. Tusi’s advices.  
                                                 
 
  
   1 Рашид-ад-дин. Сборник летописей. III том. Москва, 1946. стр. 31 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    74
Hulegu khan, who had stopped his troops near Baghdad, 
sent offers on surrendering to Mustesim – the caliph of 
Baghdad. The caliph rejected and threatened him with the 
wrath of God.  
One of advisers – Husamaddin advised the ruler to give 
up his attack to Baghdad and to attack Constantinople. But 
as N. Tusi’s advice was different, he quarreled with Husa-
maddin.  
Rashidaddin Fazlullah wrote in his work “Jami Al-
Tawarikh”: “Hulegu khan consulted with statesmen and 
advisers about mentioned attack. Everybody said his 
opinion. 
Hulegu khan called the astrologer Husamaddin and 
asked: 
– What are stars saying? 
The astrologer answered fearlessly: 
– Success isn’t expected in attack to Baghdad and war 
against Abbasids because nobody has achieved anything by 
attacking Abbasids and Baghdad yet. If you won’t listen to 
me and go there, six kinds of unhappiness may happen: 
first – horses may die and illness may spread among troops, 
se-cond – the sun won’t rise, third – it won’t rain, forth – 
cyc-lone will spread and an earthquake will destroy the 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    75
world, fifth – plants won’t grow, sixth – the great ruler will 
die in the same year… 
Then Hulegu khan called Nasiraddin Tusi and asked his 
advice. Tusi answered that, none of listed cases would 
happen.  
Hulegu khan asked: 
– Then what will happen? 
Nasiraddin Tusi answered:  
– Hulegu khan will be the caliph”. 
According to Rashidaddin, N. Tusi was far from the 
prejudice and was able to analyze the situation correctly. 
He proved his thoughts with scientific grounds.  
Though Arabs ruled countries located in the Near East 
and south of the Caucasus Mountains during hundreds of 
years, those regions began to weaken gradually. A great 
change occurred in the Arab Caliphate in 750. As the 
Amavid dynasty (661-750) couldn’t rule the empire, the 
Abbasid dynasty (750-1258) seized power and ruled the 
caliphate till the middle of XIII century. The capital of the 
caliphate – Baghdad was the greatest and richest city of the 
world. Besides it, it was the greatest cultural, art and 
science center of the Near East. All popular scientists 
carried out their activities in this city.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    76
Hulegu khan founded his mighty state in Azerbaijan in 
1260 after Baghdad was occupied (1258). Elkhans were 
rulers of the new state called İlkhanids.  
 
                    
 
 
 
       The policy of Nasiraddin Tusi  
 
Mongols hadn’t any religious belief when they attacked 
Afghanistan, Iran, Near East and north of the Caucasus. 
They believed in ghosts. European monarchs and especially 
the Pope wanted Mongols to accept Christianity. The Pope 
sent his ambassadors to residences of Mongol rulers for 
acceptation of the new religion. But Muslims won this 
“competition”. Berke khan (1201-1266) accepted Islam 
when he was holding power (1257-1266) and nomad 
Mongols became Muslims after it. Most of Russia’s lands 
were controlled by Berke khan and he had listed Russian 
nations for the first time.  
Though Azerbaijan had already been occupied by 
Hulegu khan, Berke khan also wanted to occupy this 
country. V. Shklovsky wrote about it using Marco Polo’s 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    77
“Travel book” as a source: “Berke khan also wanted to 
occupy Azerbaijan after Hulegu khan”. 
There were very good pastures below the Kur River. 
Livestock spent winter in those pastures and was taken to 
mountains in summer. Azerbaijan was famous for its 
artisans, cloths, carpets and swords made there were spread 
all over the world.  
But Azerbaijan had already been conquered by Hulegu 
khan and he highly estimated this land. He declared Tabriz 
its capital.  
Rulers of the Golden Horde and Mongolia fought with 
each other for Azerbaijan during about 100 years.1  
There was a battle between troops of Hulegu khan and 
Berke khan near the Darband castle. Berke khan lost the 
battle in 1259 and his troops hid behind the Terek River. 
After the battle, he looked at corpses and said sadly: “We 
could conquer the whole world if we were together”.  
Did N. Tusi accompany Hulegu khan at that battle? It is 
known that, the famous scientist accompanied the ruler of 
Mongolia at all battles. Hulegu khan took his advices 
during difficult operations.  
Most historians, who investigate Islam, condemn N. 
Tusi’s participation in annihilation of the Baghdad 
                                                 
        
1
 В. Шкловский. Земли разведчик. М., «Молодая гвардия», 1966 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    78
Caliphate together with Mongol invaders. The Baghdad 
Caliphate and Mongol invaders both were threat for the 
Near East and Azerbaijan then. But they weakened each 
other at the result of struggling.  
It should be noted that, N. Tusi, who accompanied 
Hulegu khan during occupation of Baghdad, had a 
significant role in rescue of scientists, women and children, 
who were in the city. He could make Hulegu khan to 
change his policy and to stop mass slaughters after 
occupation of Baghdad.  
According to historical sources, Hulegu khan, who had 
approached Baghdad, stopped near borders of the territory, 
where Saljuk Turks lived. He had two choices: he might 
attack Baghdad, which was the last shelter of the Arab 
Caliphate, or lands of Saljugis, which extended to 
Constantinople. Hulegu khan’s decision had to prevent 
weakening of Ilkhanids. Of course, the ruler had to take 
advices of his viziers and advisors before making decision. 
N. Tusi’s advice was important for him. But the scientist 
had powerful opponents.  
Though N. Tusi’s scientific activity is approved by all 
without any doubt, his thoughts on religion couldn’t be 
accepted without arguments. He was blamed for being 
against Muslims, helping Mongols, participating in 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    79
occupation of Baghdad, advising Hulegu khan to kill the 
caliph and being an infidel. Tusi’s answer was laconic 
enough: “I am a Muslim, so everything said about me is 
nothing but lie”. 
Calling N. Tusi, who was considered “Teacher of the 
world”, infidel is an immorality as he was sincere Muslim 
and knew Koran very well. He is the author of some 
brilliant aphorisms about religion: 
“Only order of the God is significant”.  
“The religion is a rule and state is its column”.  
“Muslims are hands. They can be body if they unite”. 
Though historians of Islam blame N. Tusi for 
annihilation of the Baghdad Caliphate, it isn’t difficult to 
understand that, their approach was wrong. I’ll try to 
substantiate it.  
According to historical sources, lands of Iran and 
Azerbaijan were devastated by Genghis khan in 1221. 
Mongols sent Hulegu khan and 70 thousand fighters to the 
West in order to be leader in Southern Caucasus. This 
decision was made after Mongke khan was declared great 
khan of Mongols in the congress held in Qaragorum. 
Mongol troops annihilated all political and military forces 
they met during the occupation process in order to prevent 
sabotages and terrors.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    80
Muhammad Shah’s son – Jalaluddin came to the throne 
(1221-1231) after destruction of Khwarezm and went to 
Afghanistan and Iran in order to resist Mongol troops. The 
ruler of Ismailis’ state Aladdin (1212-1255) came to the 
throne when he was 9 (1221). His policy was neutral. He 
achieved agreement with Jalaluddin, who was an enemy of 
Mongols. The historian Nasavi, who was the secretary of 
Jalaluddin, wrote: “For the first time, Ismailis met 
Jalaluddin in 624th year of the Islamic calendar and 1226-
1227th years of the chronology of Christianity. Ismailis had 
made every effort for this meeting”. 
Though there was a conflict between Ismailis and 
Jalaluddin for several times, his vizier Sharaf Al-Mulk 
preferred peace when he was in Ganja and Beylagan. He 
kept good relationship with Ismailis. I. Patrushevsky wrote 
about it: “Sharaf Al-Mulk’s activity was a tragedy for 
Jalaluddin’s life and quickened his death”.  
Hulegu khan had got acquainted with the political 
situation existing in Iran and Near East before his march to 
Iran. Jalaluddin, Aladdin, Mustesim and Saljuk Turks were 
enemies. So Hulegu khan used this convenient situation.  
The Mongol commander Kit Buka Noyon marched from 
Qaragorum to the West with 12 thousand fighters in August 
of 1252. He passed the Amu Darya River in 651 (Islamic 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    81
calendar – R. G.) (March of 1253) and started military 
operations in Kuhistan. Kit Buka Noyon surrounded the 
Girdkuh castle with five thousand cavalrymen and 
infantrymen after part of the province was occupied.1 
Hulegu khan, who was the commander of the powerful 
army, crossed the frontier of Iran in 1253 and attacked the 
territory of Ismailis founded by Hashashins. Mongols, who 
had occupied Iran easily, met with the strong resistance of 
Hashashins. The leader of Kuhistan was considered the 
owner of tens of invincible castles – Alamut, Girdkuh, 
Lamasar etc. located in mountainous territories of his 
country. Hulegu khan knew that, Hashashins were 
supporters of the Baghdad Caliphate and powerful rival of 
Mongols. The leader of Mongols, who was known as a 
skilful politician and experienced commander, deviated 
from occupation of Ismailis’ castles by direct attacks and 
surrounded most of them. Hulegu khan demanded Ismailis 
to surrender without any battle.2  
                                                 
            1
 И. П. Патрушевский. Вазир Шараф ал-Мульк. – Ближний и 
Средний Восток. Москва, 1962. стр. 39 
           2 
Рашид ад-дин. Сборник летописей. Перев. с персидского А. К. 
Арендса. Под редак. А. А. Ромаскевича, Е. Э. Бертельса и Ю. 
Якубовского. М.-Л., III том. 1946. стр 26  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    82
But in spite of it, the first castle surrounded by Mongols 
in Kuhistan (Girdkuh) resisted for 20 years and was 
occupied during the age of Abaga khan (1265-1282).  
Hulegu khan used Genghis khan’s principle when 
conquered Ismailis – killed everybody who resisted and 
showed mercy to everybody who surrendered. But then the 
ruler changed his principle. He ordered his fighters to kill 
everybody without exception. Almost everybody was killed 
in the country in several years. Mongols killed Jalaluddin, 
Aladdin and Ruknaddin when occupied this region.  
After long negotiations, Ismailis’ last ruler Ruknaddin 
Khurshah ibn Aladdin ibn Jalaluddin (1255-1257) emptied 
about fifty castles including the Alamut castle for Mongols. 
Nasiraddin Tusi and other wise persons acted as mediators 
in this process.  
The historian of middle ages Juvayni mentioned that, 
occupation of the Alamut castle hadn’t been realized as 
Mongols expected. Ruknaddin destroyed about 40 castles 
according to Mongols’ instructions, but defenders of the 
Alamut castle, who could repulse first attack of Mongols, 
didn’t surrender even when Hulegu khan’s troops 
approached the castle’s walls. Mongols sent Ruknaddin to 
defenders to make them to surrender. But he couldn’t 
achieve success. The castle’s commandant Mugaddam was 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    83
a very stubborn man and didn’t want to surrender. Hulegu 
khan ordered the prince Bagata to surround the castle with 
his troops and went to Lamasar. Mongols attacked Alamut 
during three days under the leadership of the prince, but 
failed and were obliged to go back. Then defenders started 
negotiations on surrendering.  
Lyudmila Stroeva wrote about occupation of the Alamut 
castle in “Ismailis in Iran in XI-XIII centuries”. 
“Defenders of the Alamut castle sent Ruknaddin to 
Hulegu khan as a mediator for surrendering. So khan sent 
him to the castle. He allowed defenders to take whatever 
they can from the castle during three days. Hulegu khan 
allowed Ruknaddin to climb the tower of the castle. There 
was a rich food stock in the castle. Part of it had remained 
from the age of Hasan ibn Sabbah”.  
Juvayni advised Hulegu khan not to touch the library 
existing there. All historical works of the library were given 
to the historian. Juvayni ordered to keep astronomical 
equipments, Koran, valuable manuscripts and to burn all 
works on Ismailis. But the historian could take some of 
such works.1 
  
                                                 
          1
 Л. В. Строева. Государство Исмаилитов в Иране в XI-XIII вв. 
Москва, «Наука», 1978. стр. 243 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    84
   
                            Hulegu khan and Doguz Hatun.  
               From the manuscript “At-Tavarih” (XIV century) 
 
So, the Alamut castle – the center of Ismailis (till 1090-
1256) was destroyed. 
N. Tusi had written his well-known books when he was 
in prison at the Alamut castle by using valuable works 
existing at the library of the castle. Later the Azerbaijani 
scientist took most works, which were kept at the castle, to 
Maragha library together with Juvayni.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    85
So, Ismailis was conquered as the partner of the Arab 
Caliphate. Hulegu khan had to destroy the Baghdad 
Caliphate or the territory of Saljuk Turks in order to 
maintain safety of Ilkhanids.  
He used to take advices of his viziers and advisers 
before important marches as it has been mentioned above. 
N. Tusi was known as the messenger of peace and his 
advice was more important for Hulegu khan than advices of 
other noblemen. The Azerbaijani scientist had to defend 
Saljuk Turks as he was Turkish by origin. Besides it, he 
knew that, Turks, who lived in Anatolia, were considered 
defenders of İslam. Even Christian rules of Europe had 
organized seven major Crusades against Saljuk Turks in 
order to annihilate Islam according to the Pope’s order. 
Besides it, Turks settled in Anatolia played a role of barrier 
and strong line of defense between the Christian world and 
Ilkhanids in the West. After Hulegu khan invaded Iran and 
Azerbaijan, Turkish cavalrymen and infantrymen began to 
enter Mongolian Armed Forces. But it wasn’t easy for 
Mongols’ khan to win Saljuk Turks. Hulegu khan knew 
that, Turks were courageous, faithful and devoted people 
and never were up in arms against each other. All these 
factors rescued Saljuk Turks. Later Turkish troops of the 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    86
Mongolian Armed Forces had a significant role in 
destruction of the Baghdad Caliphate.  
N. Tusi started construction of Maragha observatory du-
ring that period. If Hulegu khan didn’t trust the scientist’s 
wisdom, wouldn’t permit him to found the observatory.  
Mongols had occupied Azerbaijan during the age of N. 
Tusi. All administrative and cultural places were under the 
control of Mongols. It means that, the Azerbaijani scientist 
and his works also were under their control. N. Tusi was a 
head vizier of Hulegu khan and Abaga khan owing to his 
wise advises. Besides it, he was respected by them for his 
scientific achievements.  
Hulegu khan considered N. Tusi the most skilful 
politician of the country for his reasonable advises and 
outlook. So, the scientist’s advises were more significant 
for Mongols’ ruler than advises of other noblemen. Hulegu 
khan knew that, Tusi’s offers on the authority and 
management were very important. He had analyzed ideas 
of Aristotle, Platoon, Al-Farabi and ibn Sina when worked 
on such issues as the global policy, territorial policy and 
policy of sociability. According to H. B. Bayramov and S. 
M. Bayramov, analyze of the “Policy” of Platoon proved 
that, Tusi had encyclopedic outlook in the field of public-
humanitarian thoughts. He explained his interesting ideas 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    87
with titles “Policy of the country”, “Policy of defense”, 
“Policy of liberality”, and “Policy of people” (chapters of 
“Akhlagi Nasiri” – R. G.). Tusi, who proposed several 
government principles, divided the policy on this field into 
two parts: voluntary (democratic – H. B.) and forcible 
(authoritarian – H. B.) policy.  
Most scientists tried to learn several science branches at 
that time. Especially they paid attention to mathematics, 
astronomy and philosophy. N. Tusi also had learnt several 
science branches very well. The scientist had made very 
interesting discoveries, which bewildered everybody. He is 
the author of hundreds of scientific works on astronomy, 
mathematics, physics, geography, history, philosophy, 
medicine, ethics, logic, musicology, geology and other 
fields of the science. But astronomy and mathematics are 
especially significant in N. Tusi’s activity. He is the author 
of more than twenty investigations carried out in this field. 
Scientific researches and investigations carried out by the 
scientist were very large-scale and passed ahead of all 
previous scientists’ works. His works on mathematics were 
in Arabic, but investigations on astronomy were in Arabic 
and Persian. N. Tusi could become famous in the Near East 
as his works were in several languages.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    88
The most well-known works of the scientist are 
“Shaklul-qita” (“Treaties about the perfect four-side”), 
“Jame ul-hesab” (“Collection of Counts”), “Measure of 
Circle”, “Tahriru Uglidis” (“Recension of Euclid’s 
Elements”).  
“Zij-i Ilkhani” (“Astronomical tables of Ilkhanids”), 
which consists of four parts, made the scientist popular all 
over the world. N. Tusi completed most of his scientific 
works after the observatory was built. It proves that, the 
scientist hadn’t wasted his time in vain when learned 
several branches. He used to say that, people shouldn’t 
waste their times in vain. Tusi thought that, everybody had 
to dedicate his life to the development of life.  
Scientific results got by N. Tusi have spread widely and 
several science branches have been improved owing to 
them. Hulegu khan was constantly informed about the 
scientist’s works while he was working on them. As the 
Azerbaijani scientist was very famous at that time, Abaga 
khan appointed him head vizier when came to the throne 
after Hulegu khan’s death (1265). N. Tusi distinguished 
himself for his reasonable advises. The ruler trusted him 
even in the hardest situations.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    89
I want to emphasize two paragraphs of the chapter 
“Muhammad Nasiraddin Tusi” of the book “Remarkable 
personalities of Azerbaijan” written by Chingiz Gajar:  
“Most modern researchers think that, Nasiraddin Tusi 
was only a mathematician. His works have played a 
significant role in development of geometry and 
trigonometry in the East and Europe. Euclid’s “Tahriru 
Uglidis” published in Rome in 1594 in Arabic and Latin 
had an important role in spreading Tusi’s ideas in Europe. 
“Treatise on complete quadrilateral”, which consists of 
five books, is known for its significance in development of 
trigonometry in Europe. Trigonometry is analyzed as an 
independent science branch in this work. The treatise has 
been translated into English, Russian and French.  
The method of finding root of all degrees and Binomial 
formula are the most known discoveries of Nasiraddin Tusi 
made in the field of algebra. Besides it, scientist’s works on 
history, mineralogy, physics, music and astronomy are also 
noteworthy.  
Among them are “History of Baghdad”, “Treatise on 
reflection and refraction of the light”, “Euclid’s optics”, 
“Treatise on investigation of the rainbow”, “Book about 
precious stones”, “Treatise on public finance”, “Selection 
of lucky days” (astrology) and others.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    90
Most works of Nasiraddin Tusi are still waiting their 
researchers. They may be met in museums and libraries of 
Baku, Paris, Florence, Cairo, Istanbul, Moscow, St. Peters-
burg and Kazan.1 
A number of the scientist’s works haven’t been 
discovered yet and are kept in state and personal libraries 
and manuscripts funds of the world. Probably, some of 
scientific works written in Maragha observatory are kept in 
different administrative buildings of Tabriz, Tehran, Peking 
and Nanking as works of other authors. One day all of his 
works will be discovered and mankind will estimate his 
services as necessary.    
N. Tusi’s important scientific works were always kept in 
most countries’ museums and libraries. But they haven’t 
been presented to readers properly. Some scientists have 
analyzed his works, but they have kept the author’s name 
secret. One of them was well-known Italian geographer 
Paolo Toscanelli. He had found “Zij-i Ilkhani”, used it and 
tried to keep the source secret. Later I’ll give detailed 
information about it. But now I want to summarize 
information about N. Tusi.  
                                                 
     
1
 Ç. Qacar. Qədim və orta əsrlər Azərbaycanın görkəmli şəxsiyyətləri. 
Bakı, “Nicat”, 1997. səh. 124 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    91
N. Tusi used to think about development of astronomy 
in Azerbaijan and building of the observatory since his 
early years. He needed powerful, influential and rich 
sponsor for realization of his ideas. The scientist could find 
such sponsor after half-century. It was mighty Hulegu 
khan. N. Tusi got his permission and started works on the 
observatory as soon as Baghdad was occupied. He found 
place for the building, prepared astronomical equipments, 
brought valuable books for the library of the observatory 
from different cities and invited scientists from different 
countries of the world for carrying out investigations in the 
observatory for a period of less than a year. N. Tusi wrote 
about it in “Zij-i İlkhani”: “Hulegu khan demanded to 
invite scientists for carrying out astronomical observations: 
Muayyidaddin Ordy from Damascus, Fakhraddin Maraghai 
from Mosul, Fakhraddin Ikhlatini from Tiflis and 
Najmaddin Dabirani from Qazvin”. 
According to other sources, well-known scientists 
Gutbaddin Shirazi, Shamsaddin Shirvani, Jamaluddin iz-
Zeydi Bukhari, Fao Mun-Chi and others also worked in 
Maragha observatory. They improved their knowledge by 
means of N. Tusi besides working in Maragha observatory. 
Every employee of the observatory could work indepen-
dently as the most skilful and experienced scientist after 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    92
leaving the observatory, which resembled an education 
center, and returning their countries.  
According to the remarkable politician and historian of 
Azerbaijan Rashidaddin, Jamaluddin also had to found an 
observatory in Peking. But he wasn’t able to fulfil this task. 
He could complete the task after coming to Maragha 
together with the Chinese scientist Fao Mun-Chi, taking 
Tusi’s advises and obtaining sketches of equipments, which 
were necessary for the observatory.  
Chingiz Gajar wrote about it: “One of the most 
remarkable scientists of Azerbaijan Nasiraddin Tusi was 
appointed advisor of Hulegu khan. Nasiraddin’s fame had 
reached Peking even before this event and he was invited to 
the capital of the empire for construction of the 
observatory, which was planned as a perfect education 
center. But Tusi had rejected that invitation and convinced 
Hulegu khan of the importance of construction of the 
observatory in the capital of Ilkhanids – Maragha”.1  
As Hulegu khan’s activity is very interesting for most 
researchers, its investigation is worthy of note.  
He was one of beloved grandsons of Genghis khan. The 
most favourite entertainments of Hulegu, who preferred 
                                                 
       
  
 1
 Ç. Qacar. Qədim və orta əslər Azərbaycanın görkəmli şəxsiyyətləri. 
Bakı, “Nicat”, 1997. səh. 129 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    93
nomad’s life, were hunting and organization of grandiose 
banquets. He was interested in beautiful things. He had 
learned military science and used it successfully.  
According to Rashidaddin, Hulegu khan loved science 
very much, respected scientists and benefited by their 
knowledge.  
Hulegu khan was courageous, stern and cruel, besides it, 
liked toadies very much… He was kind-hearted for his 
friends and merciless for enemies and he was greedy for 
wealth.1 
Hulegu khan was brother of the ruler of Chine – 
Khubilay khan. The influential and mighty ruler respected 
him very much. Tusi knew that, Khubilay khan wouldn’t 
reject his brother and was sure that, Hulegu khan was able 
to get his brother’s permission for construction of the 
observatory in Azerbaijan. It was necessary to invite 
experts from Chine to Azerbaijan before getting correspon-
ding permission. Young scientist Fao Mun-Chi was invited 
to Azerbaijan according to the request of Hulegu khan.  
N. Tusi played a role of professional diplomatist in this 
business. Though the ruler of the great empire (Yuan) – 
Khubilay khan wanted to found an observatory in Chine, it 
                                                 
             1 
Л. В. Строева. Государство Исмаилитов в Иране в XI-XIII вв. 
Москва, «Наука», 1978. стр. 243 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    94
was built in Azerbaijan. A large sum of money was needed 
for construction of the observatory and its future was 
unknown. The science center built in the empire had to 
develop astronomy and Khubilay khan knew it. He wanted 
to build another observatory in Chine with 20 thousand 
dinars given by Hulegu khan after Maragha observatory 
was completed and to invite the most experienced experts 
from Azerbaijan for this purpose. Khubilay khan knew that, 
skilful experts would be prepared in Maragha observatory 
for development of astronomy, mathematics, geometry and 
geography. So, experts invited from Azerbaijan would 
carry out main part of works, which had to be carried out in 
the observatory of Chine. Surely, graduators of N. Tusi’s 
school were able to work in any part of the world.  
Hulegu khan conquered all territories of Azerbaijan and 
declared himself the ruler of this country in 1256. After it, 
he appointed the genius scientist N. Tusi his advisor.  
N. Tusi was born on February 18, 1201 in the settlement 
Bahar of the city Hamadan. He used the pseudonym “Tusi” 
as had got his education in the village Tus of the province 
Khorasan. He got his primary education by means of his 
father and secondary education by means of well-known 
scientists of XIII century. The student of Sarkhas – the 
student of well-known Azerbaijani philosopher Bahmanyar, 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    95
who was the student of Abu Ali ibn Sina, also was Tusi’s 
teacher.  
They say that, Nasiraddin had a phenomenal memory, 
used to analyze everything he read and heard, to accept 
positive ideas and reject negative ones since his early years. 
He liked to make new riddles, theorems, devices and 
equipments. He was interested in difficult scientific 
problems… 
Tusi was famous as a genius mathematician all over the 
world. His philosophical, public-political and juridical 
ideas are very interesting. Abaga khan (1265-1282) appoin-
ted N. Tusi his vizier after he came to the throne in 1265 
after the death of Hulegu khan. The scientist, who was a 
vizier of Ilkhanids for 9 years – till the end of his life could 
put several ideas on the “state” and “society” forward.1 
Tusi had read and analyzed plenty of books since his 
early years. He was always respected by influential 
personalities of Azerbaijan and his researches carried out in 
different fields had made him famous all over the world. 
N. Tusi had learned several sciences since his childhood. 
The science, literature, art and culture had developed highly 
at that time. Tusi had learned several languages and several 
                                                 
        
1
 Azərbaycan Beynəlxalq Universiteti. Nəsirəddin Tusinin 800 illik 
yubileyinə həsr edilmiş Respublika konfransının materialları. Bakı, 2001. 
Professor  İ. M. Zeynalovun məruzəsi, səh. 270-271 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    96
science branches in order to analyze works of well-known 
scientists of the ancient time and early middle ages.  
Azerbaijan was famous for its remarkable personalities 
known in the Near East as Muhammad Babakuhi Bakuvi, 
Shahabuddin Abu Hafs Suhrawardi, Qatran Tabrizi, Ali 
Khatib Tabrizi, Afzaladdin Khagani Shirvani, Omar ibn 
Osman Kafiaddin Shirvani, Ajami Nakhchivani, Mahmud 
Zanjani, Sheikh Nizami Ganjavi, Mahsati Ganjavi etc. 
during the age of N. Tusi. Hulegu khan had also heard 
about these people as the science and culture were 
important for him. N. Tusi was the most comprehensively 
developed representative of Azerbaijan and could amaze 
everybody with his knowledge. Hulegu khan trusted him 
even in the hardest situations. Actually, the scientist’s 
advises were very reasonable. Owing to one of his advises, 
the great empire was razed to the ground and global 
changes occurred in the history.  
Any state wasn’t founded after the Baghdad Caliphate 
disintegrated (1258), but its territory was appropriated by 
Ilkhanids. Ilkhanids’ treasury of the science and culture 
was opened for scientists of other regions. N. Tusi had an 
irreplaceable role in this historical process.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    97
The ruler, who wanted to govern the state in peace, 
ordered Tusi to write a book about the state structure and 
finance system. Some issues of that book are still topical. 
Muhammad Nasiraddin Tusi wrote about unemployment 
of youth: “They found jobs for healthy and prompt people 
who were not occupied with agriculture, trade, juridical 
affairs etc. Taught them to use weapons and called them to 
the army. Taught some of them to write and read. So, 
everybody was drawn into the corresponding job”.  
…Tusi advised the ruler to pay enough wages to state 
servants and officials. He wrote: “Then state servants 
wouldn’t appropriate state’s property”.1  
Besides it, I want to mention that, Hulegu khan had 
established Ilkhanids, which included Iran, Azerbaijan, 
Georgia, Iraq, Small Asia till the Kizil Irmak river, 
Turkmenistan and Afghanistan. The Baghdad Caliphate, 
which was considered powerful and rich state of the region, 
had been destroyed completely. Saljuk Turks were busy 
with appropriation of lands of the Byzantine Empire. 
Hulegu khan, who had founded his residence in Azerbaijan, 
gave up the occupation policy and spent the rest of his life 
for governing his state.   
                                                 
            1
 Azərbaycan Beynəlxalq Universiteti. Nəsirəddin Tusinin 800 illik 
yubileyinə həsr edilmiş Respublika konfransının materialları. Bakı, 2001. 
Professor M. N. Seyidovun məruzəsi, səh. 210 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    98
Turkish fighters attacked Baghdad first of all. After 
them, Mongol fighters brought all streets of the largest city 
of the Near East under their control and plundered the most 
grandiose buildings. Baghdad became ruins. N. Tusi, who 
was accompanying Hulegu khan during that march, could 
prevent death of many scientists, old men, women and 
children. The scientist rescued thousands of innocent 
people and this event went down in history.  
But some politicians described occupation of Baghdad 
as a brutal execution: “Hulegu went to the caliph of 
Baghdad – Abbasi Mustamid, but struggle lasted in 
Baghdad, bloody clashes occurred often etc. 
His (Hulegu khan’s – R. D.) commander Bagu occupied 
Baghdad in February of 1258. The slaughter lasted for 40 
days: towers, gates were destroyed, besides it, magnificent 
buildings and scientific collections were burned… So, 
Abbasids’ rule, which had lasted for 500 years, was ended”.  
It seems that, K. Marks wanted to exaggerate occupation 
of Baghdad. But the reality was different. Though Mongols 
made great destructions and slaughters in the city, later 
Hulegu khan could liquidate chaos in the city in accordance 
with advises of N. Tusi and Juvaini and brought the 
situation under his control.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    99
Some historians write that, occupation of Baghdad was 
related with N. Tusi’s desire to take vengeance on his 
enemies. They say that, 20-years imprisonment of the 
scientist at the Alamut castle was fault of the caliph of 
Baghdad. It is said that, N. Tusi had sent an ode to the 
caliph of Baghdad when he was in Kuhistan. It was 
received by supporters of the caliph’s vizier ibn Alqam. 
After reading the ode, vizier thought that N. Tusi was a 
dangerous opponent and ordered to arrest him.  
Above mentioned version was invented by historians of 
Islam in order not to soil the name of the caliph of Baghdad 
– Mustesim. But in spite of all these, N. Tusi wasn’t furious 
at Nasiraddin Mohtasham and ibn Alqam. Nevertheless, 
everybody knew that, the Azerbaijani scientist was 
respected by Hulegu khan for his wisdom.  
It has been proved that, N. Tusi was humanist and 
merciful person. He never desired to revenge. Following 
historical event proves it: 
The caliph’s vizier ibn Hajib also was hiding when 
Mongols occupied Baghdad. N. Tusi had come to Baghdad 
in order to present his work on “Ahli beyt” to the caliph 
when he was young. The vizier looked through the book 
and threw it in the River Dajla.1   
                                                 
      1
 A. Məmmədov. Hökm və hikmət. Bakı, “Qafqaz-LTD”, 2002. səh.158 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    100
N. Tusi’s friends advised him to throw ibn Hajib in the 
river as he did it with the book. But, the scientist bore him 
no malice.  
N. Tusi’s character was the same when he was in prison 
and at the palace of Hulegu khan. It is already known that, 
he could rescue thousands of people during occupation of 
Baghdad and among them were a lot of remarkable 
persons. People, who had exposed to repressions for their 
political thoughts, mostly asked N. Tusi’s help. And the 
scientist asked Hulegu khan’s support in his turn.  
According to the history, ambassadors going to Chine 
and Mongolia from European countries used “Silk way”, 
which passed through several countries of Asia. Part of the 
“Silk way” passed through Azerbaijan. There is no doubt 
that, ambassadors could get acquainted with Azerbaijan’s 
culture, literature, art, customs, science, policy and 
historical personalities when they were in this country.  
So, they heard a lot about N. Tusi, who was famous in 
Azerbaijan and Near East in the middle of XIII century for 
his character and scientific achievements.  
There is no doubt that, N. Tusi’s fame had spread in 
Europe. Experts of astronomy, mathematics, geometry, 
geography and history were especially interested in his 
activity.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    101
Most of his colleagues knew him as the philosopher and 
scientist. Representatives of the ancient Greek philosophy – 
Fales, Platoon, Aristotle and philosophers of the middle 
ages M. Al-Ghazali, Bahmanyar, Al-Farabi, Al-Biruni, ibn 
Sina had a significant role in formation of philosophical 
ideas and ethnic thoughts of the scientist. Arab historian 
and sociologist of the middle ages ibn Khaldun mentioned 
that, N. Tusi was ibn Sina’s follower. 
Tusi understood death of the matter as its replacement at 
the result of changes in its form and features as previous 
peripateticians.   
“People could get an opportunity to get acquainted with 
Tusi’s ideas owing to this philosophical work written in 
Azerbaijani (“Akhlagi Nasiri” – R. D.). The scale, logical 
basis and structural analyze of ideas proved that it was 
humanist thinker’s conception on humanity”.   
There is no doubt that, the author of above mentioned 
ideas knew several science branches. But unfortunately, his 
scientific heritage hasn’t been investigated enough. So, 
some works of the scientist including his theory on the 
meridian of America haven’t been learned yet. He had 
written that, the prime meridian started on Haldat Islands.  
 
 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    102
Construction of the immense observatory  
                    in Maragha  
 
It should be certainly mentioned that, any state leader 
didn’t want to build an observatory in Azerbaijan then. But 
the largest observatory of the world was built here in 
accordance with Nasiraddin Tusi’s personal initiative. He 
could get permission of the ruler for construction of the 
science center when he was in Baghdad. Nasiraddin Tusi 
convinced Hulegu khan of the importance of mentioned 
science center.  
A lot of money was needed for construction of the 
observatory. At first this business didn’t seem expedient. 
But N. Tusi could prove that, its result would be very 
useful.  
Perhaps, the scientist could explain it to Hulegu khan in 
a very easy way. Thunder, lightning, wind, thunderstorm, 
heavy showers, streams, aridity, movements of celestial 
bodies and their collision with the Earth were interesting 
for every ruler. They could win battles more easily if had 
information about all these factors.  
The scientist didn’t seek his own benefit only. He did his 
best for his colleagues’ welfare too.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    103
N. Tusi was very active in organization of publishing of 
books on science and economy. Lots of valuable stones 
brought from Baghdad and Alamut castle were kept in the 
treasury in Shahi Island located on the Lake Urmia. It was 
necessary to register those valuable stones, so the ruler 
asked N. Tusi to write a work about properties of valuable 
stones and the scientist wrote initial and brief version of 
“Javahirname” (Mineral Cures) during a short time. 
Whole part of the work is known by the name 
“Trangusnameyi İlkhani”. There are descriptions of 23 
minerals, 2 bones and 3 grass kinds of economical and 
medical importance in “Javahirname”, which has a 
significant role in the history of Azerbaijani art.  
Hulegu khan had taken possession of great trophy when 
he occupied Baghdad. N. Tusi didn’t waste the opportunity 
and could make the ruler to pay salaries to all scientists, 
who had participated in construction of the observatory and 
worked there. Those salaries were paid with money 
collected by means of taxes according to the initiative of 
the scientist. N. Tusi made great efforts in order to improve 
welfare of all scientists in Azerbaijan.  
N. Tusi could get permission of the ruler for construc-
tion of the observatory as the scientist had given useful 
advises for occupation of Baghdad. He knew that, Hulegu 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    104
khan would take possession of Abbasids’ great trophy after 
occupation of Baghdad.  
The scientist could convince the ruler of the convenience 
of Maragha – one of ancient towns of Azerbaijan for 
construction of the observatory. As the town was located at 
a high position, it was easy to observe celestial bodies 
there.  
N. Tusi had sent valuable books to Maragha when he 
was in Baghdad. He tried to find remarkable and well-
known scientists.  
Construction of Maragha observatory was started in 
1259 on the slope of the hill located in the west of the town. 
Nasiraddin Tusi also participated in projection of the 
building and installation of astronomical equipments. 
Skilful architects were invited to Maragha for construction 
of the observatory. N. Tusi trusted Muayyidaddin Ordy, 
who was invited from Damascus, very much. N. Tusi 
installed five new and five old astronomical equipments in 
the observatory together with the remarkable astronomer 
and constructor M. Ordy. New equipments were prepared 
by scientists. Besides it, globes of the Earth and Sky were 
also prepared in Maragha observatory for solution of some 
astronomical problems.  
Let’s speak about the architecture of the observatory: 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    105
16 main and subsidiary buildings were also built there. 
Seven of them were round. Main tower of the observatory 
was in front of buildings. The width of the round tower was 
22 meters. Main cabinets of astronomers and 
mathematicians were in this tower. Tusi, Ordy, Fao Mun-
Chi and Gutbaddin Shirazi spent all of their times there and 
observed stars and other celestial bodies. This observatory 
was considered one of the most important science centers. 
It hadn’t analogue in any region of the East till the middle 
of XIII century. Foreign representatives, especially Mongol 
representatives of Chine and Middle Asia were amazed 
when they saw the observatory.  
Equipments of the observatory were in the field with 350 
meters length and 150 meters width located on the hill. 
Equipments used for observation of celestial bodies were 
installed in main buildings. There were religious schools, 
libraries, workshops of machine-building, metal-casting 
etc. including scientists’ cabinets. A mosque was also built 
in the mentioned field. Maragha observatory would support 
activity of wise people all over the world according to N. 
Tusi’s project. He had told to Hulegu khan that, the 
observatory would be open for all foreign scientists as soon 
as its construction would be completed. Though there were 
wars and conflicts, astronomy, mathematics, geometry and 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    106
geography had to be developed in all countries of the 
world. The scientist thought that, every ruler needed wise 
persons and development of the science instead of wars.  
It is known that, there was another observatory in 
Azerbaijan before construction of Maragha observatory. E 
Mehraliyev wrote according historical documents: “He 
(Kafiaddin Omar – R. D.) established an observatory in the 
upper part of Shamakhi and invited Abdulkerim Shirvani, 
Falaki Shirvani and other astronomers there”.1  
He supported geocentric system in the science. 
Maragha is located at 460 16/ geographic longitude and 
370 23/ geographic latitude and it is one of the most 
splendid places of Azerbaijan. Especially foreigners liked 
this town. One of them was well-known traveler V. 
Shipchinsky. He wrote about Maragha: “It smelled 
blossomed wild olive-trees even several kilometers away 
from the town. Maragha is located at 35 kilometers away 
from the eastern coast of the Lake Urmia and on the height 
of 1613 meters from the ocean’s surface. It is a very old 
town: it was attacked by Saljugis in 1029 and was 
destroyed by them…” 
There are marble deposits in Dashkasan located around 
Maragha and marbles brought from there were used in 
                                                 
          1
 E. Mehraliyev. Şirvanilər. Bakı, 1996. səh. 20-21 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    107
construction of the observatory. There are plenty of Narzan 
mineral water springs in southern and eastern bottoms of 
mountains located around the town. The weather is very 
pure owing to the Lake Rezayya located around Maragha. 
So, Maragha is convenient for astronomical observations. 
Nasiraddin Tusi had been in all regions of Azerbaijan in 
order to find convenient place for the observatory and at 
last chose Maragha.  
Scientists were invited to Maragha from different 
countries and cities during the construction process. 
Everybody worked intensively. Besides local students, 
foreign students also studied there. Tusi tried to develop 
Maragha as cultural, art and scientific-educational centers 
as Athens, Rome, and Alexandria. There were enough 
necessary opportunities in the capital of Azerbaijan for it: 
first, Azerbaijan was becoming powerful state, second: his 
rulers were mighty leaders of their age. Nobody could dare 
to occupy such country. In a word, there were great 
perspectives for development of all science branches in 
Azerbaijan.1  
The observation was built in 12 years and began to be 
used in 1271. There were all necessary facilities for 
                                                 
        
1
 R. Qasımov. Xristofor Kolumb, Nəsirəddin Tusi və Amerika 
qitəsinin həqiqi kəşfi. Bakı, “Çaşıoğlu”, 2002. səh. 72 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    108
scientists’ works in Maragha. There were a lot of 
equipments in the observatory. N. Tusi – the founder of the 
observation allowed to use those equipments in foreign 
countries too. The ruler of Azerbaijan Abaga khan was 
satisfied with works carried out in the observatory and tried 
to help experts, who worked there. The ruler’s kindness and 
benevolence pleased everybody. 
Both rulers of Ilkhanids Hulegu khan and Abaga khan 
had read “Akhlagi Nasiri” written by N. Tusi. That’s why 
they accepted the scientist’s advices and admonitions 
without doubt.  
N. Tusi could establish medieval academy in the 
observatory. If Mongols didn’t cause a scare in European 
countries, students of those countries would come to 
Azerbaijan in order to get education. Then Maragha 
observatory would be well-known in European countries 
too. The scientist had made great efforts for this purpose. 
The observatory wasn’t built in Maragha accidentally. 
Nasiraddin Tusi knew that, Azerbaijan was situated on the 
“Silk way”, on the point of intersection of different trade 
ways and in the place of the strategic importance. The 
country was within Ilkhanids and far-sighted scientist 
assumed that it would be weakened by other states in 100-
150 years. That’s why he established the observatory in 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    109
Maragha, but not in large cities as Tabriz, Isfahan and 
Baghdad, which were within Ilkhanids. He knew that 
Maragha was the capital of Azerbaijan, but it might escape 
from great destructions unlike other cities of the strategic 
importance during future bloody and destructive wars, so, 
the observatory could be saved for future generations. 
There weren’t large fortifications, castles and towers in 
Maragha. Actually, later, capital of Azerbaijan was moved 
from Maragha to Tabriz.  
The observatory established by N. Tusi had passed 
ahead of all well-known observatories of the East for its 
structure, scale and scientific investigations carried out 
there. It was considered academy of astronomy, geography 
and mathematics for scientists of the world.  
It was important to establish astronomical research 
institute carrying out intensive and exact observations for 
determination of most main astronomical quantities for 
solution of several problems.  
One of such quantities was an annual precession dose. It 
is known that, the axis of rotation may change its direction 
at the result of impact of the gravitation of the Moon and 
Earth on the equatorial part of the Earth. Some changes 
occur on coordinates of stars at the result of the gravitation 
the Moon, Sun and planets. It was necessary to know 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    110
elements of lunar and solar movements and eclipses in 
order to prognosticate lunar and solar eclipses and to 
prepare movement tables of the Moon and Sun.  
Several valuable works were written about different 
science branches under the leadership of N. Tusi. Main 
elements of geocentric orbits of planets and their daily 
movements were described in “Zij-i Ilkhani”. “Zij-i 
Ilkhani” was considered unique work in the field of 
astronomy for several centuries. Unfortunately, the work 
wasn’t translated and spread in the world then. But some 
scientists, who were interested in the book, could read it 
with the help of translators.  
Nasiraddin Tusi wrote in the introduction of “Zij-i 
Ilkhani”: “Hipparchus’s observations were considered 
most productive works before us. More than 1400 years 
have passed since that time. 285 years after Hipparchus, 
observations of Ptolemy became popular. His observations 
were continued in Baghdad during the age of the caliph 
Mamun and more than 430 years have passed since that 
time. Observations of Hakami and ibn Al-Allama carried 
out 250 years ago were similar to our observations”. 
As it was mentioned above, some scientists write that, 
Paolo Toscanelli had used N. Tusi’s table of geographic 
coordinates and his map when he made his well-known 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    111
map in 1474. The Florentine cosmographer had noted on 
his map that, it was possible to go to India from Europe by 
crossing the Atlantic Ocean in the West. It proves that, 
progressive-minded people of that time believed that, the 
Earth was spherical and they noted this fact in their 
materials, maps and investigation works though there were 
a lot of people, who tried to impede them.  
N. Tusi could prepare broad and pithy reports on stars. 
Those reports mainly consisted of coordinates of main 
stars. He had determined the prime meridian at 100 towards 
the west of the known meridian unlike Abu Raihan Al-
Biruni and mentioned that there was a very large territory 
in that part of the Earth, which was unknown for the Old 
World. This conclusion has a very simple explanation. 
Usually geographers and cartographers of middle ages 
wrote that the prime meridian passed through the beginning 
or the end of the continent, large island and peninsula.  
As it has been proved that, P. Toscanelli had used the 
map and reports of the Azerbaijani scientist, I have come to 
the conclusion that, Christopher Columbus had also used 
“Zij-i Ilkhani” and N. Tusi’s map, but he preferred to keep 
it secret. 
  
 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    112
            Maragha observatory and its scientists 
 
According to the remarkable Azerbaijani scientist 
Rashidaddin, more than 100 scientists and other employees 
worked in Maragha observatory. Most of them were N. 
Tusi’s students. Later they became well-known scientists of 
their countries and got jobs in rulers’ palaces. Even some of 
them tried to get their rulers’ permissions for construction 
of similar observations in their countries. But as realization 
of such projects required plenty of money, they couldn’t 
succeed. Names of some well-known and influential 
experts of Maragha observatory have been determined after 
investigation of several sources: 
 
1. Muhammad Nasiraddin Tusi 
2. Mahmud Gutbaddin Shirazi   
3. Gregory Abul Faraj   
4. Muayyidaddin Ordy 
5. Najmaddin Dabirani  
6. Fakhraddin Ikhlati  
7. Fakhraddin Ahmad At-Tusi Al-Maraghai  
8. Mahiaddin Maghribi  
9. Sheikh Kamal  
10. Damghanli Mahmud Najmaddin Usturlabi  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    113
11. Husamaddin Shami  
12. Sadraddin Nasir Tusi  
13. Najmaddin Katib  
14. Fao Mun-Chi  
15. Isa Mongol 
16. Tagiaddin Ali Hashshashi  
17. Nafisaddin ben Tolayib  
18. Nasrani Safiaddin  
19. Muhammad ben Muayyidaddin Ordy 
20. Jamaluddin az Zaidi Bukhari  
21. Mohiaddin Kamal  
22. Abi Shukr Maghribi  
23. Ibn Al-Fuvati  
24. Nizamaddin Al-Naysaburi  
25. Asiladdin Hasan at-Tusi  
26. Karimaddin Abubakr ibn Mahmud Salmasi  
27. Shamsaddin Shirvani  
28. Mohiaddin As-Shirvani  
 
Some scientists write that, scientists of Maragha and 
other Muslim countries used to copy works of ancient 
Greek scientists. Of course, it is impossible to agree with 
this thought. Scientists of the East had played a significant 
role in improvement of ancient scientific works when their  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    114
   
             Model of Maragha observatory was made by the  
                  Academician M. J. Bulatov (1907-2004) 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    115
copies were created. The Renaissance Culture was 
established in the East before Europe.  
Some scientists describe Renaissance Culture as the 
product of Italy (XIV-XVI centuries) and Europe (XV-XVI 
and XVII centuries) and try to prove that the East was 
always behind the West for its culture. 
According to scientists of the West, culture of Muslim 
countries doesn’t correspond to all main features of the 
Renaissance Culture. But some orientalists of the West 
don’t defend this thought. Well-known orientalist of 
Switzerland Adam Mets named his work devoted to 
investigation of the Islamic culture “Muslim Renaissance” 
and noted that the Islamic culture was older than the 
Western culture…  
Application of the ancient culture developed during 
slavery years in Greece has spread widely in Italy too. The 
East had passed ahead of the West from this point of view, 
humanist philosophy and literature were developed in 
Chine, India and Iran in VIII-XII and in Azerbaijan in XII-
XIII, innovations made by Nasiraddin Tusi in science – 
astronomy, mathematics, mineralogy spread all over the 
world. The ancient culture has been applied in Azerbaijan 
Renaissance as Italian and European Renaissance. 
“Isgandarname” of Nizami Ganjavi and “Akhlagi Nasiri” 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    116
of N. Tusi, especially its 30th chapter may be cited as 
examples. Nizami described Macedonian Isgandar, who 
had established Hellenistic stage of the ancient culture, 
historical personalities connected with him, first of all his 
teacher Arastoo (Aristotle – R. D.) and N. Tusi included 
ancient Greek philosopher Platoon’s admonition to his 
student Aristotle and more than 40 instructive aphorisms 
written by him in “Akhlagi Nasiri”.1 
According to historians, main duties of astronomers of 
the East lived in IX-XIV centuries was to present scientific 
works of ancient astronomers to the community. 
The author of “The role of Maragha observatory in 
development of Islamic astronomy: Scientific revolution 
before Renaissance”, scientist of Columbia University 
(USA) J. Saliba wrote that, such thought about astronomers 
of the East was considered right before 50th centuries of XX 
century. Because scientific works of representatives of 
“Maragha School” established in Maragha (Eastern 
Azerbaijan) in XIII century weren’t known then. The 
scientist mentioned that, results of investigation of the 
activity of “Maragha School” prove that, presentation of 
                                                 
        
1
 Azərbaycan Beynəlxalq Universiteti. Nəsirəddin Tusinin 800 illik 
yubileyinə həsr edilmiş Respublika konfransının materialları. Bakı, 2001. 
Professor Y. A. Qaraməmmədlinin məruzəsi, səh. 267-268 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    117
scientific works of ancient astronomers wasn’t only duty of 
astronomers of the East lived in IX-XIV centuries. 
Besides it, in 1957 American scientist V. Roberts wrote 
that, the Earth model presented by astronomers of the East 
stimulated Copernicus’s model.  
Authors of many articles about “Maragha revolution” 
wrote that, scientific revolution was made by Copernicus 
owing to activities of scientists of Maragha. There is no 
doubt that, Copernicus had learned scientific heritage of 
Maragha observatory. It should be mentioned that, the 
scientist of Poland was considered “the most talented 
representative” of Maragha observatory.  
N. Tusi is the author of many books and tractates about 
astronomy: “Zij-i Ilkhani”, “Tahriru Al-Majisti”, “The 
tractate about astrolabe”, “Memories about astronomy”, 
“Thirty chapters” etc.  
The Academician F. Magsudov and Professor H. 
Mammadbayli wrote about “The tractate about astrolabe”: 
“The astrolabe is mobile astronomical equipment. 
Observers can determine geographic coordinates of the 
place they stand on by means of this equipment. This book 
of Tusi had spread widely. Another book of the scientist is 
“Thirty chapters”. His theoretical work about movements 
of planets is named “Memories about astronomy”… 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    118
Nasiraddin Tusi was guided by heliocentric theory of 
planets. The scientist’s astronomical activities didn’t lose 
their significances even after development of Copernicus’s 
heliocentric system plan”.1 
Let’s give some information about several scientists of 
Maragha observatory, which were famous for their 
astronomical researches: 
Their scientific works had spread in Near East and 
South-Eastern Europe and admired experts of different 
fields in a very short time. So, several talented scientists of 
Maragha observatory were known abroad too. Every 
educational center can be proud of such result.  
The head of Shamakhi Astrophysical Observatory – 
Academician Hajibay Sultanov mentioned that, Maragha 
observatory had stimulated development of physics and 
mathematics in Western Europe, Chine, Middle Asia and 
India.  
Mahmud ben Masud Gutbaddin Shirazi (1236-1311) 
was born in Shiraz and spent his youth there. He was a 
student of Nasiraddin Tusi and learned astronomy and 
mathematics. Gutbaddin had worked in Maragha till 1282 
and then was sent to Egypt as the ambassador of Mongols. 
                                                 
       
1
 Ф. Максудов, Г. Дж. Мамедбейли. Мухаммед Насирэддин Туси. 
Баку, «Гянджилик», 1981. стр. 29-30 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    119
He made a map of the Mediterranean Sea and lands located 
around it in Egypt. The scientist is an author of a very 
valuable work – “End of knowledge” written in Arabic 
about astronomy and geography achievements of his time. 
After it he wrote an encyclopedic book by name “Durratul 
taj” (Pearls of the crown).  
Another scientist of Maragha observatory – a Jew, who 
had adopted Christianity, by name Johanna Gregory Abul 
Faraj Bar Hebraeus (1226-1286) was born in the eastern 
part of Anatoly Peninsula. Abul Faraj, who was a bishop in 
Malatya and head churchman in Aleppo, came to Maragha 
in 60th years of XIII century and worked there under the 
leadership of Nasiraddin Tusi. He is the author of the 
valuable work, which includes brief information about 
bases of astronomy and geography and was written in 
Arabic. Abul Faraj became popular in Europe for his book 
“History of dynasties” or “Brief history of states” written 
in Arabic. This work describes lifestyle of multinational 
collective, which worked and lived in Maragha 
observatory.  
The chief engineer and builder of Maragha observatory 
was Muayyidaddin Ordy. There isn’t enough biographical 
information about Ordy. Only two manuscripts of his 
treatise about “Astronomical equipments of Maragha 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    120
observatory” written in Arabic have remained as historical 
documents. They are kept in national libraries of Paris and 
Tehran. The first manuscript was found by the teacher of 
the special school of eastern languages A. Jurden in Paris at 
the beginning of XIX century and was translated into 
French. The book was published in Paris in 1809 and 1810. 
It was translated into Germany in 1811. The book includes 
description of ten astronomical equipments prepared by 
Ordy under the leadership of Nasiraddin Tusi. At the result 
of analysis of information given in Ordy’s tractate, 
researchers came to the conclusion that, equipments of 
Maragha observatory were more perfect than equipments of 
other observatories. It is known that, equipments invented 
by Ordy were used in most observatories of the world. 
Further made astronomical equipments also were improved 
by using Ordy’s equipments.  
Muhammad Ordy worked on preparation of astrono-
mical equipments in the observatory and was the author of 
the most ancient star globe of the world (1279). Positions 
of stars were showed exactly on that globe.  
A rich man had established a museum by name “Picture 
Gallery” in Dresden, Germany in XVI century and the 
globe made of bronze, silver and gold were kept in that 
museum. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    121
Sadraddin Ali Tusi was a leader of the observatory after 
his father’s death. His brother Asiladdin is the author of 
one manuscript of “Zij-i Ilkhani” kept in the national 
library in Paris.  
 
      
                The sky globe of scientists of Maragha.  
                                   Museum of Dresden 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    122
Mahiaddin Maghribi was Spanish Arab. He came to 
Aleppo before construction of the observatory and worked 
in the field of astronomy there. When troops of Hulegu 
khan entered Aleppo, Mahiaddin used his privileges as an 
astronomer. Hulegu khan, who was aware of Nasiraddin 
Tusi’s respect to astronomers, rescued Mahiaddin and sent 
him to Maragha.  
Well-known scientist Fao Mun-Chi had come from 
Chine, Isa had come from Mongolia and Fakhraddin Ikhlati 
had come from Tiflis. Scientists of Maragha observatory 
were of different religions. Besides Muslim scientists, 
Christians, Nasranis and Buddhists also worked in the 
observatory and they were always welcomed there. There 
were Persians, Arabs, Jews, Uzbeks, Chinese, Turks, 
Mongols and others among scientists of Maragha 
observatory besides Azerbaijanis. It turns out that, Maragha 
observatory was multinational cultural center and there was 
a real emancipation there. This factor was one of the most 
advanced features of the observatory.  
The astronomer by name Go Shu-Ching established an 
observatory in Khanbaliq (Peking) in 80th years of XIII 
century. According to “History of Juan dynasty” written in 
Chinese and notes of the Azerbaijani historian Rashidaddin, 
Mongke khan had asked Hulegu khan to send Nasiraddin 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    123
Tusi to Chine for construction of the observatory after he 
was freed at the result of occupation of Hashshashis’ tower. 
But as the Azerbaijani scientist wanted to establish an 
observatory in Azerbaijan, he didn’t go to Chine. So, the 
Chinese astronomer by name Fao Mun-Chi was sent to 
Maragha in order to organize construction of an observa-
tory in Peking. Fao Mun-Chi went to Chine together with 
another astronomer by name Jamaluddin in 1265 after 
gathering enough experiences in Maragha observatory and 
reached Peking after two years.  
Khubilay khan, who paid special attention to the science 
and culture, was the ruler of the great Juan Empire and 
hoped that Chinese experts would be able to build a 
building resembling Maragha observatory in Peking. In 
Peking observatory celestial bodies were observed with 
astronomical equipments brought from Maragha 
observatory (Rotary quadrant and Armillary device). 
Astronomical equipments invented under the leadership of 
N. Tusi were considered the most exact astronomical 
equipments for at least 200-year period. Those equipments 
are still kept in Chine (Peking observatory). 
There were several observatories and science centers in 
the world before construction of Maragha observatory. 
“Tables of Faridaddin” made by Fakhraddin Shirvani at 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    124
“Darul-Uloom” and “Dar Al-Adab” academies in Shirvan 
was popular. Mamun Academy in Central Asia, Alexandria 
observatory in Egypt, Baghdad observatory in Iraq, Rey 
and Isfahan observatories in Iran served astronomy 
properly. Mentioned educational centers stopped their 
activities during next historical processes.  
I want to mention one interesting problem. Ten devices 
and equipments were used in Maragha observatory for 
scientific experiments and observations. Five of those 
devices and equipments were known before the middle of 
XIII century, but other five were invented in Maragha 
observatory under the leadership of N. Tusi. Equipments 
and devices invented in Maragha observatory were used in 
Peking observatory of Chine, Ulugbek’s observatory of 
Samarqand, Tycho Brahe’s observatory of Denmark and 
Jaipur observatory of India established during next years 
and great works were carried out in order to improve those 
equipments. Let’s give some information about mentioned 
observatories.  
 
 
 
 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    125
Application of “Zij-i Ilkhani” in other 
astronomical catalogues 
  
The grandson of Timur Leng, who valued science, cul-
ture and art, – Ulugbek (22.03.1394 – 27.10.1449) estab-
lished a grandiose astronomical observatory in Samarqand 
when he was the ruler of Samarqand. He invited well-
known scientists as Giyasaddin Kashi, Gazi-Zadeh Rumi 
and Ali Kushchi to his observatory in order to develop 
astronomy and mathematics. Giyasaddin Kashi made the 
astronomical catalogue by name “Zij-i Khagan” in 
accordance with “Zij-i Ilkhani”. 
Giyas ad-din, who had learned astronomical equipments 
of Maragha observatory, is the author of the tractate about 
astronomical equipments and interesting works as “The key 
to arithmetic”, “About environment of a circle”, “Chord 
and sinus” and others having a significant role in 
development of mathematics.  
Gazi-Zadeh Rumi was Ulugbek’s teacher and became 
leader of the scientific collective after the death of Giyas 
ad-Din. Ali Kushchi completed even all scientific works 
after the death of Rumi and made “Zij-i Ulugbek” and 
“Zij-i Gurgani” catalogues including information about 
main works of Ulugbek’s observatory.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    126
Ulugbek’s observatory was well-known for its wall 
sextant, which’s radius was 40.04 meters, and astronomical 
catalogue by name “Zij-i Ulugbek”. The wall sextant 
consisted of a quarter-circle as its analogue in Maragha 
observatory. Its scale was between 0 and 90. 
                 
              
                       Ali Kushchi (1402-1474) 
  
Half of the device was under the ground and other part 
of it was on the ground. Special building was built for the 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    127
upper part of the wall sextant. It was three-storeyed 
building and its height was 21 meters. The device was 
placed on the meridian plane. There was a cupola on the 
upper part of the building for observation of the Sun and 
planets.  
One of Uzbek astronomers of XX century Jalalov 
compared “Zij-i Ulugbek” and “Zij-i Ilkhani” and found 
plenty of similarities between them. There was a single 
difference between observation programs described in “Zij-
i Ilkhani” and “Zij-i Ulugbek”: Coordinates of 1018 stars 
had been determined at the result of observations made in 
Ulugbek’s observatory. According to results of investi-
gation of those stars’ coordinates by the American astrono-
mer E. B. Knobel, longitudes of 900 stars and latitudes of 
878 stars were redetermined in Ulugbek’s observatory. It 
was considered high result in the field of astronomy. E. B. 
Knobel wrote: “The star catalogue made in accordance with 
his special observations has an exceptional importance”.  
Well-known French mathematician and astronomer 
Pierre Laplace, who had investigated Ulugbek’s obser-
vatory, wrote: “He (Ulugbek – R. D.) made a star catalogue 
and astronomical tables in the capital of his country 
Samarqand and they were best tables made before Tycho 
Brahe’s observatory”.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    128
The star catalogue “Zij-i Ulugbek” was considered 
detailed and necessary work for development of astronomy, 
improvement of astronomical observations, learning of 
uncommon movements of celestial bodies and their 
structures. But Ulugbek’s observatory had been working 
since the first half of XV century though Maragha 
observatory had been working since the second half of XIII 
century. Maragha observatory was 150 years older than 
Ulugbek’s observatory. Such period is enough for achieve-
ment of important scientific results. Scientific experiments, 
astronomical observations and scientific results of Maragha 
observatory were superior of achieve-ments of all 
observatories built before Tycho Brahe’s observatory. We 
should admit that, astronomers of Samarqand had used 
results of works carried out in Maragha observatory in most 
of their activities. Well-known scientists of Azerbaijan H. 
Mammadbayli, Z. Khalilov and Farajov also approved this 
fact.  
Let’s note values of annual precessions in order to clear 
up this question:  
 
Ptolemy – 36.0 
Al-Battani – 54.4 
Al-Sufi – 55.0 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    129
Nasiraddin – 51.4 
Ulugbek – 51.4  
 
Professor H. Mammadbayli wrote about it: “The table of 
geographic coordinates of 256 cities was made in Maragha 
observatory and it was included in “Zij-i Ilkhani”. Such 
table existed in “Zij-i Ulugbek” too. According to results 
of investigations, that table was copied from “Zij-i 
Ilkhani” to “Zij-i Ulugbek”. Only coordinates of 
Samarqand were redetermined. There were sine and tangent 
charts in “Zij-i Ulugbek” too. But those charts were more 
exact that charts prepared in Maragha observatory. 
Values of those functions were precise to the fourth 
digit. It should be mentioned that, scientific works carried 
out in Maragha observatory had great influence on the 
activity of Samarqand observatory. But each observatory 
had its own scientific activity”.1  
Astronomers of Ulugbek’s observatory used scientific 
works carried out by the remarkable Azerbaijani scientist 
N. Tusi as directives and Maragha observatory was a 
reference point for them.  
 
                                                 
          1
 H. C. Məmmədbəyli. Mühəmməd Nəsirəddin Tusi. Bakı, “Gənclik”, 
1980. səh.148 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    130
     
                             Ulugbek (1394-1449) 
 
In general, scientific-practical works carried out in 
Maragha observatory established by N. Tusi were 
stimulators for astronomical observations of all new 
observatories established in the middle ages and all 
scientific experiments were used there. That’s why 
European astronomers knew structures of astronomical 
equipments invented in Maragha observatory. Several 
rotary quadrants (azimuthal quadrants) and one wall 
quadrant were found in Tycho Brahe’s observatory 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    131
established in Copenhagen. Its semicircle was improved 
and became “Universal” device used in modern astronomy. 
It proves that, Tycho Brahe had sent several scientists to 
Azerbaijan for investigation of the activity of Maragha 
observatory before construction of his observatory in 
Copenhagen. All equipments and devices invented and 
used in Maragha were interesting for all astronomers, 
mathematicians, cartographers and geographers of the 
world. 
Though precisions of observations made in Maragha 
were ideal in comparison with European and Asian 
observatories, observations made by Tycho Brahe at the 
end of XVI century were more precise.  
Jaipur observatory of India was considered well-known 
center of astronomical observations in its country and in the 
south of Asia. Two astronomical catalogues – “Zij-i Shah 
Jahan” and “Zij-i Muhammad Shah” were made in that 
observatory during the age of Shah Jahan (1628-1659) and 
Muhammad Shah (1719-1748). Investigation of mentioned 
catalogues by several scientists proved that, its observation 
program consisted of observation programs of Samarqand 
and Maragha observatories. Some of tables of those 
catalogues consisted of the copy of the table of “Zij-i 
Ilkhani”. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    132
The author of “Zij-i Shah Jahan” – Indian astronomer 
Abu Mulla Farid Dehlvi and the author of “Zij-i 
Muhammad Shah” – great scientist of India Savoie Jay 
Sing had learned activity of N. Tusi and astronomical 
observations made in Maragha observatory when they 
prepared mentioned astronomical catalogues. It should be 
taken into account that, Savoie Jay Sing made his catalogue 
in the middle of XVIII century and almost all astronomers 
of the world used N. Tusi’s work as the source though 500 
years had passed since “Zij-i Ilkhani” was made. All of 
astronomical equipments used in European observatories 
were being improved on those days. Optical equipments 
were being produced. Astronomers of Asian observatories 
preferred to use equipments produced in Europe for their 
astronomical observatories.  
The remarkable statesman of India Javakharlal Nehru 
wrote about Savoie Jay Sing: “Savoie Jay Sing had learned 
development level of the astronomy in Europe before he 
started his observations, he understood that, scientists of the 
East had enough successes in this field and made non-
optical astronomical equipments”. 
N. Tusi had another more valuable work on astronomy 
written before “Zij-i Ilkhani”. He had named that work, 
which was completed in 1235, “Muiniyya” (“Muiniyya fi 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    133
elm alhayya”) in honor of the son of Ismailis’ leader in 
Kuhistan Nasiraddin Mohtasham – Muinaddin Abu As-
Shams. According to N. A. Abdulgasimova, N. Tusi had 
made a lot of changes in  the cinematic  model developed 
by Ptolemy in mentioned work in order to determine 
positions of planets beforehand. Thereafter those changes 
were continued by other Muslim scientists and 
Copernicus… N. Tusi wrote “Hall” in Persian as the 
addition to “Muiniyya” after a while – during occupation 
of Mongols. Cairo and Tehran versions of both works are 
still kept. They played a role of stimulator in writing of 
“Zij-i Ilkhani” and were broadly analyzed by scientists.1 
 As “Muiniyya” is about astronomy, it will be 
interesting to describe all of its four parts together with 
their chapters for readers: 
I part consists of 2 chapters: I chapter includes 
introduction to astronomy and main geometric notions 
necessary for explanation of astronomy and II chapter is 
about several physics problems (especially two types of 
mechanical motion – rectilinear and circular motions). 
II part consists of 14 chapters: they are about structure of 
celestial bodies. 
                                                 
        
1
 Azərbaycan Beynəlxalq Universiteti. Nəsirəddin Tusinin 800 illik 
yubileyinə həsr edilmiş Respublika konfransının materialları. Bakı, 2001. 
Professor N. Əbdülqasımovanın məruzəsi, səh. 375 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    134
    
               Nasiraddin Tusi works on “Zij-i Ilkhani” 
 
III part consists of 12 chapters: they are about 
mathematical geography. 
IV part consists of 6 chapters: they are about problems 
on measurements and distances of celestial bodies. 
The geographical longitude of Mecca was 74010/ (it was 
73010/ in “Zij-i Ilkhani”) and its geographical latitude was 
21040/ in “Muiniyya”. N. Tusi wrote that settled part of the 
Earth consisted of “half of the territory between the equator 
and the North Pole”.1 
                                                 
         
1
 Azərbaycan Beynəlxalq Universiteti. Nəsirəddin Tusinin 800 illik 
yubileyinə həsr edilmiş Respublika konfransının materialları. Bakı, 2001. 
Professor N. Əbdülqasımovanın məruzəsi, səh. 376-377 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    135
N. Tusi realized his dream and established a grandiose 
observatory in one of fascinating places of Azerbaijan – 
Maragha for development of astronomy and mathematics. 
Maragha was situated on the “Silk way”, between the Near 
East and Middle Asia and on the threshold of Europe. It 
had relations with Middle Asia, Near East, Small Asia, 
Balkan, Apennine, Crimean Peninsulas, Egypt, India and 
Chine and those relations were intensified. That’s why N. 
Tusi could gather well-known scientists of different regions 
around himself. 
The astronomy wasn’t developed only in the south of 
Azerbaijan in XIII century. 
…Close scientific and political relations between Rashid 
al-Din Vatvat (the historian of Khwarezm – R. D.), 
Khwarezm-Shah Tekush and Khagani (Afzaladdin Khagani 
Shirvani – R. D.), invitation of the genius poet Zulfugar 
Shirvani to the palace of Khwarezm-Shah Aladdin 
Muhammad at the beginning of XIII century when he was 
20 years old etc. proved that, there were relations between 
Khwarezm and Shirvan in the field of astronomy.1 
It turns out that, most well-known thinkers, poets and 
scientists, who had gone to the Middle Asia from 
                                                 
       
1
 Q. Kəndli-Herisçi. Xaqani Şirvani (həyatı, dövrü, yaradıcılığı). Bakı, 
1988. səh. 21 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    136
Azerbaijan made great efforts in order to learn astronomy. 
The astronomy began to be developed in the north of 
Azerbaijan as other eastern countries. As well-known 
scientist Kafiaddin Omar knew astronomy, he stimulated 
interest of his sons and his nephew Afzaladdin Khagani for 
learning this field. There is no doubt that, as Khagani was 
the representative of influential and well-known kin, he 
was well-educated and interested in astronomy. Kafiaddin 
Omar taught astronomy to the genius Azerbaijani poet and 
thinker Khagani. The poet mentioned it in his poem 
“Praise of uncle”: 
 
      He taught me three branches of science,  
      Also astronomy and every notion…1 
 
Unfortunately, Khagani didn’t use his abilities and 
phenomenal brain for investigation of this field. He might 
be remarkable astronomer of the world.  
Shamsaddin Shirvani was a student of astronomers of 
Shamakhi and experts of Maragha observatory benefited by 
his scientific experiences.  
 
 
                                                 
             1
 Xaqani Şirvani. Seçilmiş əsərləri. Bakı, “Yazıçı”, 1987. səh 87 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    137
          The most grandiose academy of sciences  
                     was located in Maragha 
 
It was possible to prognosticate lunar and solar eclipses 
in accordance with tables prepared in Maragha observatory. 
Most of those tables were distributed among scientists and 
students, who worked in the observatory. Only people of 
certain level were aware of lunar and solar eclipses in 
Azerbaijan unlike other places of Asia and Europe and they 
used to discuss it among themselves. The astronomy and 
astrology were developed in Azerbaijan highly. Maragha 
observatory was one of the most advanced observatories of 
its time. The greatest science academy was in Maragha. 
The most ancient sky globe was made in Azerbaijan 
(Maragha observatory) and it is known by the world 
community. This invention hasn’t any alternative. 
According to some historical sources, there were star and 
earth globes in Maragha observatory. As the scientific 
collective of Maragha observatory had invented star globe 
under the leadership of N. Tusi, the earth globe also might 
be invented in Maragha. N. Tusi knew that, the Earth was 
spherical and he might make an earth globe and divide the 
earth into two hemispheres. Besides it, he knew 
measurements of the Earth. But models made by him 
haven’t remained till today. There are some articles about 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    138
the inventor of the first earth globe. According to historical 
sources, the German geographer, cosmographer and 
traveler of Nurnberg Martin Behaim (1459-1507) made the 
first earth globe in 1492 after returning to Europe from 
expeditions made to coasts of Africa. But N. A. 
Abdulgasimova wrote that, the first earth globe had been 
invented by the Azerbaijani scientist. She wrote: 
“According to manuscripts of scientists, who worked in 
Maragha observatory, Europeans were aware of existence 
of different scientific devices including earth and star 
globes. The first geographic globe was made in 1266 by the 
Azerbaijani scientist Karimaddin Abubakr ibn Mahmud 
Salmasi”.1  
I think that, professional scientists of Maragha 
observatory might make tens of such globes.  
The globe invented by Muhammad Ordy was decorated 
with gold and silver and that model was saved as the 
valuable work of art. This was prescience of the scientist. 
Most experts could declare that the star globe wasn’t made 
in Maragha observatory if it wasn’t kept in the hall 
“Physics-mathematics” of the museum “Picture Gallery” 
in Dresden. Thus, first globes of the world having precise 
                                                 
           1
 Azərbaycan Beynəlxalq Universiteti. Nəsirəddin Tusinin 800 illik 
yubileyinə həsr edilmiş Respublika konfransının materialları. Bakı, 2001. 
Professor N. Ə. Əbdülqasımovanın məruzəsi, səh. 22 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    139
coordinate divisions were made in Azerbaijan. There isn’t 
any information about realization of precise observations 
and existence of exact dancer clocks in Maragha 
observatory. But it is known that, N. Tusi’s third teacher 
Yunus Al-Misri was an inventor of a dancer clock in 
Azerbaijan and some of his students worked in Maragha 
observatory. N. Tusi created a rich library for scientists of 
Maragha observatory using authority of Hulegu khan. 
There were 400 thousand manuscripts at the library. Most 
of manuscripts had been written in Azerbaijan. Maragha 
library was considered one of the greatest libraries of the 
Near East and most of manuscripts, which were kept there, 
had their own histories. Authors of those works were 
genius and wise people.  
A lot of cultural and art monuments, science centers of 
different cities were damaged at the result of attacks of 
Hulegu khan’s troops. But N. Tusi prevented destruction of 
those monuments and works of art, brought valuable works 
to Azerbaijan and maintained their safety. So, mentioned 
library was created in Maragha and about 76 works of N. 
Tusi were kept there. Most of scientists, who worked in the 
observatory, used his works as the scientific source. 
Scientists of Chine, India, Arab countries, Mongolia and 
Europe carried out intensive scientific works in Maragha. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    140
Nobody doubts that N. Tusi was known as a genius and 
phenomenal person. He coped with works of several people 
on his own. The scientist could achieve more unique results 
if used all of his energy for scientific works instead of 
public affairs. But N. Tusi used to spend most of his time 
for public affairs, construction of the observatory, delivery 
of valuable manuscripts there, drawing well-known 
scientists, talented students and pupils into research works 
in Maragha observatory, improving their welfares, 
establishment of education centers in most cities of 
Azerbaijan.  
I have discovered that, N. Tusi’s life and activity were 
similar to lives and activities of two historical figures. They 
are the philosopher Demetrius of Pharia, who lived in 
Athens in ancient times, and skilful politician, author of 
“Politics” Abu Ali Hasan ibn Haja Nizamulmulk, who 
lived in the early middle ages.  
Demetrius went to Alexandria as soon as he was 
banished from Athens. He didn’t know how the ruler of 
Egypt Ptolemy Sotera I would meet him…1  
Ptolemy I, who was predecessor of Macedonian Isgan-
dar in Egypt, was well-known as a commander and writer 
and was an author of the historical work by name “History 
                                                 
            1
 Р. Хаггард. Клеопатра. Баку, «Гянджлик», 1990. стр. 13 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    141
of Isgandar”. Demetrius offered him to establish grandiose 
cultural and art center and to name it Museion – “Temple 
of Muses”. Invitation of scientists, delivery of manuscripts 
and increase of their copies were started after Museion was 
ready and Demetrius of Pharia was appointed leader of the 
academy. 1 
Nizamulmulk was born in 408th year of the Islamic 
calendar (1017-1018) in Noghan district of the Tus pro-
vince and was killed with knife by one of representatives of 
Hasan Sabbah in Sahna settlement of Baghdad in 485th year 
of the Islamic calendar (1092).  
Haja Nizamulmulk Hasan ibn Ali was a vizier of Saljuk 
sultans Alp Arslan (1063-1072) and Malik Shah (1072-
1092) and he carried out important works for development 
of Saljugis’ state, realization of construction works, 
increase of the state’s economic power, development of the 
army, improvement of the science and culture. Almost the 
state was ruled by Nizamulmulk.2  
Besides dealing with public affairs, the scientist worked 
on the foreign policy, rules of religion, supported 
establishment of special religious schools for preparation of 
statesmen and religious figures. Mentioned religious 
                                                 
         
  
 1 
Н. А. Ионина, автор-составитель. Сто великих чудес света. 
Москва, «Вече», 2000. стр. 145 
           2 
BSE, ikinci nəşri, 29 cild, səh. 603 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    142
schools were known as “Nizamiyye” schools. The most 
well-known “Nizamiyye” school was Baghdad school, 
where statesmen, religious figures, astrologers, philoso-
phers, lawyers and poets were prepared… Sadi Shirazi also 
was a graduator of that school.1 
Azerbaijan also was within Saljugis’ state when 
Nizamulmulk was a vizier. So, “Politics” is very important 
source for learning history of Azerbaijan concerning XI 
century. Besides it, this work was used in next centuries 
too. Muhammad Al-Ghazali also had used “Politics” in his 
“Nasihat-al-muluk”…  
“Politics” was first published by the French orientalist 
Sh. Shafer in 1892. Sh. Shafer published French translation 
of “Politics” a year later and biography of Nizamulmulk in 
1897…2 
N. Tusi established rich library and Maragha 
observatory as Demetrius and invited the most well-known 
scientists there. Besides it, he worked as vizier and advisor, 
played a significant role in public affairs, established 
religious school and supported scientists. So, activity of N. 
Tusi was similar to activities of above mentioned persons.  
                                                 
         
   
 1
 Əbu Əli Həsən ibn Əli Xacə Nizamülmülk. Siyasətnamə. R. 
Sultano-vun yazdığı müqəddimədən. Bakı, “Elm”, 1989. səh. 3 
    
   
    
 
2 
Əbu Əli Həsən ibn Əli Xacə Nizamülmülk. Siyasətnamə. N. 
Məmmədzadənin əlavəsi. Bakı, “Elm”, 1989. səh. 27 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    143
Maragha observatory was considered the greatest 
academy of sciences of the world as it was the first diversi-
fied science center of the East. It had passed ahead of 
“Beytul hukema” of Baghdad, “Mamun Academy” of 
Urgenj and other science centers of the world for astrono-
mical observations, scientific investigations and researches, 
invention of astronomical equipments, achievement of 
scientific results, education programs, number of scientists 
and students and written scientific works. Though the 
observatory was established for astronomical observations, 
history, geography, geometry, botany, philosophy, minera-
logy, physics, chemistry, medicine, astrology, optics, 
literature, aesthetics and even musicology also were learned 
there besides astronomy and mathematics. Well-known 
experts were prepared in each field. It is known that, more 
than hundred scientists worked under the leadership of N. 
Tusi. After taking into consideration above mentioned facts 
we may say that, Maragha observatory was the greatest 
academy of sciences of the world.  
The academician Magsud Aliyev wrote about Maragha 
observatory and its founder N. Tusi: “Nasiraddin Tusi 
established National Academy of Sciences in Maragha 
observatory in XIII century. The astronomy, different 
branches of astronomy – machine-building, observational 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    144
equipments, mathematics, geography, mineralogy, law, 
physical geography, nature study, social sciences, philo-
sophy, musicology, geometry, trigonometry and spherical 
trigonometry were founded there. There wasn’t any 
analogue of that Academy of Sciences. Such institutions 
began to be established in Europe only in XV and XVI 
centuries. 1 
Skilful experts could be prepared and valuable scientific 
results could be achieved in the Academy of Sciences of 
Maragha if Azerbaijan didn’t participate in wars 
afterwards”. 
Greater academy of sciences was established near 
Shamakhi in XI century. It was named “Academy of 
Medical Sciences” and remarkable scientist – philosopher, 
mathematician, astronomer, anatomist, chemist and 
physician Omar ibn Osman Kafiaddin Shirvani was consi-
dered its founder. He was one of skilful experts of medi-
cine, philosophy and pharmacology in the middle ages. 
The Professor Eybali Mehraliyev wrote about it: “That 
scientist (Kafiaddin Omar – R. D.) gained respect of the 
                                                 
         
1
 Azərbaycan Respublikası “Təhsil” Cəmiyyəti 2002 il 28 iyunda 
dahi Azərbaycan alimi Nəsirəddin Tusinin 800 illik yubileyinə həsr 
olunmuş “Nəsirəddin Tusinin elmi xidmətləri və Nəsirəddin Tusi yazıçı-
tədqiqatçı Ramiz Qasımov yaradıcılığında” mövzusunda keçirilən elmi-
praktik konfransda akademik Maqsud Əliyevin çıxışı 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    145
ruler (Shirvanshah Fariburz I (1063-1096) –R.D.) and his 
activity included testing biologic-medical technologies 
(making medicine by means of plants, mould funguses and 
parts of animal bodies), preparation system of surgical 
methods, astronomy, mathematics, construction (water 
settings, civil and production settings), poetry and prose, 
law, philosophy, history, music (theory and rules of 
singing), painting, politics and military science… 
The structure of Shirvan Academy of Sciences was as 
following in XI-XII centuries: presidium – president 
department – legal sciences – house of science. As there 
was close relation between military figures and scientists, 
we may come to the conclusion that, military science also 
was an element of the academy’s structure”.1   
Shirvan Academy of Sciences of XI century was 
described in the article about development of the science in 
the East, which was in the historical encyclopedia 
published in 1953 in Paris. 2  
It has been proved that, science centers of Azerbaijan 
had developed highly, fame of most scientists, who worked 
in those centers, had spread all over the world and they 
were invited to different cities.  
                                                 
          1
 E. Mehrəliyev. Şirvan Elmlər Akademiyası. Bakı, “Çaşıoğlu”, 2000. 
səh 69-70 
          2
 “L. Histoire de la Seinse”, Paris la volume II, 1953. la paqe 52 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    146
Preparation of genius scientists is realized on the basis of 
the scientific base formed in accordance with their 
predecessors’ thoughts. So, N. Tusi’s encyclopedic activity 
is a continuation of previous science centers established in 
the East and Azerbaijan.  
Yagut Al-Hamavi wrote about the scientific environ-
ment developed by Azerbaijani scientists in IX-XII 
centuries, scientists of Barda, who lived in IX-X centuries, 
and scientists of Shamakhi, Darband, Ganja, Tabriz and 
Khoy, who lived in X-XII centuries. 
Kafiaddin Omar, who is considered founder of Shirvan 
Academy of Sciences and pharmacology in Azerbaijan, 
systemized knowledge about pharmacology in his work 
“Tibb-i-Nabavi” and described methods of making 
medicine by means of plants, animals and minerals there. 
His son Osman ibn Omar Vahiaddin Shirvani and Falaki 
Shirvani worked on mathematics, physics and astronomy, 
Abdulkerim Shirvani and his grandson Fazil Faridaddin 
Abul Hasan Shirvani made astronomical equipments and 
carried out astronomical investigations.  
Abu Al-Fazl Hubaysh ibn Ibrahim Tiflisi – the 
physician, astronomer and mathematician, who lived in XII 
century, is the author of 9 works about medicine and 
pharmacology, “Bayan an-Nujum” (Description of stars), 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    147
“Madhal ila ilm an-Nujum” (Introduction to the science 
of stars) and tens of other works…  
Shamsaddin Shirvani (1210-1280) had come to the 
science center established by Tusi from Shirvan astrono-
mical center. Besides carrying out scientific researches, he 
had invented astronomical equipments (astrolabe). 1  The 
Azerbaijani engineer Karimaddin Abubakr ibn Mahmud 
Salmasi, who worked in the science center of N. Tusi, 
could make the earth globe by means of dough made of 
paper and drew climate zones on it.  
The Professor N. Abdulgasimova wrote in accordance 
with historical sources that, Karimaddin Salmasi made the 
first geographic globe of the world (1266). Though this 
news was sensational, it was a truth, as invention of such 
globes wasn’t difficult for experts of Maragha observatory. 
As there were a lot of skilful scientists of geometry, 
mathematics, geography and astronomy in the observatory 
and Nasiraddin Tusi, who was considered founder of the 
spherical trigonometry, was their leader, preparation of sky, 
earth and climate globes in Maragha wasn’t a problem.  
 
                                                 
           1
 Azərbaycan Beynəlxalq Universiteti. Nəsirəddin Tusinin 800 illik 
yubileyinə həsr edilmiş Respublika konfransının materialları. Bakı, 2001. 
Professor E. Q. Mehrəliyevin məruzəsi, səh. 500-501 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    148
        Development of astronomy by  
                         Nasiraddin Tusi 
  
Tusi wrote valuable works about different science 
branches in Turkish, Persian and Arabic. Some researchers 
write that, he was a poet. Of course, it’s believable. The 
author of “Akhlagi Nasiri”, which is considered 
masterpiece in the field of ethics and esthetics, could write 
poems very easily. Besides it, Tusi was interested in poetry 
and music too.  
Once his students asked him: “Master, they say that, 
you’re a poet?” and he answered: “No, I’m not a poet, I just 
write poems. Every astrologer may be inspired by 
twinkling stars and write a poem”. Activity of the talented 
scientist was interesting for everybody. 1  
The collective of Maragha observatory made very 
precise devices for realization of astronomical observa-
tions. Precise clocks were very important for such 
observations. Dancer clocks were made in Maragha, but 
those devices haven’t remained till the present time. May 
be, one day earth globes and dancer clocks made in 
Maragha observatory will be found in museums of some 
countries. “Astronomical tables of Ilkhanids” (“Zij-i 
                                                 
     
1
 A. Məmmədov. Hökm və hikmət.Bakı, “Qafqaz-Ltd”,  2002. səh. 159 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    149
Ilkhani”) was prepared in accordance with astronomical 
observations. The last of those tables was made 10 years 
after Tusi’s death in 1284. Such tables were made 400 
years later in Europe.  
The Professor, Doctor of physics and mathematics 
Rehim Husseinov wrote about “Zij-i Ilkhani”: “The most 
valuable work of N. Tusi and Maragha observatory is 
“Astronomical tables of Ilkhanids” (“Zij-i Ilkhani” – R. 
D.). Mentioned work consists of four books. Bases of 
Chinese, Uyghur, Jew and Arabic calendars and ways of 
passing from one calendar to another are explained in the 
first book, the second book includes descriptions of the Sun 
and planets, ecliptic length of the Sun disc center on 
Maragha meridian in afternoons of certain days, exact 
values of average daily movements of planets, 
determination of time has been described in the third book 
and fourth book includes different information about 
astronomy. The difference between values of geocentric 
longitudes of planets written in “Zij-i Ilkhani” and modern 
values is equal to one thousandth of the second. Tusi could 
determine geocentric latitudes of planets with a precision of 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    150
second. He could also determine more exact value for 
annual precession”.1  
“Maragha observatory established by Nasiraddin Tusi in 
1259 was very popular in the East in the middle ages. It 
was the best equipped observatory of the world. There were 
sun and water watches, sky globes, armillary spheres, 
quadrants, devices for determination of horizontal 
coordinates of celestial bodies, device for determination of 
the Sun’s height on the meridian in Maragha observatory”.2 
Probably, Columbus used tables made by N. Tusi when 
he discovered New World. The most skilful and 
experienced scientists were invited to Maragha observatory 
in order to get necessary information about structures of the 
Earth and Sky.  
As I mentioned above, sky globe was made in Maragha. 
One of sky globes made by the son of Muayyidaddin Ordy 
– Muhammad (1279) is kept in the hall “Physics-
mathematics” of the museum “Picture Gallery” in Dresden. 
It is considered the most ancient sky globe of the world.  
Tusi’s third son Sadraddin Ali Tusi became the leader of 
Maragha observatory after the scientist’s death (1274). The 
                                                 
       
  
  1
 R. Ə. Hüseynov. Astronomiya. Ali məktəblər üçün dərslik. Bakı, 
“Maarif”, 1997. səh. 10  
   
2  
В. Н. Пипуныров. История часов с древнейших времен до 
наших дней. Издательство «Наука», Москва, 1982, стр. 91 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    151
son of Muayyidaddin Ordy – Muhammad also worked in 
the observatory then. He was one of well-known experts, 
who made astronomical equipments, as his father. The year 
of preparation of his globe was determined according to 
positions of stars described on it – 1279. Some scientists of 
Europe investigated that unique globe. The globe made of 
bronze and decorated with gold and silver is considered one 
of decorative artworks of XIII century.  
When we speak of Muayyidaddin Ordy, we remember 
activity of Nasiraddin Tusi and vice versa. And when we 
speak of Maragha observatory, we remember both of 
mentioned scientists.  
It is known that, Muayyidaddin Ordy played a 
significant role in construction and furnishing of the 
observatory. According to some scientists (Professor A. 
Salamzadeh and others), besides being a founder of the 
observatory and leader of astronomical investigations 
carried out there, N. Tusi was one of its authors.  
Ordy respected Tusi for his personality, skills and 
generosity as all other scientists, who worked in Maragha 
observatory. He explained his thoughts about Tusi in his 
treatise about “Astronomical equipments of Maragha 
observatory”. Ordy wrote in the introduction: “Let’s 
describe our devices created in the observatory located on 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    152
the hill in the west of Maragha. They have been created in 
660. All these works have been carried out under the 
leadership of the great scientist – our wise leader. He has 
all praiseworthy characters. He knows even all science 
branches. He gathers all scientists in the observatory, 
protects them and tries to improve their welfares. We are 
glad to work under his leadership as he takes care of 
everybody… He is polite and affable even when he gets 
angry.  
I’m talking about Nasiraddin Muhammad ibn 
Muhammad at-Tusi. God bless him. I had heard a lot about 
him. Information I had heard about him was very surprising 
for me. After getting acquainted with him, I understood that 
Tusi deserved all praises. I understood it when worked 
together with him. He didn’t deny his valuable advises 
when we were far from our motherlands, friends and 
families. He was a substitute for all of them. Being together 
with him is enough for us. God bless him!”1  
These opinions weren’t written by historians and 
researchers of XIX century. They were written by the 
scientist, who had come to Azerbaijan from Syria and 
worked in Maragha observatory together with N. Tusi. All 
                                                 
       
1
 Müəyyidəddin Ordinin “Marağa rəsədxanasının cihazları” kitabının 
müqəddəməsindən. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    153
foreign scientists praised their leader. Colleagues called 
him “teacher of the world”.  
There isn’t enough biographic information about Ordy. 
Only two manuscripts of his treatise about “Astronomical 
equipments of Maragha observatory” written in Arabic 
have remained as historical documents. They are kept in 
national libraries of Paris and Tehran. The first manuscript 
was found by the teacher of the special school of eastern 
languages A. Jurden in Paris at the beginning of XIX 
century and was translated into French. The book was 
published in Paris in 1809 and 1810. It was translated into 
Germany in 1811 as was interesting for astronomers. The 
book includes description of ten astronomical equipments 
prepared by Ordi under the leadership of Nasiraddin Tusi. 
At the result of analysis of information given in Ordy’s 
tractate, researchers came to the conclusion that, 
equipments of Maragha observatory were more perfect than 
equipments of other observatories. It is known that, 
equipments invented by Ordy were used in most 
observatories of the world. 
As it was mentioned above, there were ten great 
astronomical equipments in Maragha observatory. Five of 
them were invented there and other five were old. 
 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    154
1. Great wall quadrant 
2. Armillary sphere  
3. Device for measurement of propensity of ecliptics 
4. Device for determination of equality moments 
5. Device for determination of eclipse phases, for 
observation of lunar and solar eclipses.  
These devices were used in other observatories before 
construction of Maragha observatory.  
1. Device for determination of horizontal coordinates of 
celestial bodies 
2. Device for determination of the Sun’s height on the 
meridian 
3. Earth globe 
4. Star or Sky globe 
5. Rotary quadrant  
 
These devices were invented in Maragha observatory. 
The greatest device was the wall quadrant with 6,5 meters 
diameter. The greatest wall quadrant (diameter – 7,5 
meters) was invented in Urgenj before invention of this 
one.  
H. Mammadbayli described that device in his work. Its 
side-view looked like a wall. But that wall’s base and one 
of sides consisted of a straight line, other two sides were 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    155
replaced by 90-degree arch. A firm wood was bolted on the 
brick wall on that arch. A copper board was placed between 
them. There was a measuring board showing arch 
measurements on the copper board. The smallest division 
was equal to a moment. There was the second important 
part on the wall quadrant besides the measuring board. It 
replaced pipes of the diopter. The diopter was a simple 
pipe. It was empty, there was a wire in one of its ends and 
other end was cracked. The observer should put the 
celestial body, crack of the diopter and its wire on one line 
in order to determine direction towards that celestial body. 
The pipe should be rotated in order to achieve this. Diopter 
could measure height while moving the wall quadrant along 
the measuring board. 
As the wall quadrant was placed on the meridian plane, 
it could observe celestial bodies only at culmination 
moments (passage of celestial bodies through meridian is 
called culmination). So, height coordinates were 
determined.1  
The second great device used in Maragha observatory 
was an armillary sphere. It was very old and was used even 
by astronomers of Alexandria.  
                                                 
          1
 H. C. Məmmədbəyli. Mühəmməd Nəsirəddin Tusi. Bakı, “Gənclik”, 
1980. səh. 67-68 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    156
The armillary sphere consisted of five circumferences – 
1) ecliptics, 2) equality colure, 3) latitudes circumference, 
4) sky meridian, 5) tropics. Ecliptics, sky meridian and 
tropics were divided into arch measurements. Ecliptic and 
horizontal coordinates of stars and planets were determined 
by means of the armillary sphere. The rotary quadrant was 
invented by scientists of Maragha at the result of it. That 
device consisted of two circles, which had scales and 
perpendicular axes, one of which rotated perpendicularly to 
the horizontal plane and other rotated on that plane. 
Vertical circle was equipped with diopters in order to 
determine directions towards stars. 
Professional astronomers also learned Tusi’s scientific 
heritage. Though the scientist lived 750-760 years ago, his 
scientific achievements are still interesting for modern 
astronomers.  
The Professor Rehim Husseinov wrote about him: 
“Scientific results achieved by Tusi in the field of 
astronomy are very significant. First of all, he is the 
founder of the spherical trigonometry, which is very 
important for the modern astronomy. Application sphere of 
the spherical trigonometry is very broad.  
The most valuable work of N. Tusi and Maragha 
observatory is “Astronomical tables of Ilkhanids”. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    157
Mentioned work consists of four books and includes 
information about calendars existing in the world, ways of 
passing from one calendar to another, movements of the 
Sun and planets, real afternoon time for each day in 
Maragha observatory, position of the Sun disc center on the 
ecliptic, exact values of average daily movements of 
planets, determination of time, positions of planets in 
respect of the ecliptics and value of the annual 
precession”.1  
N. Tusi played a significant role in Ilkhanids’ life as an 
intellectual, scientist, diplomatist and generous man during 
ages of Hulegu khan and Abaga khan. He was welcomed in 
all regions of the empire and never denied his advices and 
help to other people. He paid special attention to 
development of the science and establishment of education 
centers. Tusi thought that, the science should be people’s 
supporter. He knew that, it was important to know 
everything as necessary. Besides being educated, Nasirad-
din Tusi was very patient and well-behaved person.  
Once a man sent him a letter full of abuses and called 
him “a dog”. Tusi answered him very politely: “You’re 
wrong, I can’t be a dog. Dogs have four legs and long nails. 
                                                 
    
1
 “Bilgi” dərgisinin “fizika, riyaziyyat, yer elmləri” seriyası. Nəsirəddin 
Tusinin astronomiya elmində xidmətləri. MEA-nın müxbir üzvü Rəhim 
Hüseynov. Bakı, 2002. səh. 4 №2  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    158
But I am a human being. My body isn’t hairy as dogs. My 
nails are wide. I talk and laugh. So, I differ from dogs”.1  
Tusi came to Baghdad from Maragha at the beginning of 
1274. He fulfilled his duties as a vizier and took care of 
scientists and religious schools. The scientist went on a 
pilgrimage to the grave of the seventh imam Musei Kazim 
together with his son Asiladdin though he was very tired.  
He said following sentences to his son before his death: 
“I can die in peace as I spent my life for people’s welfare 
and science… The life, which wasn’t spent for good deeds, 
is the life spent in vain”. 
The scientist, who had devoted his life, knowledge and 
skills to the mankind and science, died on June 25, 127 in 
Baghdad. Nasiraddin Tusi was buried in the Jame Mosque, 
which is situated at 10 km away from the capital of 
Abbasids – Baghdad. He was buried in the tomb of the 
seventh imam Musei Kazim (Peace to him). 
They say that, almost all of the population of Baghdad 
participated at the scientist’s funeral. People couldn’t 
believe that, Tusi had left them. The scientist, who had 
devoted his life to the mankind, was a hope for most 
people.  
                                                 
        1  
A. Məmmədov. Hökm və hikmət.Bakı, “Qafqaz-Ltd”, 2002. səh. 159 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    159
There were following words on the grave of the genius 
Azerbaijani scientist Nasiraddin Tusi: “Supporter of people 
and religion. Such man was never born”.  
Indeed Nasiraddin Tusi deserved all of these praises.  
 
 
 
 
     Scientific results achieved by Nasiraddin Tusi 
 
N. Tusi’s masterpiece about geometry – “Tahriru 
Uglidis” was written twice. The first book written in 1248 
consists of 15 articles and its manuscript was published in 
1880 in Tehran with the method of lithography. Both of 
books spread in the world in a very short time. The second 
edition of the book, which had a special role in 
development of geometry, was very popular in Europe and 
especially in England at the end of XIII century. It was 
published in Arabic in Rome in 1594 and in London in 
1657 after being translated into Latin.  
It is difficult to believe that, the work could become 
popular in Europe in Arabic during a very short time. I 
think that, it was translated into Latin in 1657 and learned 
by experts of geometry and mathematics. “Tahriru 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    160
Uglidis” was written in Arabic and its version, which is 
kept in Rome, is in this language. Regiomontanus, who was 
a famous mathematician and astronomer, went to Rome in 
1461 and translated seven articles of Ptolemy’s “Almagest” 
into Latin. He was in some libraries of Italy in 1461-1468, 
got copies of ancient manuscripts and returned to Vienna. 
Regiomontanus was known as a translator of scientific 
works rather than a scientist. 
It is already known that, Regiomontanus had learned 
Arabic, worked on translation of scientific works of eastern 
astronomers and could translate “Tahriru Uglidis” before 
1657.  
According to historical sources, one of favorite teachers 
of Isaac Newton (1642-1726), well-known English 
mathematician of XVII century John Vallis (1616-1703) 
read lectures at the University of Oxford in accordance 
with “Tahriru Uglidis” and played a significant role in 
popularization of N. Tusi in England. J. Vallis, who leaded 
Euclid department at the University of Oxford, taught the 
theory of parallel lines offered by N. Tusi there.  
According to H. Mammadbayli, besides describing the 
theory of parallel lines, relations and numbers and main 
issues of mathematics as axiometric geometry, Nasiraddin 
Tusi explained some new theorems, proved them and 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    161
generalized some of those theories in “Tahriru Uglidis”. 
He proved some theorems in different ways. The scientist 
included new notions in mathematics and tried to explain 
existing ones… Tusi proved the Pythagorean Theorem in 
36 ways in the first edition of “Tahriru Uglidis” and in 12 
ways in the second edition. The first book mainly consisted 
of theorems on the theory of parallel lines. The theory of 
parallel lines had a very important role in invention of non-
Euclidian geometry. Nasiraddin Tusi did his best for 
development of this theory.1 
“Beginning”, which had brought fame to Euclid, was 
published for many times during two thousand years as the 
initial course of geometry. It was taught in schools and 
universities before XX century. The work, which was 
interesting for all scientists, was copied in ancient times 
and spread in the world. Afterwards, “Beginning” was 
copied on the pergament from papyrus and on the paper 
from pergament. 
The work was published for 2500 times – 6-7 times in a 
year during 400 years. The original copy of “Beginning” 
hasn’t remained. But it was manifolded by copiers. Eastern 
scientists played an important role in this process. The 
                                                 
            1
 H. C. Məmmədbəyli. Mühəmməd Nəsirəddin Tusi. Bakı, “Gənclik”, 
1980. səh. 78 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    162
work was translated into Arabic by Al-Hajjaj ibn Yusuf 
during ages of Harun Ar-Rashid and his brother Mamun for 
the first and second times. The next translation was made 
by Sabit Ben Guerra. “Beginning” was learned by Arabs in 
early middle ages and then attracted attention of European 
scientists. The work was translated into several languages. 
First editions were published in 1533. It was translated into 
English in 1570 by the merchant of London by name 
Bellingway.1  
“Bases” or “Beginning” of Euclid written about 
geometry and arithmetic consisted of 13 articles before, but 
afterwards, two articles were included in it. The work was 
translated into Arabic for several times before XIII century. 
N. Tusi trusted only two of those translations – they were 
made by Sabit Ben Guerra and Al-Hajjaj. But his “Tahriru 
Uglidis” was superior of all geometry books written before 
and was known as the best work on geometry in XIII-
XVIII. The scientist wrote in the introduction of the work: 
“I decided to analyze Euclid’s work written about geometry 
and arithmetic after finishing my works on analyze of 
“Almagest”. I tried to analyze it exactly. So, I made some 
additional explanations. Some of those explanations were 
                                                 
        1
 Д. К. Самин. Сто великих ученых. Москва, «Вече», 2002. стр. 19 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    163
chosen from books of mentioned experts and others were 
my own conclusions”.  
 
         
        Euclid (? – 275-270 BC.)        “Tahriru Uglidis” published  
                                                                 in Europe 
 
 Nasiraddin Tusi refuted V postulate and the theory of 
parallel lines offered in “Beginning”. He wrote that, 
parallel lines intersected on the sphere, though they didn’t 
intersect on the plane.  
This problem was important for invention of the general 
cosmology and well-known scientists as Cauchy, Gauss, 
Bolyami and Lobachevski worked on it after some 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    164
centuries. Lobachevski could manage this problem with the 
help of the Azerbaijani scientist Mirza Kazimbey. Mirza 
Kazimbey translated Tusi’s works on mathematics from 
Persian into Russian in accordance with the request of the 
Russian scientist. So, Lobachevski could write his well-
known work on non-Euclidean geometry.  
The Professor Zahid Khalilov wrote that, the work 
(“Tahriru Uglidis” – author), which was kept as a manus-
cript during more than 300 years, was published in Arabic 
in 1594 in Rome.  
The English mathematician John Vallis and Italian 
mathematician Sakker also read this work. Proof of V 
postulate of Euclid by Nasiraddin Tusi played an important 
role in invention of non-Euclidean geometry.  
The Professor V. F. Kagan described Nasiraddin Tusi’s 
achievements in this field in his work “Bases of geometry”: 
“The Italian scientist Sakker, German scientist Lambert and 
French scientist Leganr accepted Nasiraddin’s idea proving 
that, sum of interior angles of a triangle equals two straight 
angles as a postulate and developed the theory of 
parallels”.1 
The Professor B. A. Rozenfeld wrote: “Nasiraddin Tusi 
refused to prove the postulate of parallelism by means of 
                                                 
           1
 В. Ф. Каган. Основание геометрии. М.-Л., 1949. стр. 119 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    165
two axioms and postulates and used only one simple 
postulate and it was an important step for Lobachevski’s 
proof” . N. Tusi’s scientific achievements in the field of the 
theory of parallel lines were interesting for scientists of the 
middle ages and modern time. His work became popular in 
Europe after a very short time.  
Professors Rozenfeld and Yushkevich published N. 
Tusi’s article about the theory of parallel lines and his work 
“Treatise removing all doubts about parallel lines” in 
Russian in 1960.   
That work was found by the Iranian scientist Tagi Erani 
and published in Tehran in 1936. According to scientists of 
Uzbekistan Academy of Sciences, one of the oldest copies 
of the manuscript kept in the library of the Institute of 
Oriental Studies of Uzbekistan Academy of Sciences was 
prepared by one of students of N. Tusi – Nizamaddin Al-
Naysaburi.  
Those scientists wrote about mentioned work: “The 
treatise of Nasiraddin Tusi is very interesting, it explains 
the theory of parallel lines explained in “Tehran copy”, 
criticizes theories of parallel lines of Al-Khaysam and 
Khayyam (they have been learned by historians of 
mathematics), describes works of the mathematician of IX 
century Al-Jouhari, whose work by name “Improved book 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    166
of bases” haven’t been found yet”. Al-Jouhari, Al-
Khaysam, Khayyam and Nasiraddin Tusi had a great role in 
invention of new geometry by Lobachevski in the first half 
of XIX century.  
Well-known scientists of the middle ages Abul Fazl 
Tabriz from Azerbaijan, Khazin Shani from Egypt, Ibn Al-
Khaysam and Omar Khayyam had carried out a lot of 
works on the theory of parallel lines. Eastern scientists 
were interested in well-known V postulate of Euclid.  
Though N. Tusi lived 770 years ago, scientists of XX 
century investigate his immortal works with great interest. 
The scientist’s commentaries about “About the sphere and 
cylinder” and “Measurement of the circle” of Archimedes 
have special places in the history of mathematics. The 
Kazakh scientist Audanbek Kubesov investigated those two 
works of N. Tusi perfectly and wrote dissertation about it.  
N. Tusi wrote in the introduction of “About the sphere 
and cylinder”: “I tried to understand some issues 
mentioned in “About the sphere and cylinder” of Archi-
medes (287-212 BC). It was necessary for main problems 
of geometry. At last I found a copy corrected by Sabit Ben 
Guerra. Part of the work was translated into Arabic 
inexactly. Besides it, there were some mistakes made by 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    167
the copier in the book. I tried to correct the work and 
described some of its issues at the end of the second book.  
I completed some conceptions of Archimedes by 
considering his well-known ideas. I found an old notebook. 
There were Yevtoki’s commentaries about this book, which 
were translated into Arabic by Ishaq ibn Hussein. Besides 
it, there was a text translated by Ishaq and it covered I and 
XIV captures. The text of Yevtoki’s commentary was 
similar to that text. So, I decided to write a systematic book 
and to explain mentioned text. I proved postulates in 
accordance with principles of geometry, wrote necessary 
explanations, described Yevtoki’s commentaries and 
explained existing difficulties”.1  
The Azerbaijani scientist wrote four ideas in the first 
book of that work and proved them. Kubesov wrote about 
those ideas: “Proofs of four axioms of Archimedes about 
comparison of straight lines and curves were especially 
interesting in commentaries of Nasiraddin Tusi written 
about the Greek scientist’s work – “About the sphere and 
cylinder”. 
The Greek scientist Yevtoki (VI century BC) also 
mentioned that Archimedes’s axioms had been proved. But 
                                                 
    
1
 Nəsirəddin Tusi. “Kürə və silindr haqqında” əlyazmanın Paris nüsxəsi. 
səh. 90-90a və Heydərabad nəşrinin 3-cü səhifəsi 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    168
Nasiraddin could achieve more results. He invented method 
of infinitely small quantities (infinitesimal method) in order 
to prove mentioned axioms. Nasiraddin Tusi formed new 
postulates instead of those axioms, where lines were small 
segments and their ends were maximally close points. This 
approach resembled approach of differential and integral 
calculations of ancient atomists and scientists of Western 
Europe.  
N. Tusi invented his own algorithm resembling modern 
limit methods according to postulates of Archimedes in 
order to prove mentioned axioms”. 
N. Tusi described his own method for cubic equations in 
the book. Kubesov wrote following question: “Were 
Renaissance mathematicians aware of Nasiraddin’s 
commentaries about Archimedes’s works or not?” He 
mentioned that, Nasiraddin’s ideas could be met in most 
scientists’ works. Those approaches had an important role 
in invention of new mathematics in XVI-XVII, as its 
principles were based on notions of application, changing 
quantities, functional dependence and broad number 
concept added by N. Tusi including infinitesimal method 
(infinitely small quantities). 
It turns out that, N. Tusi played a significant role in 
development of mathematics and geometry and European 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    169
scientists might use scientific works of the Azerbaijani 
scientist. There is no doubt that, N. Tusi’s works were 
popular in the middle ages and European scientists used 
them as a scientific source. So, I want to mention 
quotations of some scientists, who were popular in Europe 
for their scientific achievements. 
 
             
                          Archimedes (287-212 BC) 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    170
H. Mammadbayli, who investigated scientific activity of 
N. Tusi, wrote thoughts of several popular scientists in his 
work by name “Muhammad Nasiraddin Tusi”. I’ll use 
several paragraphs of that work. 
It is known that, astronomers, geodesists, crystallo-
graphers and cartographers used spherical trigonometry 
very often.  
The word “Trigonometry” was first used in books of the 
German theologian and mathematician Pitiscus (1505). 
Nasiraddin Tusi is the founder of spherical mechanics 
which he used in his works. That discovery was discovered 
by scientists of Western Europe 400 years later. The Dane 
scientist Ticho Brage (1546-1601) made tables of 
coordinates for more than 700 stars according to Tusi’s 
calculations. Johannes Kepler founded spherical mechanics 
in accordance with Brage’s scientific works. Isaac Newton 
discovered fundamental laws of mechanics after using their 
works. Tusi’s works about mathematics were published in 
Renaissance centers of Europe – Italy, England and France 
for many times.  
Watches were inseparable part of astronomical 
equipments used by Tycho Brahe. He had invented and 
tested four types of watches in 1577-1581 and came to the 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    171
conclusion that, watches are unfit for solution of most 
astronomical problems.1  
H. Mammadbayli wrote: “Trigonometry was an 
achievement of eastern scientists before additions of Euler 
were made. Azerbaijan had a great role in this achievement. 
N. Tusi and Giyasaddin Kashi played an important role in 
invention of trigonometry. N. Tusi wrote the first perfect 
work on trigonometry and modified trigonometry as an 
independent discipline. This work was published with 
different names. It was “Kitabi-fi-shaklul-qita” (The book 
about the perfect four-side) in Arabic, “Traktat o polnom 
chetirekhstoronnike” in Russian, “Das Bush uber das 
transversalen fiqur” in German and “Fraite quadrilatere” 
in French”. 2 
This book also was written twice – in Arabic and Persian 
as “Tahriru Uglidis”. Its Arabic version was found in 1260 
in Maragha. N. Tusi wrote in the introduction of this 
version: “I had a book, which consisted of theories by name 
“Shaklul qita”. I had made some additions to existing 
theorems and proofs there. The book was in Persian. Some 
of my friends asked me to translate it into Arabic. So, I 
                                                 
          1
 Д. Хауз. Гринвичское время и открытие долготы. Москва, 
«Мир», 1983. стр. 29 
   
   
  2 
H.  C. Məmmədbəyli. Mühəmməd Nəsirəddin Tusi. Bakı, “Gənclik”, 
1980. səh. 92-93 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    172
took their request into consideration and translated the book 
into Arabic. Besides it, I published the book without 
several surplus and unnecessary chapters”.  
The work was written in Arabic as it was necessary to 
prepare skilful experts in Maragha observatory and to 
spread scientific works written there in the Near East, 
Egypt, Apennine and Pyrenees peninsulas. N. Tusi’s main 
purpose was to spread all scientific results achieved in 
Azerbaijan in the world.  
Leading scientists of Maragha observatory used 
spherical trigonometry for determination of coordinates of 
celestial bodies. Copies of “Shaklul-qita” were distributed 
among specialists in Maragha. That’s why several old 
copies of the book are kept in most libraries of Western 
Europe. But those manuscripts haven’t been learned 
enough as Arabic and Persian weren’t popular languages in 
European countries. So, manuscripts kept in different pla-
ces were found and investigated very slowly. Researchers 
could find a lot of documents when they looked for 
manuscripts in administrative buildings of Istanbul. An old 
copy of “Shaklul qita” found in the capital of the Ottoman 
Empire in 1891 was among them and mentioned work was 
published in French and Arabic in accordance with that 
manuscript. After publication of that book, which was 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    173
about trigonometry, a heated argument arose between 
historians of mathematics in Western Europe as Regio-
montanus was considered founder of trigonometry 
according to German historians of mathematics.  
After N. Tusi’s “Shaklul qita” written in French and 
Arabic was found by historians of mathematics, debates 
were restarted about the founder of trigonometry. The 
German scientist Henry Zutter, who had a great role in 
investigation of the history of astronomy and mathematics 
in the East, began to deny Regiomontanus’s role in this 
field after reading above mentioned book. He wrote: “Plane 
and spherical trigonometry was invented when military 
occupations of Tatar rulers were stopped temporarily. What 
would European scientists of XV century do if they were 
aware of this result? May be some of them knew something 
about it?” These questions weren’t put in vain. Zutter 
thought that, some scientists knew the truth, but preferred 
to keep silence for unknown reasons.1  
Scientists, who defended Regiomontanus’s scientific 
works before, understood that, he began to lose his 
monopoly in mathematics and tried to stabilize situation in 
different ways.  
                                                 
     
1
 Ф. Кечори. История элементарной математики. Одесса, 1917. стр. 
147 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    174
The German scientist Anton von Braunmuhl, who is 
considered influential specialist in the history of 
trigonometry, published his work by name “Nasiraddin 
Tusi and Regiomontanus”. According to most specialists, 
this work had a special place among works written about 
the history of trigonometry. Though the author tried to be 
unbiased in the work, he couldn’t continue in this way. The 
result of mentioned work couldn’t satisfy honest historians 
of mathematics. Braunmuhl came to the following conc-
lusion: «Nasiraddin and Regiomontanus both were influen-
tial scientists in the field of trigonometry. Regiomontanus 
wasn’t aware of works carried out by Nasiraddin and so, he 
may be considered inventor of trigonometry».  
H. Mammadbayli agreed with the French historian of 
mathematics Motuklo and wrote: ““Shaklul qita” of 
Nasiraddin Tusi, table of trigonometric functions made in 
Maragha observatory and remake of that table by 
astronomers of Ulugbek’s observatory prove that, innova-
tions made by Regiomontanus and other mathematicians in 
XV century in Europe were less than innovations made by 
eastern scientists before”.1  
                                                 
      
1
 Ф. Г. Максудов, Г. Дж. Мамедбейли. Мухаммед Насирэддин 
Туси. Баку, «Гянджлик», 1981. стр. 54 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    175
Of course, it is impossible to agree with this fact. As it 
was mentioned above, the table of trigonometric functions 
made in Maragha observatory under the leadership of Tusi 
was an important innovation. We should note that, 
scientists, who lived in Azerbaijan in XIII century, had 
carried out very important works in the field of 
trigonometry.  
Though trigonometry was developed owing to scientists 
of Europe and Ulugbek’s observatory, they weren’t as 
professional as scientists, who worked in Maragha 
observatory. Azerbaijani scientists knew several branches 
of the science and were authors of a lot of innovations and 
inventions.  
Braunmuhl wrote: “Regiomontanus was considered 
author of this problem and its solution method. Though all 
these issues were explained in Nasiraddin’s works either, 
we can’t deny Regiomontanus’s services in this field as 
there wasn’t any relation between works of these two 
persons”.1 
According to Braunmuhl, Ptolemy knew some theorems 
about spherical trigonometry and he helped Regiomon-
tanus. Nevertheless scientists have found out that, none of 
                                                 
       1 
H. C. Məmmədbəyli, M. Haşımzadə. “Şəklül qita”nın riyaziyyat 
tarixində əhəmiyyəti. Az.SSR. EA. Xəbərləri, 1951. №8  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    176
spherical trigonometric functions were known by Ptolemy 
or any other ancient Greek scientist.  
So, scientists of the West refused to discover the real 
truth. They even wrote false considerations in order to 
overstate Regiomontanus’s “scientific achievements”.  
The Soviet scientist V. P. Sheremetyevsky, who didn’t 
make efforts in order to investigate the history of 
mathematics, tried to prove that, trigonometric functions 
were invented by Regiomontanus. His false conclusions 
can’t be taken into account. V. P. Sheremetyevsky wrote: 
“The first achievement got in Europe in the field of 
mathematics was trigonometry. It is clear as trigonometry 
is considered main part of astronomy and astronomy began 
to develop in XIV century on the basis of astrology… 
Regiomontanus invented new trigonometric function 
which is known as tangent since XVII century”.  
Other European scientist F. K. Kechori wrote: “Brad-
wardine and other English scientists are considered authors 
of first works about trigonometry. Their writings about 
trigonometry were taken from Arabic sources. The 
Professor of the University of Oxford John Maudith wrote 
about tangent and Bradwardine wrote about cotangent and 
tangent in 1340”. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    177
There were different new functions. Indians used to 
apply sinus, sinus versus and cosinus, Arabs applied 
tangent and English applied cotangent.1  
Sheremetyevsky, Kechori and other scientists wrote their 
preconceived opinions without carrying out necessary 
investigations in this field. They associated trigonometry 
with European scientists baselessly. Nevertheless eastern 
scientists had carried out important works in this field and 
passed ahead of European scientists for hundreds of years.  
The Professor H. Mammadbayli declared decisively that, 
above mentioned fact wasn’t right. He wrote: “Abul Wafa 
Buzjani defined tangent, cotangent, secans and cosecans in 
X century. He named tangent shadow, cotangent com-
pletive of the shadow, secans and cosecans diameter of 
corresponding arches. Nasiraddin mentioned this fact in his 
work very clearly”.2 Nasiraddin wrote: “It (tangent theorem 
– H. C. Mammadbayli) was first offered by Abul Wafa 
Buzjani”. 
It proves that, European scientists overstated Regiomon-
tanus’s scientific activity purposely and described him as 
the founder of trigonometry. I can’t understand Braun-
                                                 
           1
 Ф. Кечори. История элементарной математики. Одесса, 1917. 
стр. 147 
        
2 
H. C. Məmmədbəyli. Mühəmməd Nəsirəddin Tusi. Bakı, “Gənclik”, 
1980. səh. 111 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    178
muhl’s purpose. He wrote that, Regiomontanus had 
invented trigonometry without reading works of Nasiraddin 
Tusi as he didn’t know Arabic. But investigations prove 
that this thought was baseless. We’ll see explanation of this 
conclusion below. I want to note that, European and eastern 
scientists couldn’t write any work about trigonometry in 
XIV-XV centuries without reading works of scientists, who 
worked in the Near East and were well-known for their 
achievements got in the field of astronomy and mathe-
matics. Besides it, Regiomontanus lived only till his 40.  
 
 
 
 
 
   Misappropriation of Nasiraddin Tusi’s           
            invention by Regiomontanus 
 
European scientists often used works of Muslim 
scientists in order to learn most branches of the science. N. 
Tusi’s scientific heritage also was discussed by scientists of 
the West.  
Astronomy and mathematics were developed highly in 
eastern countries and especially in Azerbaijan owing to N. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    179
Tusi’s talent and works of most scientists were translated 
into Latin and Greek as they were interesting for European 
scientists. But some venturesome scientists translated 
works of eastern scientists and published them as their own 
works. Unfortunately, such events had happened for several 
times.  
Valuable cultural monuments and manuscripts were 
taken from the capital of the Byzantine Empire to the 
Apennine Peninsula when Sultan Mehmet approached 
Constantinople. As mostly Venetian seamen participated in 
this process, most of manuscripts were taken to Venice. 
Besides it, I want to mention that, there were historical 
documents, which proved that, there were relations 
between scientific centers of Constantinople and scientific 
centers of other cities including Maragha observatory.  
It has been proved that, scientists of the Byzantine 
Empire had investigated library of Maragha observatory. 
Besides it, several scientists came to Maragha and Tabriz 
from the Byzantine in XIV century and translated scientific 
works kept there from Arabic and Persian into Greek and 
Latin.  
I want to give some information about the German 
translator and scientist Regiomontanus (Johannes Muller) 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    180
(1436-1476), who was considered great specialist of 
astronomy and mathematics in Europe.  
He got his primary education in Leipzig and entered the 
University of Vienna, which was popular during that 
period, as was interested in astronomy and mathematics. At 
that time, astronomy was studied according to the tractate 
“Sphaera mundi” (“The sphere of the world”) written by 
the Englishman John Hollywood or Halifax (died in 1256), 
who once worked in the University of Paris and was known 
with the surname Sakrobosko. That tractate, which was 
taught in five weeks (four hours each week), consisted of 
elementary explanations of obvious results of daily rotation 
of the celestial sphere and was very popular during several 
centuries. After being published, the work became the first 
published manual of astronomy (1472), which was 
republished for 65 times during next two hundred years! 
Students learned to determine planets’ positions at different 
moments in accordance with the Alfonsine tables and 
commentaries of the Italian by name Gerardo Sabionet – 
“Theoretica planetarum” (“The theory on planets”), got 
elementary knowledge about algebra and elements of the 
theory of perspective.  
It was necessary to know astronomy at the level of the 
tractate of Sakrobosko and geometry at the level of 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    181
Euclid’s “Beginning” for getting first bachelor degree after 
the preliminary faculty. Applicants for this degree should 
be able to determine positions of celestial bodies at a given 
moment, know five books of “Beginning”, theory of 
perspective and learn another tractate else, which should be 
chosen by the applicant. So, astronomical and mathematical 
preparation of students of the University of Vienna was 
higher than preparation of students of other universities.  
There Regiomontanus got acquainted with the young 
teacher by name Georg von Peuerbach (1423-1461), who 
lectured about astronomy and they became close friends. 
Peuerbach had spent several years (in 1448-1450 according 
to one source and in 1448-1450 according to another one) 
in Germany, France and Italy. He had got acquainted with 
well-known scientists Nicolay Kuzansky and Giovanni 
Biankini when he was in Italy. Peuerbach went down in the 
history as an astronomer, mathematician and teacher of 
Regiomontanus. 
The teacher taught Regiomontanus Greek as he was 
interested in astronomy and mathematics and wanted him 
to translate required works from Greek into Latin. 
Regiomontanus went to Rome and translated seven articles 
of Ptolemy’s “Almagest” there after Peuerbach died in 
1461. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    182
He went to Venetia in 1463, analyzed and copied old 
manuscripts kept there. Besides it, he took copies of old 
manuscripts kept in most libraries of Italy to Vienna in 
1461-1468. 1 
          
         Regiomontanus (Johannes Muller) (1436-1476) 
                                                 
          1
 А. Берри. «Краткая история астрономии». 1946. стр. 84 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    183
Vienna was mathematical center of Central Europe 
besides being residence of the emperor of Holy Rome 
Empire of the German Nation in the middle of XV century. 
Though the University of Vienna was the first university in 
German countries, it wasn’t the oldest university of Europe 
and is about 250 years “younger” than the University of 
Bologna established in 1119, 17 years “younger” than the 
University of Paris (1348) and a year “younger” than 
Krakovski’s University (1364). But that High School 
became one of the greatest educational institutions of 
Europe in hundred years – yearly student admission was 
about five hundred in 1450-1461 and about three thousand 
people studied at the university (one tenth of the population 
of Vienna, which was one of the greatest cities of Europe). 
The University of Vienna was becoming an important 
center of humanism. The Italian humanist and diplomatist 
Enea Silvio Piccolomini, who represented Vatican in the 
palace of Vienna, and the Pope Pius II (since 1458) played 
an important role in this process.  
The first person, who taught main disciplines on 
astronomy and mathematics (mathematics and astronomy 
were taught together), was Johannes von Gmunden (1480-
1485 – 1442). Gmunden lectured about philosophy (accor-
ding to Aristotle) after graduating from the University of 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    184
Vienna and getting master degree, but specialized in 
mathematics by reading Euclid’s geometry, theory on 
movements of planets described in Ptolemy’s “Almagest”, 
work of Gerardo Sabionet, theory on 60th roots (published 
in 1515 with the name “Tractatus de minutiis physicis” 
(“The tractate on physical 60th roots”)) after 1412. Besides 
it, he taught students to use astronomical equipments 
(especially astrolabe). Gmunden was considered first 
professional teacher of mathematical disciplines in German 
countries.  
Regiomontanus asked the Hungarian king Matthias 
Corvinus to allow to construct observatory and printing-
house in Vienna and achieved his goal after a very short 
time. He went to Nuremberg in 1471, founded observatory 
and printing-house there. It is known that, the young 
scientist had used drafts and styles of eastern architects 
during construction of the observatory.  
Regiomontanus went to Rome in accordance with the 
invitation of the Pope Sixtus IV in 1475 in order to 
organize works on the calendar and died there a year later. 
They say that, he was killed or died of cholera.  
Astronomers used equipments of Arabs and ancient 
Greeks – astrolabes, parallel pivots, quadrants and Jakob’s 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    185
staff, including different sun, star and moon clocks during 
the age of Regiomontanus.  
Regiomontanus was interested in astronomical 
equipments at the beginning of his activity. He wrote the 
work on the complex astronomical device, which imitated 
movements of celestial bodies and was invented in 1327 by 
Richard of Wallingford, in 1455. Regiomontanus’s work 
about mentioned device hasn’t remained till the present 
day. His work “About geometrical quadrant” (“Quadra-
tum geometricum”) was written in 1457. Mentioned device 
was applied for determination of the Earth’s measurements 
in XI century and it was described for the first time by the 
French scientist Jan Liner in 1322.  
Almost during the same period, Regiomontanus wrote 
“Instrumenten amussis” (“Precise equipment”) consi-
dered for determination of heights of the Sun and stars. 
Besides it, Regiomontanus worked on improvement of road 
clocks. 
After the death of Regiomontanus, his student from 
Nurnberg – B. Walter installed armillary sphere and used it 
for observations in 1488-1504. Copernicus made observa-
tions by means of that device in 1512-1541. Different 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    186
improved armillary spheres were made and used in Tycho 
Brahe’s observatory. 1  
Though Regiomontanus’s life was too short, he could 
translate “Spherics” of Menelaus, “Spheres” of Theodosia 
and other works into Latin. I want to mention one 
interesting fact too. “Spherics” of Menelaus, who was from 
Alexandria, hasn’t remained till the present day. Abu Nasr 
Iraqi translated that work into Arabic in the early middle 
ages. Perhaps, Regiomontanus had seen translation of the 
work (Arabic version). But he was popular in the field of 
mathematics and astronomy owing to “Joannis Reqio 
Montanus. De triaquius pianis et srhericis lidev v. unae 
curtabulus sinuum”, which was about plane and spherical 
trigonometry.  
Regiomontanus completed this work in 1464, when 
worked on translation of a lot of manuscripts in Italy, but it 
was published 69 years later – in 1533. Besides it, he 
completed the work in Italy when copied manuscripts.  
Regiomontanus went to Padua in April of 1464 and got 
acquainted with G. Biankini there. He lectured at the 
University of Padua on the history of mathematics and 
Alfraganus’s (Al-Farghani) activity.   
                                                 
1
 Белый Ю. А. Тихо Браге. М. «Наука», 1982. стр. 229 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    187
The Spanish-Arab mathematician Jabir ibn Aflakh, who 
worked in Seville in the middle of XII century, (his name 
was Heber Geber in Latin texts) also had a role in 
development of trigonometry. He could solve the problem 
on spherical triangle with given cathetus and corresponding 
angle (Heber’s rule) for the first time in Europe. Results of 
works carried out by scientists of Muslim countries and 
their predecessors in the field of trigonometry were 
generalized in “Uncovering secrets of intersecting 
figures” or “Treatise on complete quadrilateral” of the 
scientist and encyclopaedist N. Tusi written in 1260. The 
treatise of N. Tusi is considered the first work, which 
analyzes trigonometry as an independent branch of science, 
in the history of mathematics. 
European scientists of the middle ages got acquainted 
with materials of trigonometry after translation of works of 
eastern scientists of ancient times and middle ages from 
Arabic into Latin. Adelard Bat translated astronomical 
tables of Al-Khwarizmi adapted by Al-Majriti in 1126 and 
created basis for acquainting European scientists with 
basics of trigonometry. Besides it, John of Seville trans-
lated astronomical tractate of the well-known astronomer 
Ahmet Al-Farghani from Fergana (IX century) known as 
“Book about elementary science on stars” in XII century. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    188
Regiomontanus was aware of both of mentioned 
translations. Besides it, probably, he had translation of Al-
Battani’s tractate “About movement of stars” which was 
made by Platoon from Tivoli in the middle of XII century 
and translation of N. Tusi’s “Treatise on complete 
quadrilateral”. As it was mentioned above, Regiomontanus 
had a Greek version of Ptolemy’s “Almagest” and he had 
learned ancient Greek language in order to translate it into 
Latin. Probably, Regiomontanus used translations of Jabir 
ibn Aflakh and Arab astronomer and mathematician az-
Zarkali (1030-1090), who was known in Europe as 
Arzakhel, either.  
It should be taken into consideration that, only few 
copies of above mentioned translations were available. 
Scientists of the Central Europe didn’t know anything 
about existence of translation of Al-Khwarizmi’s tables 
made by Adelard, though it was one of rare sources, by 
means of which Regiomontanus could learn tangent. 
Besides it, I think, Regiomontanus couldn’t use tables of 
tangents of all degrees between 0° and 45° made by the 
astronomer and mathematician Giovanni Campano da 
Novara (1260-1280) though he had translation of Euclid’s 
“Beginning” which was later published. These tables and 
tables of Regiomontanus’s colleague, who had studied at 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    189
the University of Vienna, – Peuerbach and his Italian 
colleague Giovanni Biankini were exceptions, other 
European predecessors of Regiomontanus couldn’t make 
any innovation in the field of trigonometry. 
It was done in 1462-1464. It was started in Rome and 
was completed in Padua. Regiomontanus wrote in his letter 
to Biankini that, the work about triangle was going to be 
completed.  
According to H. Mammadbayli, Regiomontanus had 
used N. Tusi’s “Shaklul qita” written in Arabic when he 
prepared manuscript of “De trianqulus”. It means that, the 
scientist knew Arabic. Though most scientists of the West 
write that, Regiomontanus didn’t know Arabic, it doesn’t 
correspond to reality.  
According to the encyclopedia “World astronomy”, Al-
Farghani’s “Basis of astronomy” – “Alfraqanj rudimen ta 
astronomioe” was published in Latin in Nurnberg in 1537. 
The manuscript of that work was found by Melanxton 
among manuscripts of Regiomontanus. Though Al-
Farghani was an Uzbek scientist, his book was in Arabic, 
but not in Greek. How could he translate the book, which 
was written in Arabic, if he didn’t know this language?  
Al-Battani’s “Mohametis Albeteni de Scienta 
Stellarum” was published in the same year in Nurnberg 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    190
together with Regiomontanus’s additions. The only copy of 
that book was kept in the Vatican library. So, the 
Academician F. Magsudov and Professor H. Mammadbayli 
wrote that, Regiomontanus knew Arabic and had read 
Nasiraddin Tusi’s works on trigonometry. N. Tusi was 
well-known in Europe then. All these facts prove that, 
Regiomontanus knew Arabic.  
There were Arabists, who worked with astronomers, in 
Rome, Florence and Venice as most scientific works of 
eastern scientists were written in Arabic and spread in 
Eastern Europe. Perhaps, Regiomontanus had learned 
Arabic with the help of those specialists.  
“De trianqulus” was published 57 years after the death 
of Regiomontanus. It was published by Johann Schoener 
and his son Andre Schoener. Saleh Zeki mentioned that, as 
the book published in 1533 was edited by Schoeners, it 
differed from previous versions. Johann Schoener worked 
as the professor of the University of Nuremberg then.  
The French historian of mathematics Montuklo wrote 
that, Schoeners had edited Regiomontanus’s work on 
trigonometry and he mentioned that, such perfect work 
couldn’t be written by the author of XV century. He 
thought that Schoeners had modified the work.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    191
Regiomontanus’s heirs couldn’t preserve his manu-
scripts after the scientist’s death. At last they were acquired 
by the leader of the Lutheran Church Melanxton in 
Nurnberg. He asked Schoeners to edit Regiomontanus’s 
“De trianqulus”. Let’s look through following fact in order 
to know Melanxton: 
Georg Lausen came from Nuremberg to Frombork to 
Copernicus in 1539, took manuscripts of the scientist’s 
“Rotation of celestial spheres” and returned to Nuremberg 
after three years in order to publish the work. He was 
dismissed from his position in the Wittenberg University in 
accordance with the order of Melanxton. He began to work 
in the Leipzig University. Andrea Ossiander was entrusted 
with publication of the book. Ossiander added a fake 
introduction to Copernicus’s book and there was a serious 
contrast between the book and that introduction.  
As Ossiander hadn’t mentioned the introduction’s 
author, it was known as Copernicus’s work for a long time. 
Why Copernicus denounced his own work? The introdu-
ction ended with: “Astronomical hypothesizes can’t be 
exact. Astronomy doesn’t require it. Only idiots can consi-
der these hypothesizes exact. Good luck, readers!” It means 
that, the author considered his own thoughts nonsense. He 
couldn’t evaluate his 36-years labor like this.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    192
At last in XIX century Pole astronomers proved that, 
mentioned introduction wasn’t written by Copernicus, it 
was written by Ossiander in accordance with Melanxton’s 
order.1 
 
     
                   Nikolaus Copernicus (1473-1543) 
                                                 
          1
 H. C. Məmmədbəyli. Mühəmməd Nəsirəddin Tusi. Bakı, “Gənclik”, 
1980. səh. 92-93 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    193
As Melanxton was a churchman, he approached 
important astronomical discoveries from the religious point 
of view. That’s why Georg Lausen was dismissed from his 
position in the Wittenberg University in accordance with 
the order of Melanxton after he took Copernicus’s book to 
Nuremberg and published it there. As several works of 
Copernicus, who had a significant role in development of 
astronomy, were considered illegal, most scientists of that 
time, especially Christian scientists tried to publish his 
works with fake introductions.  
The difference between the original of Regiomontanus’s 
“De trianqulus” and its copy published by Melanxton 
hasn’t been discovered. According to all these facts, it 
hasn’t been proved that, Regiomontanus was the author of 
mentioned work.  
N. Copernicus wrote about the Earth’s shape in 
“Commentaries about Aristotle’s “About the sky”” written 
in 1459: “The Earth is spherical. The spherical form is 
convenient for movement and especially for circular 
movement”.1  
N. Tusi’s “Shaklul qita” and table of trigonometric 
functions made in Maragha observatory prove that, 
                                                 
       
1
 Н. Веселовский, Ю. А. Белый. Николай Коперник. М.: 1974. 
«Наука», стр. 65 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    194
achievements of Regiomontanus and other European 
mathematicians were less than achievements of eastern 
scientists in XV century.  
Now we can write decisively that, Regiomontanus had 
learned Arabic when he was in Italy and translated Al-
Battani’s “Mohametis Albeteni de Scienta Stellarum” 
(scientific work of Muhammad Al-Battani about stars) 
into Latin. Besides it, he used N. Tusi’s “Shaklul qita” 
when he wrote his “De trianqulus”. The French historian 
of mathematics Montuklo also wrote that, European 
scientists couldn’t write any rich scientific work in XV 
century. It proves that, Tusi could pass ahead of western 
scientists in this field for hundreds of years and some of his 
works were stolen from libraries of Byzantine and 
Apennine Peninsula. Saleh Zeki wrote that, Regiomontanus 
had used scientific works of well-known eastern scientists.  
As it was mentioned above, the ancient Persian version 
of “Shaklul qita” was found in Istanbul in 1891. It is 
known that, one of manuscripts of that work is kept in the 
Berlin State Library and two of them are kept in Oxford 
and Paris.  
I want to mention that, scientists of the Near East wrote 
scientific works in Arabic in early middle ages, but ethical 
works were written in Persian. N. Tusi’s “Shaklul qita” 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    195
was written in Persian and Arabic. But its Arabic version 
hasn’t been found yet. May be it is kept in one of libraries 
of Germany or Austria.  
 
        
                            Muhammad Al-Battani 
 
There is no doubt that, “Zij-i Ilkhani” was translated by 
western scientists from Arabic into Latin as a very 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    196
important astronomical source and was analyzed by 
specialists of astronomy and mathematics. So, mentioned 
work of Nasiraddin Tusi might be kept in the library of the 
well-known astronomer Paolo Toscanelli located in 
Florence and part of it might be translated into Latin during 
a very short time. Regiomontanus had an opportunity to get 
acquainted with Toscanelli and Tusi’s works when he was 
in Italy.  
 
 
 
 
 
         The scientist known for scientific works 
   
“Collection of calculations” of the scientist, who was 
popular for his scientific works, was translated into Greek 
in Constantinople and then was taken to Italy. It is 
impossible to deny importance of his scientific 
achievements. H. Mammadbayli wrote: “Tusi wrote in the 
introduction of “Treatise on complete quadrilateral” that, 
continuous quantities could be understood only by means 
of discrete quantities. After 362 years, well-known scientist 
of geometry Cavaleri wrote in his letter to Galileo: “I think 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    197
that, the principle of quantities is common for both 
continuous and discrete quantities””.1  
Let’s see the example proving that, Tusi’s mathematical 
and astronomical works had spread in Europe: “There was 
following theorem in the 67th part of the well-known Pole 
scientist N. Copernicus’s “Rotation of celestial spheres”: 
A small circle moves inside another one and touches it. 
That circle’s radius is equal to half of the first circle’s 
radius. The second circle’s radius will outline the first 
circle’s diameter during the movement. That theorem was 
first proved by Nasiraddin Tusi and explained in 
“Memories about astronomy””.2 
It proves that, Nasiraddin Tusi’s “Memories about 
astronomy” and “Treatise on complete quadrilateral” 
were translated into Latin and were important sources for 
scientists. Most of his works about geometry, astronomy 
and trigonometry were translated into Latin by scientists of 
Western Europe in XIV century and published in XVI-
XVII centuries. According to the German scientist Henry 
Zutter, though churchmen were against development of 
relations with the East in the middle ages, they organized 
                                                 
            1
 H. C. Məmmədbəyli. Mühəmməd Nəsirəddin Tusi. Bakı, “Gənclik”, 
1980. səh. 135-136 
            2  
Ф. Г. Максудов, Г. Дж. Мамедбейли. Мухаммед Насирэддин 
Туси. Баку, «Гянджлик», 1981. стр.28 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    198
translation of “infidel Muslim” scientists’ scientific works 
into Latin with great pleasure. Most eastern scientists’ 
works on astronomy, mathematics, medicine and 
philosophy were translated from Arabic into Latin.  
The Soviet astronomer, academician M. F. Subbotin, 
who was considered great expert in the field of spherical 
mechanics, wrote about Tusi’s astronomical works: 
“Nasiraddin Tusi knew that, main essence of astronomy 
doesn’t consist of the “world system” only. It included 
collection of observation materials and determination of 
events. That’s why he founded an observatory and organi-
zed long-term systematic observations on the Sun, Moon 
and planets. On the other hand, the scientist made “Zij-i 
Ilkhani” with the help of scientists, which were invited to 
the observatory. Those tables were his main achievements. 
Nasiraddin realized the program, which would be realized 
by Ticho Brage after 300 years, when he made mentioned 
tables in accordance with special observations and analyze 
of Ptolemy’s mathematical theory. It proves that, 
Nasiraddin was aware of the science’s demands. Nasiraddin 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    199
Tusi could cope with all difficult works owing to his great 
energy and talent as an organizer”.1 
Works written by N. Tusi were considered important 
source for all scientists.   
Almost all well-known scientists of middle ages used N. 
Tusi’s scientific works and made important discoveries 
owing to those works.  
According to investigations, though N. Tusi’s “Book of 
collection of calculations with a board and land” written 
in 1265 hadn’t been learned by historians of mathematics 
very well, it was used by eastern scientists of the middle 
ages. Hasan Nishapuri’s “The Sun of arithmetic” written 
at the beginning of XIV century and Giyasaddin Kashi’s 
“The key to arithmetic” written at the beginning of XV 
century based on “Collection of calculations”.  
As Giyasaddin’s work had been analyzed by European 
researchers, everybody thought that, the method of finding 
root of all degrees was described in Giyasaddin Kashi’s 
“The key to arithmetic”. 
Soviet historians of mathematics did a lot of things in 
this field after the middle of XX century. Translation of XI 
chapter of N. Tusi’s “Collection of calculations” was 
                                                 
        
 
  1
 М. Ф. Субботин. Работы Мухаммеда Насирэддина по теории 
движения Солнца и планет. «Известия» АН Азерб. ССР. № 5, 1951. 
стр. 57 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    200
published in XV edition of “Researches on the history of 
mathematics” in 1963 in Moscow. After it, it became clear 
that, methods of finding root were described in Tusi’s 
above mentioned work 160 years before Giyasaddin Kashi.  
All these facts prove that, Tusi’s scientific works were 
very significant and his achievements weren’t refreshed by 
other scientists at least during 100 years. I want to mention 
that, Tusi’s most works, which aren’t known by people, are 
kept in ancient libraries of Tehran, Tabriz, Istanbul, 
Baghdad, Damascus and Near East without being analyzed 
and specialists have to work on them. The scientist is the 
first author of most discoveries in the field of mathematics. 
But foreign scientists often use his discoveries.  
As it was mentioned above, most scientific works of N. 
Tusi haven’t been learned by European researchers enough 
and so, some actual works of the scientist have been 
published by plagiarists as their own works.  
Tusi’s comprehensive scientific activity amazed people 
of all time. The Syrian historian Abul Faraj Bar Hebraeus 
worked in Maragha observatory in XIII century. He wrote 
about the observatory in his “General history”: “I got an 
opportunity to work in Maragha library, which was full of 
books written in Syrian, Arabic and Persian. The library 
wasn’t smaller than the library of Alexandria of Egypt and 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    201
was the greatest library of the world for number of 
scientific works kept there”.  
It proves that, Maragha library had a great role in 
development of the science and culture. Bar Hebraeus 
could get acquainted with very significant historical 
materials there. The Syrian historian wrote about Tusi in 
his “General history”: “The Turkish philosopher, well-
known scientist, mathematician Nasiraddin Tusi was 
introduced to me (in 1264). He had invented equipments 
(astronomical) for observations and created bigger (in 
comparison with Ptolemy’s circles) copper circles. He had 
visited Alexandria in order to observe and record planets’ 
movements. Scientists of different countries gathered 
around him in Maragha. 
He got salaries and grants of scientists and students for 
them. He had a lot of works – translation of “Logic”, 
researches on theology and natural sciences… Besides it, 
he is the author of “Ethics” (“Akhlagi Nasiri” – R. D.) 
written in Persian. He collected thoughts of Platoon and 
Aristotle about applied philosophy there. He had got 
acquainted with works of ancient philosophers either and 
didn’t deny them”. 
Such popular scientist couldn’t not to attract attention of 
scientists, philosophers, thinkers and intellectuals of the 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    202
West. N. Tusi was popular all over the world and his 
scientific heritage was discussed everywhere from Chine to 
Europe. There were enough information about him in large 
libraries of Europe and Near East in the middle ages.  
The value of the annual precession of the Earth’s 
rotation axis was determined as 51//4 in Maragha 
observatory under the leadership of N. Tusi (modern value 
is 51//2). There are a lot of mathematical, astronomical and 
geographical tables in “Zij-i Ilkhani”. The most important 
tables are tables of sinuses and tangents in sexagesimal 
numeral system and tables of geographic coordinates of 
256 cities, which were known in XIII century.  
Several astronomical catalogues consisting of geogra-
phic coordinates were made in the East before XIII century. 
But “Zij-i Ilkhani”, which was written in Maragha, was 
very different for exactness of measurements. Geographic 
coordinates of Peking and Cordova, which were situated in 
the East and West of the Old World, were fixed almost 
precisely in mentioned catalogue and distance between East 
and West of the Old World was calculated at the result of 
it. The length of the equator was almost equal to the 
modern value. So, the width of the Atlantic Ocean was 
more than the width of the Old World. It meant that, there 
should be a large land area in the middle of the Atlantic 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    203
Ocean. Coordinates of its eastern and western coasts had to 
be determined. According to “Zij-i Ilkhani”, Tusi and 
science collective of Maragha observatory could cope with 
this job successfully.  
 
         
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    204
    Preparation for discovery of America 
 
Though America was discovered by Christopher 
Columbus, scientists, who worked in Maragha observatory, 
were aware of existence of mentioned continent even in 
XIII century, because it was theoretically discovered by 
Nasiraddin Tusi.  
Though this fact is denied by most scientists, it should 
be admitted that, “Zij-i Ilkhani”, which was written in 
Maragha observatory under the leadership of Nasiraddin 
Tusi, had a great role in discovery of America. The most 
ancient manuscript of mentioned work was found after long 
researches. Besides it, manuscripts of 1308, 1403, 1600, 
1652 and 1711 were also found and presented to specialists. 
It is known that, geographic latitudes started from the 
equator. In the middle ages, all scientists wondered where 
the prime meridian started. Tusi wrote in the introduction 
of “Zij-i Ilkhani”: “Geographic longitude started in 
Algeria Haldat and Algeria Haldat is situated at 100 towards 
the west from the coast of the West Sea”. Haldat Islands 
were named “Islands of Good Luck” in geographical 
works. But according to some scientists, those islands were 
Canaries.  
 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    205
№    Names  
   of cities   
According    
  to Tusi 
According     
       to 
Greenwich 
Difference 
of degrees   
 
1. Cordova  380 26/ 040 47/ 330 39/  
2. Alexandria 610 54/ 300 03/ 310 51/  
3. Cairo   630 20/ 300 03/ 330 17/  
4. Aden  760 00/ 440 30/ 310 30/  
5. Medina  750 00/ 390 54/ 350 26/  
6. Mecca  770 10/ 390 50 / 370 20/  
7. Jerusalem  660 30/ 350 14/ 310 16/  
8. Damascus 700 00/ 360 18/ 330 42/  
9. Mosul  770 10/ 430 00/ 340 00/  
10. Khoy  790 40/ 440 58/ 340 42/  
11. Urmia  790 45/ 450 05/ 340 40/  
12. Nakhchivan  810 15/ 450 25/ 350 50/  
13. Maragha 820 00/ 460 10/ 350 50/  
14. Tabriz  820 00/ 460 17/ 350 43/  
15. Tiflis  830 00/ 440 49/ 380 11/  
16. Baku  840 30/ 490 52/ 340 38/  
17. Shamakhi  840 30/ 480 39/ 350 51/  
18. Derbent  850 00/ 480 17/ 360 43/  
19. Baghdad  800 00/ 440 24/ 350 56/  
20. Abadan  840 30/ 520 30/ 320 00/  
21. Shiraz  880 00/ 520 34/ 320 00/  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    206
22. Kazvin  850 00/ 500 00/ 350 00/  
23. Nishapur  920 00/ 580 51/ 330 09/  
24. Samarqand  990 16/ 660 59/ 320 17/  
25. Bukhara  960 30/ 640 25/ 320 05/  
26. Khujand  100035/ 690 38/ 300 57/  
27. Sana  770 00/ 440 30/ 320 30/  
28. Urganch 940 30/ 600 45/ 330 45/  
   Average    
 Difference 
  340  30/  
 
H. Mammadbayli, who published part of the table in his 
work “Muhammad Nasiraddin Tusi”, wrote: “According 
to the table, the prime meridian determined in Maragha 
observatory is situated at 34-350 west of today’s Greenwich 
Meridian. Where does this meridian pass? Let’s see 
geographic map in order to answer to this question. The 
meridian, which is situated at 34-350 west of today’s 
Greenwich Meridian, passes through San Roka Cape 
located on the eastern coast of South America. What does 
this mean? It is known that, discovery of America was 
started on October 12, 1492. But mentioned table was made 
in Maragha observatory in 1270 s. How could it happen? 
May be Columbus was aware of existence of America 
before it was discovered or Tusi’s table was wrong? Thus, 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    207
investigation of the table of Maragha observatory is very 
interesting. 
    
№ Names of      
     cities   
According    
  to Tusi 
According    
  to Biruni 
According    
 to Ptolemy 
1. Aden 760 00/ 700 00/ ------------- 
2. Mecca 770 10/ 670 00/ 670 00/ 
3. Medina  750 20/ 670 30/ 650 20/ 
4. Sana 770 00/ 670 20/ 630 30/ 
5. Bukhara  960 30/ 870 50/ 870 20/ 
6. Urganch  940 30/ 840 01/  ----------- 
7. Samarqand  990 00/ 890 00/ 890 30/ 
8. Khujand  100035/ 900 35/  ----------- 
 
Several tables made before Nasiraddin Tusi should be 
investigated. If geographic longitudes of same cities fixed 
in tables of different authors are compared, it will turn out 
that, Nasiraddin Tusi’s table is different.  
Comparison of tables proves that, Nasiraddin had 
determined the prime meridian at 100 towards the west. But 
he confirmed that, some of previous authors had 
determined the prime meridian before”.1  
                                                 
           1
 H. C. Məmmədbəyli. Mühəmməd Nəsirəddin Tusi. Bakı, “Gənclik”, 
1980. səh. 154-156 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    208
I should note that, P. Toscanelli had already seen N. 
Tusi’s “Zij-i Ilkhani” when he made his map in 1474. 
Perhaps, the Italian scientist had used Azerbaijani scien-
tist’s mentioned work.  
But astronomers and geographers of XV century 
wondered why N. Tusi determined the prime meridian at 
100 towards the west of Haldat Islands – the eastern coast of 
the Atlantic Ocean, though other scientists as Al-Biruni and 
Al-Khojandi determined the prime meridian at 250 towards 
the west of the Greenwich Meridian. Surely, it couldn’t 
happen by accident. How could he know where the remote 
eastern part of South America was located? If N. Tusi’s 
purpose was to get different result, he could determine the 
prime meridian at 440 towards the west of the Greenwich 
Meridian. Such result would be more expedient for 
scientists of the observatory. Thus, in that case, 900 
meridian could pass through Maragha. It proves that, Tusi 
was sure that he was right. Ch. Columbus, who went to 
transatlantic travel, knew whose help he needed. He wrote: 
“Ptolemy and other scientists wrote that, the Earth was 
spherical. They mentioned that, its center was on the Aran 
Islands. According to them, that area was located below the 
equator, between Arabian and Persian Gulfs and the Earth’s 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    209
boundaries passed San Vicente Cape in Portugal and 
Kangara and Seres in the East”.1  
Columbus wrote that, the Aran Islands were on 90-
degree meridian in the Eastern Hemisphere. Mentioned 
island is situated below the equator, between Arabian and 
Persian Gulfs. It may be Sheisel Islands only. The 
longitude of those islands was 530 with regard to the 
Greenwich Meridian. Completion of this measurement is 
340. Ch. Columbus’s and N. Tusi’s results are almost same. 
It means that, the well-known traveler had got acquainted 
with the astronomical table made in Maragha.  
Mentioned table consisted of coordinates of 256 cities. 
These cities included Cordoba of Spain and Peking of 
Chine. 
 
 
 
 
        The map made in Maragha in Europe 
 
The member of the Academy of Sciences of Uzbekistan 
T. N. Niyazov analyzed longitudes of Samarqand, Bukhara, 
Herat, Osh and Khojand and determined the prime 
                                                 
           1
 Христофор Колумб. «Путешествие», 1952. стр. 391 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    210
meridian at 320 towards the west of the Greenwich 
Meridian. It means that, “Zij-i Ilkhani” had been made 
professionally.  
As it is known, Ch. Columbus had used Canaries as a 
passage when he started his travel. But he could use Green 
Cape Islands, Azores and Madeira Island instead of 
Canaries. 
Scientists of the middle ages wondered where Haldat 
Islands and Islands of Good Luck were situated. Some 
scientists wrote that, mentioned islands were situated at 350 
towards the west of the Greenwich Meridian. 
The English scientist G. R. Kaye wrote in his work 
“Astronomy of India” that, Islands of Good Luck were 
situated at 350 towards the west of the Greenwich 
Meridian.1 
Why did he think like this? Most of scientists of the 
ancient time and middle ages thought that, Islands of Good 
Luck were situated at 350 towards the west of the Atlantic 
Ocean. Their location was near the border of the Old 
World. It means that, Kaye described mentioned islands at 
350 towards the west of the Greenwich Meridian. As it is 
known, there aren’t such islands at 350 towards the west of 
the Atlantic Ocean.  
                                                 
           1
 Г. Р. Кае. «Индийская астрономия». 1924. стр. 52 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    211
Al-Biruni wrote: “Some scientists calculated the begin-
ning longitude from Islands of Good Luck and others 
started calculation from the coast of the West Sea. The 
difference between these two places is 100”. The Arab 
geographer Ali ibn Said Al-Maghribi Al-Andaluzi (1214-
1274), who lived in Spain during the age of N. Tusi, wrote 
about Haldat Islands: “The Earth is spherical. It is 
surrounded by water on all sides. 
The dwelling part of the Earth – Algeria extended from 
Haldat to Isles of Scilly for 1800. Algeria Haldat was in the 
West. But Isles of Scilly were in the East”.  
Ali Al-Andaluzi didn’t write openly that, the Earth was 
surrounded by water on all sides and didn’t mention which 
places were its dwelling areas. He didn’t describe concrete 
place of Algeria Haldat, but as it was in the West, some 
scientists thought that, it was Canaries, Madeira Island or 
Azores. I’ll disprove it below. The concrete place of Isles 
of Scilly also may be determined. As meridians weren’t 
divided precisely in those years, eastern parts of Asia, end 
of the Indonesian archipelago – Moluccas, Sulu archipelago 
and New Guinea were considered the East. Ali Al-Andaluzi 
tried to fix the beginning and end of the Eastern 
Hemisphere in XIII century.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    212
Of course, scientists of Maragha observatory also 
thought about location of Algeria Haldat. The Syrian 
scientist Gregory Abul Faraj, who worked together with N. 
Tusi, wrote: “According to Greek scientists, the dwelling 
part of the Earth starts on the west and it is called Islands of 
Good Luck or Haldat Islands”.  
Well-known Azerbaijani geographer and historian of 
XIII century Mahmud Ghaznavi thought that, Islands of 
Good Luck or Haldat Islands were situated on the western 
coast of the Atlantic Ocean. Another scientist of the 
observatory, Mahmud ben Masud Gutbaddin Shirazi wrote 
about mentioned islands: “According to Ptolemy and other 
scientists, the beginning longitude started from six islands, 
which were called Algeria Good Luck and Algeria Haldat 
and they were situated on the West Sea called “ocean”. 
Those islands were dwelling areas in the ancient time. They 
were in front of Ethiopian. But now they have been covered 
by water”.  
Thus, two of scientists, who worked in Maragha 
observatory, Gregory Abul Faraj and Gutbaddin Shirazi 
wrote that, Algeria Good Luck and Algeria Haldat 
consisted of six islands and they were situated on the West 
Sea – on the prime meridian. Which islands did they 
consider? We’ll analyze it later.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    213
Now, let’s see opinions of several scientists. The Arab 
scientist Harrani (XIV century) wrote: “Western lands start 
from the West Sea. Nobody has ever been on the other side 
of that sea and don’t know what is located there. There are 
plenty of settled islands there. Two of them are called 
Haldat. Two of them are the largest ones”. 
These words of Harrani surprised H. Mammadbayli and 
he wrote: “… Harrani’s opinion is so interesting… Two of 
these islands – Cuba and Haiti are larger than other ones. It 
can be seen in the schedule of relative measurements. So, 
Harrani considered that, Islands of Cuba and Haiti were 
Algeria Haldat”.1 
Most scientists thought like this. But it can’t be 
considered a sensation. Scientists thought that, Anthill 
islands located on the border of western lands and two large 
islands located there – Cuba and Haiti were Algeria Haldat. 
According to them, Anthill islands consisted of many 
islands and two of them were larger than other ones. I’m 
obliged to disprove it. Islands mentioned by Harrani can’t 
be Anthill islands. Scientists of the middle ages described 
Anthill islands on the eastern coast of Asia, near Japan. As 
America hadn’t been discovered then, nobody could 
                                                 
        
 
1
 H. C. Məmmədbəyli. Mühəmməd Nəsirəddin Tusi. Bakı, “Gənclik”, 
1980. səh. 160-161 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    214
describe Anthill islands in the east of that continent. But 
some scientists and geographers described Anthill islands 
on the western coast of the West Sea. Nevertheless, it 
doesn’t mean that, Harrani meant today’s Anthill islands.  
Ancient scientists wrote that, Anthelia Islands were 
situated in the east of Asia. Really, maps, where Anthelia 
Islands were described, had spread broadly in Europe.  
The Italian cartographer Francisco Pisano made a map in 
1367 and described Anthelia Islands there. That map is kept 
in the Parma Public Library of Italy at present. Another 
map made by unknown author in 1424 is kept in the library 
located in Weimar, Germany. Its author was the German 
scientist Humboldt. The French cartographer Battista 
Beccaria also made a map in 1435. Anthelia Islands were 
described there under the name Stonechat. The Italian 
cartographer Andrea Biankini described Anthelia Islands in 
the centre of the Atlantic Ocean on his map made in 1436.   
Why did scientists named those islands Anthelia? 
Eratosthenes wrote that, it was possible to reach India by 
sailing towards the west from Spain without changing the 
parallel. So, scientists thought that, there was only the West 
Sea (Atlantic Ocean) between eastern coasts of Asia and 
Europe including western coasts of Africa. Everybody 
imagined the Earth like this before the discovery of 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    215
America. Africa was called Libya in the ancient time. So, 
islands located on the western coast of the West Sea were 
called Anti-Libya. Gradually this name became Anthelia.  
Besides astronomy and mathematics, geography also 
was investigated in Maragha. For example, coordinates of 
256 cities of the Old World were determined there. So, a 
map of the Earth could be made in this city. It is known 
that, the most ancient sky globe of the world had been 
made by scientists of Maragha observatory. I mean, it 
wasn’t difficult for those scientists to make a map of the 
Earth. Besides it, manuscripts of scientists of the 
observatory prove that, Karimaddin Abubakr ibn Mahmud 
Salmasi had made the first geographic globe in 1266. But 
unfortunately, it hasn’t remained till the present time. 
I think, the map of the Earth made in Maragha was 
copied and some of its copies were taken to Europe. It 
means that, N. Tusi did his best in order to prevent loss of 
inventions made in Maragha observatory.  
I think, N. Tusi, Gutbaddin Shirazi, Muayyidaddin Ordy 
and Fao Mun-Chi had copies of mentioned map as they had 
great roles in realization of works of the observatory. So, it 
is convincing that, the map had several copies.  
For example, the remarkable scientist of Maragha 
observatory Gutbaddin Shirazi worked in the observatory 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    216
till 1282 and then he was sent to Egypt as the ambassador 
of Mongols. He might take the copy of above mentioned 
map to Egypt as he was interested in cartography. The 
scientist had made the map of the Mediterranean Sea and 
lands located near it when he worked in Egypt. Later Egypt 
was arrested by the Ottoman Empire and probably, the map 
was taken as a strategically important material.  
 
 
 
 
 
     Christopher Columbus and the discovery of   
                          global importance 
 
Christopher Columbus was born in 1451 in Porta 
dell’Olivella – near the eastern part of Genoa, Italy, in the 
family of the weaver. He loved the sea and first travelled 
from Genoa to Khios in 1474-1475. Ch. Columbus met an 
accident on coasts of Portugal when he travelled from 
Khios to Flandreau in 1476 and was obliged to go to 
Lisbon. Columbus went to England, Ireland and Spain in 
the following year and returned to Portugal. So, the future 
admiral could visit important places located in the north-
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    217
western part of Europe. He could become a professional 
seaman. 
 
        
                Christopher Columbus (1451-1506)         
 
Christopher Columbus married Felipa Moniz Perestrello 
in 1479 in Madeira Island or Portugal and began to live in 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    218
Madeira Island. He started to learn practical navigation in 
Porto Santo Island. The traveler enlarged his knowledge in 
expeditions to Guinea realized in 1482 or 1483 after 
travelling to Azores.  
Great geographical discoveries have successfully been 
used in ship building, navigation and improvement of 
geographical knowledge. Portuguese and Spaniards learned 
to make improved vessels, which could sail against the 
wind. Use of compass and development of cartography 
allowed sailing on an open ocean. As the Earth was 
considered spherical, people hoped that they would find 
eastern countries by sailing towards the west. 1  
Only one way existed for going to India and Chine. It 
was the “Silk way”, which extended to Damascus, Tabriz 
and Peking. Abu Al-Hasan Ali Al-Masudi, Abu Hamid Al-
Harnati from Granada, Giovanni da Pian del Carpine, 
Benedict from Poland, Andre Langumo, Guillaume de 
Rubrouck, Nicollo, Maffeo and Marco Polo, Ruy Gonzales 
de Clavijo and Niccolo de Conti, who were sent to the 
travel in accordance with orders of the Pope and European 
rulers, entered Asia from Small Asia and Levant. 
Merchants met great difficulties as taxes were too high. 
                                                 
         
1
 М. Л. Абрамсон, А. А. Кириллова, Н. Ф. Колесницкий и др.; 
Под ред. Н. Ф. Колесницкого. История средних веков: 2-е изд. испр. 
и доп. Москва, «Просвещение», 1986. стр. 391 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    219
People preferred to go round Africa in order to go to 
mentioned countries over the sea.  
Columbus prepared his project for travelling to India 
through the western way when he was in Portugal and 
presented it to the king of Portugal Juan II in 1484. His idea 
was very simple and consisted of true and false parts. First 
(true): the earth is round. Second (false): the largest part of 
the Earth is land – Europe, Africa and Asia. So, the 
distance between the western coast of Europe and eastern 
coast of Asia is small: it is possible to reach India, Chine 
and Japan in the shortest time by passing the Atlantic 
Ocean through the west. But, seamen had to sail about 
10000 km (to Japan) between Europe and Asia.1 It was very 
difficult without having any stopping-place. 
The Italian scientist, cosmographer and astronomer 
Paolo dal Pozzo Toscanelli (1397 Florentine – 1482), who 
lived in XV century, and humanist Pietro Martire also 
thought like this. Genius scientists as Aristotle, Eudoxus of 
Cnidus, Posidoni, Eratosthenes, Pifey, Pliny the Elder, 
Pompony Mela, Strabo and Plutarch also thought that, such 
travel was possible. The idea of Common Ocean was 
accepted by the church in the middle ages. Such theory was 
                                                 
        1
 И. П. Магидович, В. И. Магидович. Очерки по истории географи-
ческих открытий. II том. Москва, «Просвещение», 1982. стр.14  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    220
affirmed by the Islamic world including well-known 
Muslim scientists – Ali Al-Masudi, Muhammad Al-
Khwarizmi, Battani, Abu Raihan Al-Biruni, Mahmud Al-
Khojandi, Idrisi and Nasiraddin Tusi. 
The king and his noblemen understood that, Genoese 
scientists were enough wise. Juan II sent Columbus to 
“Mathematical Union”, which was organized under the 
leadership of the archbishop of Ceuta Diego Ortiz de 
Villegas. Other members of that organization were Jewish 
scientists. Rodrigo, who had improved astrolabe and 
sextant, and expert of the navigation astronomy Hose 
Vitsingo were among those scientists.1 Mentioned persons 
thought that, measures and distances hadn’t been fixed 
correctly in Columbus’s project. Though those scientists 
also didn’t know exact sizes of the Earth, they were sure 
that, calculations of Columbus were wrong. So, they 
advised king to reject him.  
Columbus tried to prove that, though it was difficult to 
reach eastern coasts of Asia through the western way, it 
was possible. Portuguese couldn’t achieve any positive 
result in research of unknown lands by using Columbus’s 
project. It had a reason.  
                                                 
        1
 Ч. Верлинден. Покорители Америки. Ростов-на-Дону, «Феникс», 
1997. стр. 21 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    221
Al-Biruni, who was well-known scientist of Europe, had 
determined the prime meridian at 250 towards the west of 
the Greenwich Meridian and Portuguese seamen looked for 
Anthelia Islands and Islands of Good Luck there. Thus, 
expeditions organized under the leadership of “Mathe-
matical Union” in Portugal hadn’t to move away from the 
 
             
              Paolo dal Pozzo Toscanelli (1397-1482) 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    222
 
prime meridian. So, expeditions, which tried to discover 
Anthelia Islands and Islands of Good Luck, couldn’t reach 
America. Though the prime meridian was kept secret by 
Portuguese, Columbus had understood that, they applied 
the prime meridian determined by Al-Biruni. So, it was 
impossible to discover the continent located in the west of 
the Atlantic Ocean. The expedition of Portuguese organized 
in 1487 under the leadership of Van Olmen, which carried 
out researches in the west of the ocean, didn’t worry 
Columbus. Anthelia Islands and Islands of Good Luck 
weren’t on the prime meridian determined by Al-Biruni. 
Columbus planned to apply the prime meridian determined 
by N. Tusi. He was sure that, mentioned meridian would 
take him to unknown lands.  
Columbus got acquainted with Herzog von Medinaceli 
don Luis de la Cerda with the help of Antonio Marchena 
when he was in Spain. Herzog approved the Genoese 
seaman’s project and informed the queen Isabella about it, 
besides it, he said that, if the queen rejected Columbus, he 
would organize an expedition on his own account. The 
queen invited Columbus to Alcazar Palace in Cordoba on 
May 1, 1486 in order to get acquainted with him and 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    223
presented his project to the special commission for 
discussion after interesting dialogue.  
The commission gathered first in Cordoba and then in 
Salamanca, which was considered town of universities. The 
commission, which was organized under the leadership of 
Isabella’s godfather Hernando Talavera and consisted of 
monarchs and noblemen, made negative decision after 4 
years.  
Columbus didn’t lose his courage and read a lot of 
scientific books in order to prepare for the expedition. He 
mainly read books on geography and cosmography. 
Especially, he read Marco Polo’s books and made a lot of 
notes about them. He was sure that, his considerations were 
correct. Besides it, he had Pliny’s “Natural history” in an 
Italian translation published in 1489, works of Plutarch and 
Ptolemy. He made notes on several books as Pierre de 
Ailli’s “Imaqo Mundi” (“World Map”) and Enea Silvia 
Piccolomini’s (is known as the Pope Pius II) “Historia 
rerum ubique Mundi” besides Marco Polo’s book written 
in Latin, which is still kept in the Columbia Library of 
Seville. There are about 2125 notes made by him.1  
                                                 
        1
 Ч. Верлинден. Покорители Америки. Ростов-на-Дону, «Феникс», 
1997. стр. 32 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    224
Pierre de Ailli wrote a tractate on general geography in 
1410. He supported ideas of Marinus of Tyre, who thought 
that, Asia extended towards the east and there was only a 
narrow ocean between Asia and Europe. The French 
cosmographer even wrote that, it was possible to pass that 
ocean in several days when the weather was fine. The 
Genoese seaman underlined this sentence and made 
detailed note about it. He made notes about the sentence, 
where the author of “Imaqo Mundi” wrote that, Spain isn’t 
very far from India and the east starts near the west. 
Chapters about India and Asia are full of notes. 
He underlined one of paragraphs in Enea Silvia 
Piccolomini’s “Historia rerum”, where the author wrote 
that, Asia extended towards the latitude of Spain. He noted 
on other paragraph, where the author described Chinese as 
peaceful creatures, that, Chine is situated near India, on the 
other side of Spain and Ireland.  
J. Baker wrote that, Columbus’s cosmographical ideas 
were founded in the middle ages. He used the book of 
Pierre de Ailli – “Tractatus de imagine mundi” (Tractate 
about the description of the Earth), which included 
thoughts of Roger Bacon described in “Opus Magus” at 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    225
the end of XIII century. So, Columbus hadn’t any new 
ideas. 1  
Columbus had read “Almagest” of Ptolemy in 
Regiomontanus’s translation and “Measurement of the 
Earth’s circle” written in 9 chapters by Dicuilus, who was 
the author of two tractates about geography and astronomy 
(814-816) in order to learn geography and astronomy. 
Dicuilus’s work was the first work written about geography 
in the French Empire. Main materials used for the work 
were taken from works of ancient scientists including 
Pliny.  
The king Juan II entrusted the Frenchman by name 
Ferdinand van Olmen known in Portugal as Fernando de 
Ulmo with research of lands located on the other side of the 
Atlantic Ocean, after “Mathematical Union” rejected 
Columbus. Van Olmen started his travel with two caravels 
in spring of 1487.2 In 1462, the former king of Portugal 
Alfonse V sent the seaman by name Vogado in that 
direction as the head of the expedition for discovery of 
unknown islands located in the west of the Atlantic Ocean, 
                                                 
       
1 
Дж. Бейкер. История географических открытий и исследований. 
Пер. с англ.М., «Иностранной литература», 1950. IV глава. 
         2  
Ч. Верлинден. Покорители Америки. Ростов-на-Дону, «Феникс», 
1997. стр. 23 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    226
but the expedition couldn’t get any result. Van Olmen 
couldn’t return from the expedition.  
Columbus’s project was presented to the commission 
again in 1491, but he was rejected again. So, the Genoese 
seaman decided to go to France and Herzog Luis de 
Santangel, who was the financial counselor of Ferdinand 
from Aragon, convinced everybody that, Spain would 
repent for allowing Columbus to go.1  
The king’s herald came up with the seaman at 6 km 
away from Granada and made him to return back. 
Columbus’s marine (“Santa Maria”, “Pinta” and “Ninia”) 
left the port of Palos on August 3, 1492, discovered the 
island of Guanahini (today’s Watling) located within 
Bahamas on October 12 and proved existence of the fourth 
continent of the world. Admiral reached Lisbon on March 
4, 1493. Afterwards, Columbus travelled to coasts of the 
New World for three times – in 1493-1496, 1498-1500 and 
1502-1504 and deliberately declared that, had discovered 
East Asia in order to mislead monarchs. But I emphasized 
in my works, especially in “Christopher Columbus, 
Nasiraddin Tusi and discovery of America” that, the well-
                                                 
1
    
2 
Ф. Дж. Купер. Мерседес из Кастилии или путешествие в Катай. 
Одесса, «Маяк», 1985. стр. 91 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    227
known seaman knew where he was going and when he 
would reach the land. 
Besides it, there is another “skeptic” conception too 
(since the middle of XVI century). According to this 
conception, Columbus knew that there was a land area in 
the west of the Atlantic Ocean before he started his travel 
on August 3, 1492. A. Vinio of America, Romulo Carbia of 
Argentine, M. Endre of France and R. Ballester Escalas of 
Spain supported this conception in XX century. 1  
I want to mention some details in order to analyze 
mentioned discovery. There are some literatures about 
purposes of Columbus’s expedition. According to some of 
them, Columbus planned to reach Asia in 1492. It is 
necessary, to look through the agreement signed by the 
seaman and two kings in order to check this consideration. 
He could get titles and privileges, which he wanted, only 
after the discovery. Asia or any part of that continent 
wasn’t described in the agreement.  
Portuguese seamen got right of organizing expeditions 
towards the south and east of Canaries and seamen of 
Castilia could organize expeditions towards the west and 
north when the Pope divided the Earth between Castilia and  
                                                 
1
 В. Л. Афанасьев. Текст воспроизведен по изданию: Бартоломе де 
Лас Касас. История Индии. Ленинград, «Наука», 1968. стр. 18 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    228
   
      Christopher Columbus started his first transatlantic travel 
 
Portugal in 1479. So, monarchs of Castilia couldn’t 
mention any part of Asia in the agreement concluded with 
Columbus. Almost entire continent was given to Portugal. 
But the agreement might be only about Asia as according to 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    229
ideas existing in ancient times and early middle ages, only 
Asia could be situated in the west of Europe, on the other 
side of the Atlantic Ocean.1  
According to official chronics, after the first travel, 
Columbus declared that, he had discovered India in the 
west of Europe and brought several Hindus from there. 
The Italian humanist Pietro Martire (Poignant Peter), 
who lived in Barcelona and were close to the kingdom 
palace, corresponded with his fellow-countrymen. He had 
written in the letter written on November 1, 1493: “One 
person by name Colon (Columbus) says that, he could 
reach India, the place of antipodes of the west. He 
discovered many islands located on the other side of the 
East Ocean near India as cosmographers thought… I don’t 
want to write anything about it, nevertheless size of the 
Earth made me to think otherwise”.  
That is, before the travel of Christopher Columbus, 
Pietro Martire thought otherwise about calculations of 
Paolo Toscanelli.  
I think that, Ch. Columbus couldn’t agree with thoughts 
of the Florentine cosmographer. First of all, well-known 
sea traveler couldn’t agree with length of the Earth’s 
                                                 
           1
 Ф. Дж. Купер. Мерседес из Кастилии или путешествие в Катай. 
Одесса, «Маяк», 1985. стр. 237 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    230
outline. It means that, Asia isn’t situated in the Atlantic 
Ocean at 10000-12000 km away from Canaries in the west  
 
     
       Christopher Columbus approached Guanahani Island 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    231
as Paolo Toscanelli thought. Columbus had determined 
that, land area located in the west of the Atlantic Ocean was 
at 4500-5000 km away from Europe. It means that, the 
mentioned land was other land, which was unknown for the 
Old World.  
I think, he agreed with ideas of the Azerbaijani scientist 
after getting acquainted with N. Tusi’s “Zij-i Ilkhani” and 
his map and was sure that, the land area located in the west 
of the Atlantic Ocean was at 5000-5500 km away from 
Europe. That distance could be overcome in 30-35 days.  
Toscanelli was a defender and leader of the public 
library founded by the humanist Niccolo Niccolini. He 
defended ideas mentioning that, the Earth is spherical and 
planned to go to India through the western way. The 
astronomer had edited “Table of Alfonso” (XIII century). 
Though Toscanelli had read scientific works of most 
scientists, he had lessened measurements of the Earth for 
unknown results.  
Experts can’t justify Toscanelli for such rude mistake. 
He had made elementary mistakes when made his map in 
1474. But he had opportunities for preventing those 
mistakes. The Greek scientist Eratosthenes lived in 
Alexandria. According to his calculations, the length of the 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    232
Earth’s outline was 43625 km and its radius was 6943 km.1 
There is no doubt that, Columbus knew this fact. As he was 
interested in astronomy, he had taken into account 
calculations of Eratosthenes, Poseidon, Al-Khwarizmi, Al-
Biruni, Tusi and Toscanelli before starting his travel. 
 
        
                     Eratosthenes (276-194 BC)     
                                                 
        1
 R. Qasımov. Konkistadorların Mərkəzi Çili sahillərində faciəli ölümü. 
Bakı, “Çaşıoğlu”, 1999. səh 247 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    233
Usually cupolas of temples were used as part of sun 
watches. The most popular example is the cupola of Santa 
Maria del Fiore located in Florentine. P. Toscanelli 
installed his popular gnomon in the temple in 1474 and 
could determine afternoon moment by means of it with 
exactness of half a second.  
He attached a bronze plate with a hole in the middle of it 
on the window located on 90 m and made a ruler on the 
floor in the left of the main church. Rays of the Sun passed 
through the hole of the disk and reached the floor in two 
months – between the end of May and end of June. The 
device had remained until the end of XIX century and then 
was destroyed by restorers by mistake.  
At the result of inexactness of measurements, Toscanelli 
lessened measurements of the Earth and determined that, 
the distance between Spain and India was 6 thousand miles 
– this measurement was two times less than the real 
measurement. 
The French physician Jan Fernell (1497-1558), who was 
interested in astronomy, wrote that, the length of the 
Earth’s outline was 39816 km and its radius was 6337 km.1 
It means that, Toscanelli had made a mistake. According to 
                                                 
      
   
 1
 О. Коротцев. Глобус, как измеряли землю. Ленинград, «Д.Л», 
1980. стр. 312  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    234
his calculations, the length of the Earth’s outline was 29000 
km. So, Columbus didn’t accept report of the Florentine 
scientist and took into account measurements determined 
by the Greek scientist Eratosthenes and geographic 
coordinates determined by N. Tusi.  
 
   
           Description of the world according to Eratosthenes 
 
Of course, my hypothesis is serious enough. As N. 
Tusi’s map was kept in the library of Florentine, “Zij-i 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    235
Ilkhani” also might be kept there. How could Columbus 
find that work then?  
 
 
 
 
        Destiny of the map of Maragha 
   
 Jamaluddin iz-Zeydi Bukhari went to Chine together 
with the Chinese scientist Fao Mun-Chi in 1265, when 
Maragha observatory was being built. Fao Mun-Chi, who 
shared scientific investigations carried out in Azerbaijan 
with his colleagues, could become very popular in Nanking 
and in the Emperor’s Palace in a very short time.  
The emperor of Chine Khubilay (1256-1295), who paid 
special attention to all branches of the science, got 
acquainted with works of the young scientist and created 
good opportunities for him. The emperor’s father Mongke 
khan had ordered Hulegu khan to occupy the Alamut castle 
of Hashashins as he wanted to invite Tusi to Chine in order 
to establish an observatory there. Hulegu khan occupied the 
castle, but the Azerbaijani scientist deviated from going to 
Chine. Afterwards Khubilay khan decided to establish an 
observatory in the capital of the empire Khanbaliq and sent 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    236
Fao Mun-Chi to Maragha for achieving practise in this 
field.  
After long preparations, construction of the observation 
was started in Khanbaliq in 80th years of XIII century under 
the leadership of the well-known Chinese astronomer Qo 
Shu-Ching with participation of Fao Mun-Chi. Almost all 
equipments used in this observatory were invented by 
experts of Maragha observatory. Armillary sphere, Rotary 
quadrant and sky globe are among them.  
This fact has been noted in historical sources as well. 
According to historical sources of Chine, Jamaluddin iz-
Zeydi Bukhari had brought small models and draughts of 
devices invented in Maragha observatory to Chine. The 
professional astronomer Jamaluddin worked on preparation 
of the Chinese calendar and the calendar of Jan Van was 
accepted in Chine in accordance with his offer. Geographic 
coordinates of 27 settlements of Chine also were fixed in 
“Zij-i Ilkhani”. Astronomers of Maragha had important 
roles in development of trigonometry and astronomy in 
Chine.  
Most works of Fao Mun-Chi were kept in large libraries 
as exponents after his death. The well-known Italian 
traveler Marco Polo, who had visited Chine in 1272, had 
worked as the ambassador of Khubilay khan in accordance 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    237
with the offer of the Italian Aysen. Marco Polo could see 
the map brought from Azerbaijan in Nanking.1 He knew 
that, it was brought by Fao Mun-Chi. There is no doubt 
that, the Venetian traveler knew Fao Mun-Chi and learned 
something about scientific works carried out in Maragha.  
Marco Polo bought mentioned map and took it to his 
motherland. The relation between Azerbaijan and Chine 
became more regular after formation of Ilkhanids by 
Hulegu khan. The friendship between two countries was 
improved. Chinese astronomers used the prime meridian 
fixed in “Zij-i Ilkhani”. They considered mentioned work 
the most precise astronomical catalogue and the most 
skilful scientific workers of the world worked in Maragha 
observatory.  
I came to the conclusion that, mentioned map could be 
kept in the public library founded by the Italian humanist 
Niccolo Niccolini in Florentine. The map, which was 
considered property of Polos, could be presented to the 
library in order to be preserved.  
Marco Polo presented a copy of his book to the 
Frenchman Tibo de Sepua, who was the ambassador in 
Venice, in 1307 – 8 years after leaving Genoa prison. The 
                                                 
       1
 R. Qasımov. Xristofor Kolumb, Nəsirəddin Tusi və Amerika qitəsinin 
həqiqi kəşfi. Bakı, “Çaşıoğlu”, 2002. səh 124  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    238
French ambassador returned to his motherland after 
completing his work in Venice. So, mentioned work began 
to be copied and spread in France and “Travel book” began 
to be discussed again. But afterwards it turned out that, the 
book was full of mistakes. In spite of it, materials of Marco 
Polo’s book were used by other authors either. For 
example, there were some citations from that book in the 
novel of Bodue.  
After a while the traveler’s book was found by 
geographers. Traveler’s biography was written by the 
Venetian geographer Ramuzino 200 years after his death. 
He translated Marco Polo’s work from French into Italian 
and included it in the second volume of “Travels by land 
and sea”.  
The map considered for start of cross marches was 
included in “Book of Christians” written by Marino 
Sanudo the Elder in 1320. That map included descriptions 
of Europe, Syria, Small Asia and Arabia. Probably, the 
author had used Marco Polo’s map. Besides it, the Venetian 
traveler had described territories of Georgia, Darband and 
Chine on the map rightly.  
Victor Shklovsky wrote in his historical narrative “Land 
explorer”: “There was Marco Polo’s “Travel book” in the 
vessel when Christopher Columbus left Spain during his 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    239
first travel and that book substituted for the compass and 
map”.1  
It is obvious that, Columbus was interested in the 
Venetian traveler’s book. Probably, he had got acquainted 
with all materials brought from Chine by Polo. Columbus 
accidentally found Tusi’s map when looked through 
materials brought by the Venetian traveler.  
Unlike V. Shklovsky, my hypothesis is as following: 
There was the map of America besides other materials in 
the vessel when Columbus started his travel towards the 
New World and that book substituted for the compass. 
Columbus’s work became easier as the prime meridian of 
the Old World passed through the remote eastern part of the 
unknown land. Mentioned map could be prepared under the  
leadership of N. Tusi. The location of the continent located 
on the other side of the Atlantic Ocean was approximately 
described on the map.  
Toscanelli couldn’t agree with most ideas of N. Tusi. 
Though huge land area was described at 5000 km towards 
the west of Europe on the map of the Azerbaijani scientist, 
Toscanelli thought that, it was in the east of Asia and at 
10000-12000 km  towards the  west  of coasts of the Old  
                                                 
         
 
1
 В. Шкловский. Земли разведчик. Москва, «Молодая гвардия», 
1966. стр. 194 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    240
 
       The map made by Toscanelli in 1474 (reconstruction) 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    241
World. Probably, Toscanelli imagined the land located in 
the west of the Atlantic Ocean as part of Asia when looked 
through calculations of N. Tusi.  
That’s why he didn’t agree with reports prepared in 
Maragha observatory and mentioned that, as the Earth was 
spherical, if there was a land area on the ocean on the way 
to the west, it should be part of Asia. Toscanelli wrote as 
most scientists of XV century that, there couldn’t be 
another continent in the Earth besides existing three 
continents.  
The Florentine cosmographer thought that, if the fourth 
continent existed, it could be discovered before. So, only 
the eastern part of Asia could be situated in the west of 
Europe, on the Atlantic Ocean. Besides it, the Florentine 
cosmographer wrote that, huge land area could be reached 
after about 10000-12000 km.1 
Columbus took all these facts and reports made in 
Maragha into account and decided that, mentioned land 
area could be reached after 5000-5500 km. But Columbus 
didn’t write that, the land area located on the ocean was 
unknown in the Old World. Thus, he falsely defended 
                                                 
   
1
 R.  Qasımov. Xristofor Kolumb, Nəsirəddin Tusi və Amerika qitəsinin 
həqiqi kəşfi. Bakı, “Çaşıoğlu”, 2002. səh. 130-131  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    242
Toscanelli’s idea, which mentioned that, the land located in 
the west of the Atlantic Ocean was part of Asia. 
Columbus read a lot books when he was in Italy, 
Portugal and Spain. Columbus started his travel towards 
coasts of the New World by taking into consideration 
calculations of Eratosthenes and Earth’s structure 
determined by N. Tusi.  
I suppose that, outlines of America had been determined 
beforehand in Maragha. Scientists of the observatory had 
found out that, storms, cyclones and tsunamis weren’t 
caused by winds, they were caused mostly by the Moon 
circulation. This discovery was very important for 
travelers.  
As it is known, Columbus lived in Portugal and its 
colonies temporarily and was interested in navigation. His 
brother Bartolommeo was a cartographer wherever he 
lived. The most educated merchants learned that profession 
as it had become popular in the Apennine Peninsula.  
Cartography and map trade were considered profitable 
occupations in European countries then. Bartolommeo 
Columbus used to buy and sell modern and ancient maps. 
Probably, he had found copies of maps made during the age 
of Macedonian Isgandar. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    243
Knowing navigation and coastlines was very important 
for seamen sailing across the Mediterranean Sea. There was 
strong competition between Catalan and Italian experts in 
the field of cartography. Bartolommeo got acquainted with 
cartographers, geographers, archivists and library directors 
in several cities of Italy when looked for maps. He got 
acquainted with Toscanelli in Florentine. As it was 
mentioned above, the well-known scientist leaded N. 
Niccolini’s library besides carrying out other works. Of 
course, there were a lot of materials about geography and 
astronomy.  
In general, Toscanelli was known as well-known expert 
of geography and everybody tried to be his friend. Besides 
Christopher Columbus, Bartolommeo Columbus also 
visited the library leaded by Toscanelli when he was in 
Florentine and analyzed necessary materials kept there. He 
could be indifferent to strange maps kept in the library as 
exponents. Bartolommeo was especially interested in the 
map, which described outlines of the land located in the 
west of the Atlantic Ocean and wanted to get the map made 
in Maragha observatory. I think Bartolommeo informed 
Christopher about mentioned map and he copied it. It is 
known that, Christopher Columbus and Florentine 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    244
cosmographer were close friends. The traveler considered 
him his teacher.  
Tusi’s map and “Zij-i Ilkhani” were especially 
important for Columbus, who sailed across coasts of 
England, Ireland, Spain, Guinea and Madeira Islands. The 
coastline described there was a great stimulus for starting 
new expedition. Christopher wanted to find that coast. If 
really it was situated in the west of the Atlantic Ocean, N. 
Tusi would be the most phenomenal scientist of the world. 
Afterwards mentioned coastline was discovered, but 
Columbus was obliged to keep this fact secret.  
A question appears: “What happened to the map, which 
was made in Maragha observatory and described outlines 
of America?” As mentioned map hasn’t remained until 
present time, most experts didn’t believe that, such map 
had been made in Maragha. It is impossible to accept this 
thought. According to some historical sources, Columbus 
used the map made in 1474 by Toscanelli during his first 
travel. That map has been described in most literatures. But 
its lines have been reconstructed. Its initial version doesn’t 
exist. 
 
 
 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    245
               The sensational map found in the  
             Topkapi Palace Museum of Istanbul 
  
The admiral Piri ibn Haji Mammad Reis (1475-1554) 
was an experienced captain, talented navigator, skilful navy 
captain, well-known navy commander, professional 
navigator officer and educated cartographer of his time. His 
maps were the most necessary aids for the science of 
navigation. Besides it, Piri Reis could combine different 
maps, which had different scales, in one map. All captains 
and navigator officers wanted to have such maps.  
German scientists – Professors Gustav Adolf Deissmann 
and Paul Kohl found an ancient map drawn on the 
pergament made of the gazelle skin when they carried out 
restoration works in the Topkapi Palace Museum of 
Istanbul in 1929. That map was made in Chelibolu in the 
month of Muharram of 919th year of the Islamic calendar 
(1513).  
Piri Reis made an atlas in 1528 and included this map in 
that atlas by fixing the date as 1513. Afterwards it turned 
out that, mentioned historical material was copied from 
ancient manuscripts kept in the library of Constantinople.  
 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    246
           
                    Admiral Piri Reis (1475-1554) 
 
Most cartographers, geographers and historians of 
Europe did their best for being in that library, but couldn’t 
achieve it. Libraries of Pergamum, Babylonia, Alexandria, 
Baghdad, Tabriz, Maragha, Damascus and Athens were 
moved to Istanbul during wars. Everybody knew that, there 
were a lot of ancient manuscripts, maps, anthropological 
and ethnographical information in mentioned library and it 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    247
was possible to get sensational information by getting 
acquainted with them. Piri Reis’s map, where outlines of 
the Western Hemisphere were described, was one of such 
materials. 
According to historical sources, Piri Reis often visited 
that library in order to analyze ancient documents and 
maps. Mentioned map could attract attention of Turkish 
scientists for its exactness. It was almost the first map, 
which described outlines of America. Besides it, the 
sensational material included outlines of North America 
and Antarctica. It was made 21 years after the first travel of 
Columbus. But the Genoese admiral hadn’t visited the 
continent besides eastern coasts of Panama, Nicaragua and 
Honduras. Antarctica was discovered after more than 300 
years by Fadday Bellingshausen and Mikhail Lazarev 
(1819). That’s why most scientists made radical steps in 
order to analyze the map. Author of the map and date of its 
preparation were interesting for them.  
Piri Reis had copied lines from other ancient maps and 
included notes of Columbus made during his travel in his 
map. The Turkish admiral admitted that, he had copied 
western part from Columbus’s map. It means that, the well-
known traveler had unique maps, which stimulated his first 
travel. It should be taken into consideration that, historians 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    248
and geographers carried out unsuccessful researches during 
hundreds of years in accordance with “Columbus’s lost 
map” made by Columbus in West End islands. 
There is no doubt that, the map found in the Topkapi 
Palace Museum of Istanbul by Adolf Deissmann and Paul 
Kohl was a sensational discovery. It wasn’t similar to maps 
made at the end of XV century and XVI century. Though 
necessary devices and equipments didn’t exist then, 
coordinates of South America and Africa had been 
determined exactly. Could such map be made by any well-
known cartographer, geographer or sea traveler of Europe? 
German and Turkish scientists investigated found map 
attentively.         
  The American secretary of state Henry Stimson also 
was interested in this investigation. He thought that, 
“Columbus’s  map” could  be  in  Turkey. He  ordered  the  
ambassador of USA in Turkey to start researches in order 
to find mentioned map. Though the Turkish government 
supported researches comprehensively, any success 
couldn’t be achieved.  
Piri Reis mentioned that, he had used about twenty maps 
made during the age of Macedonian Isgandar in accordance 
with exact calculations. But scientists didn’t believe his 
explanation about the map found in 1929. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    249
   
                               Piri Reis’s map (1513) 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    250
Scientists couldn’t believe the Turkish admiral’s 
statements as aerocosmic technology didn’t exist then. 
There wasn’t any copy of maps made during the age of 
Macedonian Isgandar. The Turkish admiral’s map caused 
great resonance in Turkey. 
The map was published in many editions in the state 
publishing house in 1935 in accordance with the order of 
the president of Turkey Mustafa Kamala Ataturk, who was 
proud that, cartography had been developed in Turkey even 
in XVI century.  
Experts of the USA and especially captain Arlington X. 
Mueller, who was considered professional expert in the 
fields of cartography and navigation analyzed mentioned 
map in 50s years of XX century and get sensational result. 
The coastline of the Queen Maud Land covered in ice had 
been described in the southern part of the map. Probably, 
the map was made when mentioned territory wasn’t 
covered in ice. Of course, this sensational result amazed 
experts.  
As opponents of Mueller didn’t accept his result, he 
resorted to help of the director of Weston observatory 
attached to Boston College Daniel L. Lainhen and director 
of the observatory attached to Georgetown University 
Francis Hayden for verification of his result. Mentioned 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    251
experts participated in the radio discussion made on August 
26, 1956 on this theme. The theme was spread all over the 
world. After it, the Professor of Kinsk College located in 
New Hampshire Charles H. Hapgood began to be interested 
in mentioned theme. The map was included in the program 
of scientific investigations of Kin-State College owing to 
his efforts.  
 
    
          Combination of Piri Reis’s map with the modern map 
 
After long investigations, Ch. Hapgood sent request to 
the technical-intelligence escadrille of the cartography 
department number 8 of Air Forces of the USA. Joint work 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    252
lasted for more than two years and it was proved that 
mentioned map had been made before the Queen Maud 
Land was covered in ice.  
Afterwards Ch. Hapgood continued investigations 
independently and got the next sensational result. Latitudes 
of popular islands located near Antarctica had been fixed 
on the map in detail. Probably, they were found by means 
of maps made before by applying modern spherical 
trigonometry. It is obvious that, authors of the map knew 
that, the Earth was spherical and they knew the Earth’s 
length with 50 miles error.  
 
Several optimist sea travelers believed existence of 
“Southern land” in the middle of XVI century. One of 
them was well-known Spanish seaman, architect and 
annalist Pedro Sarmiento de Gamboa, who defended that 
idea even before publication of popular “Atlas” of Gerhard 
Mercator. The well-known Spanish sea traveler Alvaro de 
Mendana de Neyra organized expedition towards the south 
of the Pacific Ocean in accordance with his offer in order to 
find the mythical country Ophir located in the south of the 
Earth.  
…Mendana saw atoll or reef (Ontong Java or Rocador) 
on February 1, 1568 and approached “large land” 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    253
separated from the ocean with coral reeves (Santa Isabel) 
on February 7… Mendana thought that, he had discovered 
Ophir in the southern continent (the king Solomon had sent 
vessels to Ophir to find gold in order to decorate Jerusalem 
temple in the myth). But he had discovered archipelago, 
which was named Solomon Islands.1  
All coordinates were restored in accordance with 
investigations carried out by American architects and 
cartographers Blanche, Mueller and Walter. It turns out 
that, coastlines of the Old World, New World and Antarc-
tica were described on the map exactly. The coastline of 
Antarctica wasn’t covered in ice in 11-4 thousand BC. It 
means that, cartography had developed 6 thousand years 
ago as highly as the present time. Besides the eastern coast 
of South America, the western coast and Ant Mountains 
also were described on the map of Piri Reis. 
The well-known Flemish cartographer Abraham Ortelius 
described “Southern land” in the southern part of the 
Pacific and Indian Oceans on his map “Theatre of the 
world” consisted of 53 maps. This idea was supported by 
another well-known Flemish cartographer Gerhard 
Mercator, who described “Southern land” in his atlas.2   
                                                 
        1
 R. Qasımov. Müqəddəs missiya. Bakı, “Çaşıoğlu”, 2001. səh. 66-67 
        2  
R. Qasımov. Müqəddəs missiya. Bakı, “Çaşıoğlu”, 2001. səh. 67 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    254
   
                        The world map of the middle ages. 
                          The author – Gerhard Mercator 
 
This fact caused all scientists to think. How could the 
Turkish admiral describe mentioned places exactly? There 
is no doubt that, mentioned map wasn’t made by Piri Reis 
only. Who was the real author of the map and when was it 
made? 
Ch. Hapgood came to the following conclusion when 
analyzed the map: “Exact information is exchanged 
between nations. The map was made by unknown nation 
and was found by Phoenicians and Creteans, who were 
considered genius seamen during more than thousand 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    255
years, in ancient times. It became clear that, such maps 
were kept in the Great Library of Alexandria located in 
Egypt before being annihilated by the Crusaders in VII 
century”.1 
The ancient Greek scientist Fukidid wrote: “The most 
famous tsar of Creteans Minos had established navy and 
occupied large part of the Ellyn Sea and Kirkland Islands”.2 
As if they were in a hurry. Other nations living around 
the Mediterranean Sea couldn’t use navigation, vessels and 
maps as professionally as they did. But their appearing and 
disappearing were very enigmatic. It is known that, they 
lost their hegemony in the Sea of Crete in 1150 BC, when 
Doris moved to Peloponnesian Peninsula.3 
Almost everybody knew that, Phoenicians were skilful 
seamen. They systematically sailed to the Atlantic Ocean 
from the Strait of Gibraltar and investigated coasts of 
Europe and Africa. Phoenicians used ancient maps for 
sailing in the ocean safely.  
Most researchers wrote that, Piri Reis’s map was used 
by other cartographers too. It means that, those maps were 
kept in Alexandria in several copies. They were spread all 
                                                 
           1
 Ч. Хепгуд. Древние карты морских королей. 
           2
 Фукидид. История. I том, Москва, 1915. стр.5  
        
3   
Хульмут Ханке. Люди, корабли, океаны. Москва, «Прогресс», 
1984. стр. 33 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    256
over the world after Egypt was occupied. Descriptions of 
Antarctica also were spread in several countries. I think, 
Gerhard Mercator, Oronteus Fineus and Philipp Buache 
also had such maps.  
         
   
      The Orontius Finaeus map of Antarctica made in 1532 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    257
   
                The map made by Philippe Buache in 1739 
 
Some scientists including Ch. Hapgood wrote that, 
sensational maps made by above mentioned experts were 
kept in the Library of Alexandria and were taken to the 
library of the Byzantine Empire afterwards together with 
other documents. Probably, most copies of mentioned maps 
were taken to Venetia in 1204 owing to Venetian seamen. 
But nobody can surely mention that, that material was 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    258
given to the Turkish admiral by Venetian seamen or 
merchants. It couldn’t happen as there was a war between 
Ottoman Empire and Venetia. All these facts prove that, 
cartography is one of the most ancient science branches and 
there were professional cartographers – authors of exact 
maps even 15000 years ago. Afterwards mentioned maps 
began to be spread in new civilization centers of the world.  
 
 
 
 
 
      Who is the real author of the map –  
     admiral Piri Reis or Nasiraddin Tusi? 
  
Ancient maps were kept in well-known libraries of 
Alexandria owing to Phoenicians and Creteans. 
Babylonia was one of ancient civilization centers of the 
world before the ancient time. The most talented experts, 
well-known scientists and wise persons had gathered there.  
Probably, maps of other parts of Antarctica and the 
whole Earth were taken to Babylonia by unknown people 
during unknown civilization. Afterwards Macedonian 
Isgandar started his marches in order to conquer the world 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    259
and declared Babylonia center of his empire founded at the 
beginning of IV century BC. The conqueror of the world 
founded Alexandria in 332 BC in Egypt and it became one 
of scientific and cultural centers of the ancient time during 
a very short time. So, ancient maps kept in Babylonia 
began to be moved to the famous library of Alexandria. 
That’s why the admiral Piri Reis mentioned that, those 
maps had been made during the age of Isgandar.  
One of annalists, who lived during the age of Isgandar, 
Vitruvius wrote: “Isgandar saw the real port near the 
settlement of fishermen Rakotis located near Faros Island, 
between the Mediterranean Sea and Lake Mariut when he 
reached the rank of the Nile River. Isgandar ordered the 
architect Deinocrat, who accompanied him during marches, 
to establish a town in the place, where they went”. Really, 
Deinocrat established large town there during a very short 
time and gold sarcophagus of Isgandar were brought to that 
town after ten years.  
Though Alexandria was very young, it could become 
scientific and cultural center of the ancient world. Well-
known scientists and philosophers of all countries located 
around the Mediterranean Sea visited that town. The town 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    260
was famous for its magnificent library, Temple of Muses 
and Academy of Sciences.1  
Scientists gathered in the temple, worked on manuscripts 
kept in the library of Alexandria and kept several copies of 
their works there. There are a lot of similarities between 
Maragha observatory and Temple of Muses. It is necessary 
to analyze this fact.  
The most progressive period of the temple was during 
the age of Ptolemy Everget III. He used to buy original 
manuscripts and could get articles of Eschil, Sofokl and 
Euripid by convincing Athenians… So, about 200000 
manuscripts were collected in the temple during the age of 
Ptolemy and his heirs continued his mission afterwards. 
Number of manuscripts kept in the temple grew 
significantly after the library of Pergamum was moved to 
Alexandria and became 700000. There were hundreds and 
thousands of manuscripts among them and most of them 
were spread in most cities of the world…  
The poet Callimachus was the head of the temple after 
Demetrius of Pharia. He was a poet and scientist. 
Callimachus had created 120-volume “Catalogue of the 
library of Alexandria”, which resembled encyclopedia of 
                                                 
      1
 М. Гумилевская. Как открывали мир. Москва, «Д.Л», 1977. стр. 38 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    261
history and culture, there.1 But the temple had a very tragic 
ending.  
Tsaritsa of Egypt Cleopatra moved manuscripts to the 
Temple of Serapes in 48 BC in order to save them. The 
consul of Rome Gaius Julius Caesar ordered to burn part of 
manuscripts in the port when he came to Alexandria in 
order to prevent rebellion.  
So, great part of valuable sources, which were collected 
during several centuries, was annihilated there. But some of 
them were taken abroad.  
Expeditions were organized towards the coastline of 
Africa hundreds of years ago and surely, successful travels 
were realized owing to made maps. Seamen, who lived on 
coasts of Egypt, Levant and Arabian Peninsula, were 
considered the most skilful experts. Probably, some of 
maps made during that period were kept in libraries of the 
ancient time and scientists used those materials in their 
scientific works. Arabs organized successful expeditions 
around the Indian Ocean and Phoenicians could do it on 
eastern coasts of the Atlantic Ocean.  
There were a lot of maps made by Arabs and Piri Reis 
learned most of those maps. Portuguese used materials of 
                                                 
       
   
1
 Н. А. Ионина, автор-составитель. Сто великих чудес света. 
Москва, «Вече», 2000. стр. 146,148 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    262
Arabs and especially well-known seaman and skilful 
navigator Ahmad ibn Majid when sailed from the Atlantic 
Ocean to southern coasts of Africa. He had sailed to the 
south of Africa together with Bartolommeo Dias and to 
India together with Vasco da Gama (as a navigation 
officer). It is known that, Ahmad ibn Majid was a 
professional seaman and had learned this profession by 
means of corresponding documents. He had described his 
knowledge in about 40 scientific works and two books – 
“Collection of main principles about seas” (1462) and 
“Book about bases and laws of navigation” (1490).  
Those materials were often used by Piri Reis as they 
were spread in several countries. Piri Reis got acquainted 
with several parts of “Hatainame” after M. Polo in order to 
expand his knowledge. The Ottoman traveler Ali Akbar 
Hatai was in that country in 1505-1506 when the emperor 
of Chine Chu Kou Chao came to the throne and he 
published mentioned book in Persian in Istanbul in 1520.  
Besides it, the Turkish admiral had read scientific works 
of the most famous geographers and astronomers of Europe 
including Toscanelli. It means that, Piri Reis was enough 
educated and didn’t fall behind other geographers and 
cartographers.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    263
It is known that, Piri Reis was a head admiral of Egypt 
and had great competencies. As he ruled the Mediterranean 
Sea and especially the territory between the center and 
eastern coasts, he could control many routes. As vessels 
sailing from France and Spain to kingdoms located in the 
Apennine Peninsula and cities of Greece, from Venetia 
Genoa and Naples to France, Spain and cities of Greece 
were controlled, they were often attacked by the navy of 
Piri Reis. Besides it, his spies gathered important 
information about expeditions, which sailed from the 
Mediterranean Sea and ports of Portugal, Spain, France, 
Netherlands and England, and sent gathered materials to 
Piri Reis. Thus, the admiral had a lot of secret materials 
about kingdoms of Europe. Piri Reis wrote his “Book of 
navigation” (“Kitab-i Bahriye”), which had a significant 
role in the field of navigation, owing to mentioned 
materials.  
Piri Reis was mostly interested in maps describing 
outlines of important geographical points, especially 
unknown coastlines and he made his future plans in 
accordance with them. That’s why he was considered the 
most skilful and experienced navy leader.  
As Egypt was the colony of the Ottoman Empire, most 
historical documents kept there were taken to Istanbul. The 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    264
Turkish admiral, who was interested in historical 
documents and different maps, found a lot of maps in 
Alexandria and Istanbul, worked on them and made his 
perfect atlas in 1528. But one of those maps could attract 
attention of modern scientists. It was the map, which was 
made in 1513 and described outlines of America, 
Antarctica and North-western Africa.  
Piri Reis admitted that, he had made that map by 
copying several ancient maps. His admission made works 
of researchers easier and they could carry out systematic 
works in this field. Cartographers and historians wondered 
how the Turkish admiral could find the most notable map 
of XX century. As it was mentioned above, Piri Reis wrote 
that, he had made western part of the map according to 
notes made by Columbus on the map he used during his 
first travel.  
The American secretary of state Henry Stimson, who 
tried to find the origin of “Columbus’s lost map”, thought 
that, it was in Turkey. Of course, most scientists agreed 
with this thought. Even if Piri Reis used “Columbus’s lost 
map”, he had found it in an unknown situation. Probably, 
the Turkish admiral was obliged to keep mentioned map in 
one of strategic buildings of Istanbul as a historical 
document after using it. It means that, doubts of Henry 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    265
Stimson weren’t groundless. But long-term researches were 
unsuccessful. Either those researches weren’t organized as 
well as necessary, or their participants weren’t professional 
experts. 
Several important questions appear: First, who were real 
authors of manuscripts found by P. Reis? Second, did 
Columbus have an original copy of the map (the part 
describing America and West Africa) during his first 
travel? Then, how could the Turkish admiral find 
mentioned map? Third, how could the Turkish admiral find 
mentioned map? It is obvious that, the sea traveler couldn’t 
be the author of the mysterious map. Outlines of the New 
World discovered by him in 1492 were drawn in mentioned 
map before the expedition left Spain. Fourth, who is the 
real author of the map and how could he determine 
corresponding outlines and coordinates? Fifth, how could 
the map appear in the Topkapi Palace Museum of Istanbul 
and why weren’t historians, geographers and cartographers 
aware of its existence until it was found in 1929. What was 
the reason? 
According to historical sources, Piri Reis usually spent a 
lot of time in the library of the Empire in order to analyze 
ancient documents and maps. The map, which described 
outlines exactly, attracted attention of Turkish scientists. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    266
That map was one of the first maps, which described 
outlines of America (for the first time, outlines of America 
were drawn by Juan de la Cosa in 1500 and then by 
Cantino in 1502). Besides it, the map included outlines of 
North America and Antarctica. It turns out that, 
Columbus’s lost map was in Istanbul. It is possible to 
understand it by looking at pictures of vessels drawn on the 
map.  
1. There were caravels, carracks and naos in the western 
part of the map, though Piri Reis’s navy consisted of 
galeras, galeas, fusts and other vessels. So, the author 
wanted to mention that, there was an unknown continent 
between Eastern Asia and Western Europe and that 
continent was discovered by Spaniards.  
2. Mentioned pictures of vessels prove Piri Reis’s 
supposition about “Columbus’s map”. The Genoese 
admiral had used caravels, carracks and naos when he 
travelled to coasts of the New World and proved that those 
vessels were important during long ocean passages.  
Coastlines described on the mysterious map are 
noteworthy. They prove that, maps describing outlines of 
the Earth existed in ancient times. One fact also should be 
mentioned. As there weren’t aerocosmic technologies then, 
scientists didn’t believe statements of the Turkish admiral. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    267
None of maps made during the age of Isgandar has 
remained until present time. It is known that, Isgandar 
returned to Mesopotamia with the help of the commander 
of his navy Nearh after his march to India. The navy didn’t 
meet with difficulties during the travel. It has been 
mentioned in works of Arius and Strabo.  
The Greek merchant, traveler and geographer from 
Massalia by name Pifey left his motherland and started his 
travel in 325 BC, when troops of Isgandar returned to 
Greece. He used very difficult route and reached British 
Isles, some coasts of North Europe including Tule Island 
(was described on the map of Eratosthenes) and Baltic Sea. 
That travel was described in Pifey’s book “About the 
ocean”. Though mentioned book hasn’t remained until 
present time, Strabo and Pliny the Elder gave enough 
information by basing on it. If the Greek traveler hadn’t 
corresponding map, he couldn’t achieve success in such 
difficult travel. Thus, there were a lot of maps describing 
most territories of the Earth during the age of Isgandar and 
Pifey had used those maps. It shouldn’t be forgotten that, 
Phoenicians, who were considered skilful seamen, had 
travelled from the Strait of Gibraltar towards the north and 
south.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    268
1. Hapgood wrote that, the map was made by an 
unknown nation and most of maps made in ancient times 
were gathered and analyzed in the library of Alexandria.1 
It was necessary to know navigation, spherical 
trigonometry, astronomy, mathematics, trigonometry, 
geography and cartography in order prepare such material. 
Seamen and travelers couldn’t know these fields.  
2. Only skilful scientist could combine several maps in 
the world map. He had to know mathematical and spherical 
trigonometry. All scientists of the world knew that, the 
inventor of mathematical and spherical trigonometry was 
Tusi (not Regiomontanus). I think the original of the map 
(without the part describing Antarctica) could be made by 
Tusi.  
3. The Turkish admiral’s navy had worked in the 
Mediterranean Sea and he was in Spain. Was he aware of 
existence of Columbus’s map?  
He could find such map in Istanbul either. As I 
mentioned above, scientists of Maragha observatory could 
make several maps describing outlines of America. 
Nasiraddin Tusi, Muayyidaddin Ordy, Gutbaddin Shirazi 
and Chinese scientist Fao Mun-Chi could have such maps 
as they had important posts in the observatory.  
                                                 
  1
 Ч. Хепгуд «Древние карты морских королей». 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    269
Probably, Gutbaddin Shirazi took his map to Alexandria 
when he went to Egypt as the ambassador of Mongols and 
afterwards the map was taken to the capital of the Ottoman 
Empire by means of Turks. It turns out that, Columbus 
wasn’t aware of existence of the map kept in Istanbul, so, 
he couldn’t find it.  
Then, how and where could the Spanish admiral find 
“Columbus’s lost map”? I have found only one answer: 
The Chinese scientist of Maragha observatory Fao Mun-
Chi took the map made in the observatory to his 
motherland in 1267. According to previous chapters, Marco 
Polo had taken that map to Italy. It was kept in the library 
leaded by Toscanelli in Florentine and Columbus got 
acquainted with it there.  
4. How were outlines and coordinates determined? It is 
known that, mentioned map was made in accordance with 
several manuscripts. I’ll describe history of the part 
describing the north of Antarctica.  
N. Tusi worked in Alexandria and carried out interesting 
investigations in most educational, scientific and cultural 
centers located there, besides working in famous cities and 
educational centers of the Near East. Most works and 
historical documents kept in the library of Alexandria were 
taken to the capital of the Byzantine Empire after the 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    270
library of Alexandria was annihilated by Crusaders (X 
century). Besides it, N. Tusi got good opportunities for 
expanding his scientific activity after annihilation of the 
Baghdad Caliphate by Hulegu khan in 1258. A grandiose 
library was established in Baghdad during the age of 
Abbasids and it was full of valuable works. Those works 
were brought to the capital of the Caliphate from occupied 
cities including Alexandria. Tusi also used those works in 
order to expand his knowledge. Probably, the scientist had 
found several parts of mentioned map, which would be 
known as “Admiral Piri Reis’s map” in future, in Baghdad 
and started to investigate that historical document before 
foundation of Maragha observatory (1259). Europe, Asia 
and Africa (of course, partially) had already been 
investigated until the middle of XIII century.  
The sensational conclusion of Charles Hapgood about 
the map was as following: “Latitudes of well-known 
islands located near Antarctica were described on the map 
in detail. Probably, those results were achieved in 
accordance with an older map made by using modern 
spherical trigonometry. It is obvious that, authors of the 
map knew that, the Earth was spherical and they knew the 
Earth’s length with 50 miles error”.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    271
I think Tusi had an important role in this achievement. It 
was difficult to combine coordinates fixed on the map 
made 6000 years ago with modern coordinates. It is known 
that, N. Tusi and scientists of Maragha observatory knew 
spherical trigonometry enough well. Probably, the 
Azerbaijani scientist had found the map without the 
coordinate system. 
N. Tusi fixed geographic latitudes and longitudes as he 
knew spherical trigonometry. Skilful seamen could 
determine approximate distance between two points located 
on the ocean after analyzing the map.  
So, Columbus knew how long he had to travel during his 
first travel owing to mentioned map. Some modern 
scientists also accept this hypothesis. There wasn’t any 
other skilful scientist, who knew astronomy, mathematics 
and geography enough well and was able to fix geographic 
latitudes and longitudes exactly, before Columbus found 
the map. 
As it is known, Piri Reis’s map included only 
description of the western part of the Earth. It should be 
mentioned that, N. Tusi had determined coordinates of 256 
cities including cities of Spain and Chine. I think the 
Azerbaijani scientist had that map without the part 
describing Antarctica and some cities and their coordinates 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    272
were described by him. Thus, outlines of Asia, Africa, 
America and even Australia were drawn on Piri Reis’s 
map. But what about the eastern part of the Earth?  
Piri Reis was interested only in geographical points of 
the strategic importance as he was a commander of navy. 
Probably, the Turkish admiral analyzed the map once used 
by Columbus attentively and then clipped the part 
describing the eastern part of the Earth of and presented it 
to the archive located in Istanbul in order to keep the way 
to “Spice Islands”, which were especially important for 
the Ottoman Empire, secret. What was the reason? 
According to the history, the Ottoman Empire occupied 
most territories of the Near East until the beginning of XVI 
century, so, controlled “Silk way” and the way to “Spice 
Islands” and was monopolist in trade of the most 
expensive silk clothes and spices of European markets. It 
means that, merchants of Europe had to use other ways in 
order to go to markets of East Asia. Such ways were 
described on mentioned map. They were the western way 
mentioned by ancient scientists and south-eastern way 
along Africa.  
There is no doubt that, Turks had hidden the eastern part 
of the map as they wanted to keep that way secret and 
didn’t want Europeans to be aware of its existence. But the 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    273
history of the western part of the map is different, though 
another part was found in 1929 in Istanbul. There wasn’t 
any need for hiding western part of the map. The huge 
territory located in the west of the Atlantic Ocean – the 
fourth continent played a role of “barrier” on the western 
way to East Asia and Turks knew that European seamen 
had to overcome a very difficult way in order to reach the 
eastern coast of Asia. It means that, Europeans had to 
refuse to use seaway for going to the eastern part of Asia 
and to prefer land road, which was under Turks’ control. 
So, the admiral Piri Reis had hidden the eastern part of the 
map in a very inaccessible place.  
Another hypothesis can also be mentioned. Probably, 
mentioned map was divided into two parts before being 
found by Piri Reis. Columbus had made special efforts for 
this purpose. It was obvious that, the map was enough big. 
It might attract people’s attention when was carried. So, the 
sea traveler clipped the part he didn’t need of and as 
territories described on that part were known by people, 
hided it in one of cities of Italia. Columbus brought another 
part of the map to Spain after using it for sailing to the New 
World. Afterwards the map was found by Piri Reis.  
I think that, Columbus had sent the map to Italy, his 
native town Genoa or to the public library of Florentine by 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    274
means of the trustiest herald as soon as he returned from 
the travel. But the map couldn’t reach its address of 
destination. Piri Reis controlled great part of the 
Mediterranean Sea and often attacked vessels of Spain, 
Portugal, France, Genoa, Venetia and Vatican during that 
period. As it was mentioned above, the map was taken by 
Turks when it was sent from Vatican to Italy in 1505. So, 
the map couldn’t reach its address of destination. I think 
that, the Turkish admiral had found the map, which was 
used by Columbus during his first travel, in this way.  
A strange paradox occurs. Number of well-known 
scientists began to decrease in the West after the temple of 
Muses and Temple of Serapes, where the library of 
Alexandria was kept, were burned. A lot of remarkable 
scientists had appeared in the West before that library was 
annihilated. Probably, there were valuable materials used 
by almost all scientists in mentioned library. The library 
had been saved until the age of Macedonian Isgandar. Such 
hypothesis is convincing enough.  
Eratosthenes, who had made great efforts for 
development of geography, is the author of the valuable 
work about the Earth.  
 
 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    275
       
            Columbus prepares for his second travel 
 
It shouldn’t be forgotten that, the scientist leaded the 
library of the Temple of Muses. Eratosthenes was a 
mathematician, philosopher, literary critic, astronomer, 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    276
geographer and author of epic poems. He had determined 
the Earth’s length with 75 km error.1 
Piri Reis’s map proves that, such maps were known even 
before the age of Isgandar. Were those maps used in travels 
resulted in significant geographical discoveries? 
When I looked through ancient travels, the expedition 
sent by the Egyptian pharaoh Necho II to the south of 
Africa through the Red Sea in 597 BC attracted my 
attention. Travelers didn’t dare to start long travels in the 
ancient time. The expedition had to continue its travel in 
the Southern Hemisphere after passing the equator. Ancient 
people thought that everybody, who would try to pass 
equator, would meet with the hell or fall into the deep cleft. 
They said that, nobody had sailed in that direction and 
returned from there. But several seamen agreed to start 
travel and returned back through the Mediterranean Sea 
after going round Africa and entered Egypt by passing the 
Nile River. I think that, they could complete the expedition 
successfully owing to convenient maps they had. It means 
that, as Phoenicians had a map similar to Piri Reis’s map, 
they could overcome all travels successfully. It shouldn’t 
                                                 
        
1
 Н. А. Ионина, автор-составитель. Сто великих чудес света. 
Москва, «Вече», 2000. стр. 148 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    277
be forgotten that, Phoenicians could easily visit Madeira 
Island, Azores and Canaries located on the Atlantic Ocean. 
According to Ch. Hapgood, mentioned map described 
the world by means of ancient outlines. First of all, 
continents had been described on different maps and then 
all maps had been combined on one pergament. Such work 
could be carried out by N. Tusi only. Locations of 
continents and coordinates had been determined precisely 
as spherical trigonometry had been used for this purpose. 
The founder of Maragha observatory knew spherical 
trigonometry enough well.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    278
                    Achieved results 
 
1. N. Tusi, who was very honest person, was very 
generous man besides being well-known scientist, inventor 
and philologist. It should be taken into account that, Tusi 
had left the Alamut castle after being kept there for more 
than 20 years without any wealth. But he began to work as 
the advisor of Hulegu khan and spent most of his wage for 
people serving the science. N. Tusi could get some 
concessions of the ruler of Ilkhanids in order to improve 
welfares of scientists, teachers and students, who worked 
and studied in Maragha observatory. It should be 
mentioned that, charity works were carried out by rulers, 
commanders and landowners then. As they had great 
opportunities, they tried to demonstrate their humanism by 
carrying out charity works. I have investigated most 
scientists’ activities. Any scientist hadn’t provided people 
of various strata of society with money before N. Tusi did it 
in XIII century. I think that, the remarkable Azerbaijani 
scientist had almost founded charity and it should be 
accepted as a fact.  
2. N. Tusi, who had encyclopedic knowledge, wrote 
“Zij-i Ilkhani”, which is considered masterpiece in the 
field of astronomy, and it could become popular in Europe 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    279
soon. Ancient manuscripts of that work – 1308, 1403, 
1600, 1652 and 1711 – were found and presented to 
specialists. The prime meridian was described at 34-350 
west of today’s Greenwich Meridian, main elements of 
geocentric orbits of planets were fixed and their daily 
movements were determined more precisely in “Zij-i 
Ilkhani”, which consists of four books. Ecliptic length of 
the Sun disc center on Maragha meridian in afternoons of 
certain days and tables of planets’ ephemerides were also 
described. The difference between values of geocentric 
longitudes of Mars, Jupiter and Saturn written in “Zij-i 
Ilkhani” and modern values is equal to one thousandth of 
the second. N. Tusi had determined value of the annual 
precession more precisely. “Zij-i Ilkhani” was used during 
preparation of astronomical catalogues “Zij-i Hagan” 
(Giyasaddin Kashi) and “Zij-i Ulugbek” (Ali Kushchi). It 
mainly concerns coordinates of stars and cities.  
Some of tables of two astronomical catalogues – “Zij-i 
Shah Jahan” made during the age of Shah Jahan in Jaipur 
observatory and “Zij-i Muhammad Shah” made during the 
age of Muhammad Shah (1719-1748) were copies of tables 
of “Zij-i Ilkhani”. Almost all astronomers of the world 
used N. Tusi’s work as the source until the middle of XVIII 
century, though 500 years had passed since “Zij-i Ilkhani” 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    280
was made. But it should be mentioned that, “Zij-i Ilkhani” 
was considered unique work in the field of astronomy for 
several centuries. 
3. N. Tusi’s masterpiece about geometry – “Tahriru 
Uglidis” (the first book was written in 1248) was very 
popular in Europe in XVI century and it was published in 
Arabic in Rome in 1594 and in London in 1657 after being 
translated into Latin. One of favorite teachers of Isaac 
Newton John Vallis read lectures at the University of 
Oxford in accordance with “Tahriru Uglidis” and played a 
significant role in popularization of N. Tusi in England. 
Besides describing the theory of parallel lines, relations and 
numbers and main issues of mathematics as axiometric 
geometry, the Azerbaijani scientist explained some new 
theorems, proved them and generalized some of those 
theories in “Tahriru Uglidis”. He proved some theorems in 
different ways, included new notions in mathematics and 
tried to explain existing ones. The theory of parallel lines 
had a very important role in invention of non-Euclidian 
geometry. Nasiraddin Tusi did his best for development of 
this theory. 
4. Trigonometry was the product of Eastern scientists 
before Euler’s additions, Tusi and Giyasaddin Kashani had 
an important role in this field. N. Tusi wrote the first 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    281
perfect work on trigonometry (“Shaklul qita”) and 
modified trigonometry as an independent discipline. 
Assumptions of European scientists, who introduced 
Regiomontanus as the inventor of trigonometry, lost their 
convincingness after the ancient copy of “Shaklul qita” 
was found in Istanbul in 1891. German scientists Henry 
Zutter and Braunmuhl based on principle in this business. 
Regiomontanus, who worked on translation of original 
works from Greek into Latin in Italy in 1461-1468, was 
known as a translator of scientific works rather than a 
scientist. Probably, the work “Joannis Reqio Montanus. 
De triaquius pianis et srhericis lidev v. unae curtabulus 
sinuum”, which made him popular, wasn’t written by him 
independently.  
According to the encyclopedia “World astronomy”, Al-
Farghani’s “Basis of astronomy” was published in Latin in 
Nurnberg in 1537 and manuscript of that work was found 
by Melanxton among manuscripts of Regiomontanus. Al-
Battani’s “Mohametis albeteni de Scienta Stellarum” was 
published in the same year in Nurnberg together with 
Regiomontanus’s additions. As the scientist’s works 
written in Arabic were published in Latin, it proves that, 
Regiomontanus knew Arabic and had written his well-
known work in accordance with Nasiraddin Tusi’s 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    282
“Shaklul-qita”. The French historian of mathematics 
Montuklo wrote that, such perfect work couldn’t be written 
by the author of XV century.  
5. Most geographers of the early middle ages didn’t 
describe the prime meridian on the same place. Tusi had 
determined the prime meridian at 34-350 west of today’s 
Greenwich Meridian. It passes through San Roka Cape 
located on the eastern part of Brazil. So, Christopher 
Columbus knew the distance between Europe and New 
World (America). It didn’t happen by chance. He had the 
map found by Piri Reis in Istanbul. Abu Raihan Al-Biruni 
was known as a very influential Eastern scientist. That’s 
why, Portuguese sea travelers used the prime meridian 
determined by Al-Biruni when looked for large territory in 
the western part of the Atlantic Ocean and so, they couldn’t 
succeed. The prime meridian determined by him was at 
1100 km towards the east of Brazilian coasts. But 
Columbus had preferred Tusi’s idea.  
6. It had passed ahead of “Beytul hukema” of Baghdad, 
“Mamun Academy” of Urgenj and other science centers of 
the world for astronomical observations, scientific 
investigations and researches, invention of astronomical 
equipments, achievement of scientific results, education 
programs, number of scientists and students and written 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    283
scientific works. Though the observatory was established 
for astronomical observations, history, geography, geo-
metry, botany, philosophy, mineralogy, physics, chemistry, 
medicine, astrology, optics, literature, aesthetics and even 
musicology also were learned there besides astronomy and 
mathematics. Well-known experts were prepared in each 
field. It is known that, more than hundred scientists worked 
under the leadership of N. Tusi. After taking into 
consideration above mentioned facts we may say that, 
Maragha observatory was the greatest academy of sciences 
of the world. Unfortunately, the academy of sciences of 
Maragha couldn’t be saved for a long time. Otherwise, 
remarkable scientists could be prepared and a lot of 
scientific results could be achieved there.  
7. Five new devices were invented in Maragha 
observatory under the leadership of N. Tusi in order to 
improve astronomical observations: Device for determina-
tion of horizontal coordinates of celestial bodies, Device 
for determination of the Sun’s height on the meridian, 
Rotary quadrant, Earth globe, and Star or Sky globe. It 
should be mentioned that, afterwards, those devices were 
used in Ulugbek’s, Copenhagen and Jaipur observatories. 
Afterwards, those devices were improved and used for 
exact astronomical observations. The sky globe made in 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    284
1279 in Maragha observatory is considered the most 
ancient sky globe of the world and kept in the hall 
“Physics-mathematics” of the museum “Picture Gallery” 
in Dresden.  
8. The map made by the admiral Piri Reis in “1513” was 
found in 1929 in Istanbul and presented to experts. 
Sensational result was achieved after analyze of the map. 
The map was the copy of ancient manuscripts prepared 
6000 years ago. It concerned only the part, where outlines 
of Antarctica were described. The professor Ch. Hapgood, 
who analyzed mentioned map, wrote that, several 
manuscripts had been used for preparation of the map and 
its author knew spherical trigonometry. This work could be 
carried out by N. Tusi, who knew spherical trigonometry 
and was inventor of mathematical trigonometry, could use 
astronomical equipments and devices, had determined 
geographic coordinates of 256 cities and the Earth’s length 
exactly. So, the remarkable Azerbaijani scientist 
determined the prime meridian in the remote eastern part of 
South America, where San Roka Cape located and it 
simplified discovery of America. Unfortunately, Christo-
pher Columbus kept existence of that source secret on his 
own ambitions, so, Tusi’s role in this achievement 
remained unknown.  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    285
9. A grandiose library was established in Baghdad 
during the age of Abbasids and it was full of valuable 
works. Those works were brought to the capital of the 
Caliphate from occupied cities including Alexandria. Tusi 
had found several parts of mentioned map, which would be 
known as “Admiral Piri Reis’s map” in future, in Baghdad 
and started to investigate that historical document. The 
Azerbaijani scientist had determined coordinates of 256 
cities including cities of Spain and Chine. I think the 
Azerbaijani scientist had that map without the part 
describing Antarctica and some cities and their coordinates 
were described by him. Afterwards the map was found by 
Piri Reis. 
10. Haldat Islands were described in scientific works of 
most well-known scientists on the Atlantic Ocean. Tusi 
wrote in “Zij-i Ilkhani” that, the prime meridian started on 
Haldat Islands. Several scientists wrote that, Haldat Islands 
consisted of two large and many small islands. Some 
scientists mentioned that they were today’s Anthelia 
Islands. I have written something about this theme, but 
should describe my consequence. Probably, Haldat Islands 
described by N. Tusi are America. Harrani wrote that, 
Haldat Islands consisted of two large islands. It may be 
America, as the latter also consists of two continents. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    286
Scientists described continents as large islands then. The 
western part of the Earth was known till those islands. 
Scientists thought that, the prime meridian was there. It is 
indisputable.  
11. N. Tusi could achieve fame in Azerbaijan and 
territories located around it when he was too young. 
“Akhlagi Nasiri” had a special role in that achievement. 
“Akhlagi Nasiri”, which is considered masterpiece in the 
field of ethics, brought him great fame and took him to the 
prison at the Alamut castle.  
“Tahzibul akhlaq” of Abu Ali Miskvih written in 
Arabic was read a lot in Eastern countries before 30th years 
of XIII century. “Akhlagi Nasiri” passed ahead of 
“Tahzibul akhlaq” for all parameters and though it was 
written 770 years ago, is still used as educational 
equipment for educating Muslim generations. Even princes 
of some monarchies use “Akhlagi Nasiri” for being 
educated. Most of noble families preferred this work in 
order to protect their traditions and norms of behavior. It is 
enough to read “Akhlagi Nasiri” for understanding that, 
Tusi was very wise and sincere man.  
Though the scientist’s moral situation was unbearable 
during more than 20 years spent in prison at the Alamut 
castle, he could write several immortal scientific works 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    287
there: “Akhlagi Nasiri”, “Sherhul-Isharet” (Commen-
taries on the philosophical treatise of Abu Ali ibn Sina 
“Isharet”), “Tahriru Al-Majisti” (“Almagest”) and 
“Tahriru Uglidis”. The scientist, who couldn’t leave the 
Alamut castle, could become famous in the Caucasus, Iran, 
Near East, Middle Asia, India and other countries in a very 
short time. 
12. N. Tusi was known as the great scientist. But it 
shouldn’t be forgotten that, he was experienced and skilful 
politician in Hulegu khan’s palace as well. The ruler of 
Mongolia didn’t know where he should go when 
approached the border of Baghdad and Eastern Anatolia. 
The Azerbaijani scientist knew that, Christian rulers had 
organized seven major Crusades against the Islamic World 
according to the Pope’s order since 1096. Saljuk Turks 
participated in those battles in order to defend Islam and 
annihilated Crusaders. Besides it, Turks settled in Anatolia 
played a role of barrier and strong line of defense between 
the Christian world and Ilkhanids in the West. Annihilation 
of Saljuk Turks would make the Byzantine Empire and 
Crusaders stronger. So, Tusi made troops of Hulegu khan 
to go towards Baghdad as took all these factors into 
consideration and understood that, the Abbasid Caliphate 
wasn’t able to defend Muslims. 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    288
N. Tusi, who was accompanying Hulegu khan during his 
march to Baghdad, could prevent death of many innocent 
people including scientists. The scientist’s policy was right 
and he could have influence on Hulegu khan. Owing to his 
policy, the astronomical observatory was built in Maragha, 
but not in Peking as Khubilay khan wanted.  
13. As it is known, Maragha observatory was the most 
grandiose observatory in Near East. Though there were 
only five astronomical equipments before 60th years of XIII 
century, other five equipments were invented in Maragha 
observatory and simplified astronomers’ works 
significantly. Astronomical equipments invented under the 
leadership of Tusi were the most precise equipments of at 
least 200 years. The observation of celestial bodies was 
realized with Rotary quadrant and Armillary device 
brought from Maragha observatory in Peking observatory. 
Equipments and devices invented in Maragha observatory 
were used in Peking observatory of Chine, Ulugbek’s 
observatory of Samarqand, Tycho Brahe’s observatory of 
Denmark and Jaipur observatory of India and great works 
were carried out in order to improve those equipments.  
Observations carried out in Maragha observatory were 
the most precise observations in Europe and Asia before 
improvement of observatories, but observations carried out 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    289
by Tycho Brahe at the end of XVI century passed ahead of 
them. The grandiose library consisted of 400 thousand 
manuscripts was established in Maragha.  
14. Most authors thought that, Columbus had listened 
Toscanelli’s advices when he was in Italy. He didn’t apply 
those advices only in several principles. But he didn’t agree 
with some ideas. According to Toscanelli’s calculations, 
measurements of the Earth were smaller than real 
measurements (according to calculations of the Greek 
scientist Eratosthenes, the length of the Earth’s outline was 
43625 km). If Columbus believed in Toscanelli, he would 
sail towards Eastern Asia through the Atlantic Ocean. 
Columbus declared that, he had discovered Eastern Asia 
though knew that, discovered territory was the land, which 
was unknown in the Old World according to Tusi’s 
calculations. But he deceived himself when tried to deceive 
Spanish monarchs.  
He kept it secret until his death and thought that, his 
defenders will lay bare the truth after his death and the 
world community would be aware of Columbus’s 
discoveries.  
15. The well-known Azerbaijani astronomer and mathe-
matician Nasiraddin Tusi had a great role in discovery of 
coasts of the New World. He had drawn outlines of 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    290
America and calculated its coordinates with the help of 
stars and celestial bodies. Columbus had determined 
according to his calculations that, there was a huge 
territory, which was unknown in Europe, in the other side 
of the Atlantic Ocean at about 5000-5500 km and he 
organized expedition towards that territory. Really, Tusi 
had described the huge territory located in the west on the 
map made in Maragha observatory. It shouldn’t be 
forgotten that, all geographic measurements were 
determined with the help of the Moon, Sun and stars during 
ocean passages. It wasn’t difficult for Columbus to find 
mentioned territory as he was an experienced seaman and 
professional astronomer.  
16. Why did Columbus describe the territory he 
discovered as Eastern Asia? May be, he didn’t want people 
to move to coasts of the New World. Otherwise, Spaniards 
could appropriate discovered territories gradually. It 
contradicted Columbus’s plans. But what was the 
difference between Eastern Asia and New World? Why 
wouldn’t Eastern Asia be appropriated? Columbus could be 
considered the heir of territories he discovered, according 
to the contract signed with rulers of Spain Isabella of 
Castilia and Ferdinand of Aragon. Discovered territories 
were known as eastern coasts of Asia. It means that, if the 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    291
expedition would discover another unknown territory, 
Columbus would lose monopoly of organization of expe-
ditions towards those territories. Then, other sea travelers 
would organize expeditions towards mentioned part of the 
Atlantic Ocean. 
17. Columbus knew that, the territory he looked for was 
unknown for Europeans and besides it, he knew the 
distance between that territory and Pyrenean peninsula. The 
rebellion of seamen occurred near coasts of the New World 
proved it as the commander of the expedition asked for 
only there days in addition. As it was mentioned above, 
Guanahani Island of Bahamas was discovered twenty six 
hours after added period. Thus, Columbus knew that, huge 
territory of the Western Hemisphere wasn’t far away. The 
unknown territory should be located in the east of the 
expedition’s location according to Tusi’s map. May be, 
Columbus thought that, the route of the expedition hadn’t 
been determined precisely. So, he thought that, the 
unknown territory described on Tusi’s map wasn’t in the 
east. Every day after October came, Columbus was sure 
that, he would meet with the land.  
18. According to the Professor H. Mammadbayli, who 
investigated Tusi’s activity, astronomers and geographers 
of that time were aware of existence of America in the 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    292
Western Hemisphere. It means that, the map made by Tusi 
in Maragha wasn’t kept as the personal property of Polos 
for a long time after being brought from Chine to the 
Apennine Peninsula. The map was taken out of Venetia 
after a short time and was found by people interested in 
astronomy and geography. People, who analyzed the map, 
thought that, the coastline described in the western coast of 
the Atlantic Ocean was Far Eastern Asia. Why did they 
think so?  
Progressive-minded people of that time believed that, 
the Earth was spherical. Before Columbus’s travel people 
thought that, the Old World consisted of three continents. It 
was difficult to imagine existence of another continent. So, 
only the eastern part of Asia could be situated in the west of 
the Atlantic Ocean. Any huge territory located in the east of 
the Pacific Ocean was considered western part of Europe. 
Thus, if Tusi’s map was known by experts before being in 
the library of Florentine, that territory was considered Asia. 
P. Toscanelli thought that, mentioned territory was remote 
eastern part of Asia. So, the Earth’s measurements were 
considered very small.  
19. Columbus believed that, the territory located in the 
west of the Atlantic Ocean, which was described on Tusi’s 
map, was unknown territory. But he kept it secret for some 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    293
reasons. If he would base on the map made by the 
Florentine scientist, he had to sail towards the west through 
35-400 north latitudes and he would reach Cipango then. 
According to maps of that time, Japan and Chine were 
situated at 35-400 north latitudes. But Columbus changed 
his route towards south-west when he passed the Atlantic 
Ocean and preferred 20-250 north latitudes. So, the 
expedition met with Bahamas (Guanahani Island).  
20. Columbus usually thought about the future of 
geographical points he discovered. But he didn’t use to 
explain essences of most discoveries to members of 
expeditions and its supporters.  
The admiral knew that, there was a huge water basin at 
several mils towards the west and it separated the continent 
he would discover from Asia when he was in Belen. So, the 
well-known sea traveler understood that, calculations of the 
Greek scientist Eratosthenes concerning the Earth’s 
measurements were right.   
Besides it, Columbus used to talk to indigenous 
population when he approached shores and asked where 
large gold deposits were. Probably aborigines of Panama 
had explained him that, gold was mostly brought from 
Biru. So, it should attract the admiral’s attention and surely, 
he would plan to visit that country. According to the 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    294
history, Martin Enciso Hernandez, Diego de Nicuesa, 
Vasco Nunez de Balboa, Pedro Arias Avila (Pedrarias) and 
Francisco Pissarro heard a lot about Biru when they were in 
Panama. Columbus had to save his authority over Spanish 
monarchs. Surely, he had shared his ideas with his brother 
Bartolommeo. 
Columbus knew that, the coastline located in the west of 
the Caribbean Sea would help him to realize his future 
plans and his children would be the richest people of Spain. 
The admiral declared his son Ferdinand heir of Belen and 
entrusted his heirs with the discovery of Biru. But 
Columbus’s family lost their monopoly on the Caribbean 
Sea and Biru was discovered by Francisco Pissarro in 1532.  
21. It is possible to prove that, scientists, who wrote that, 
Columbus had discovered part of Asia, were wrong. As it 
was mentioned above, Columbus had enough information 
about clothes, traditions and races of population of Japan, 
Chine and India when he started his travel. He had 
discovered Haiti, Cuba and Bahamas but hadn’t met with 
those populations.  
If geographers were right, the Genoese admiral would 
return to Spain after he discovered Bahamas. But, Colum-
bus travelled to coasts of Central America and investigated 
very large territory. That territory didn’t resemble Asia. As 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    295
Columbus was a skilful geographer, he couldn’t mix Asia 
and coasts of the New World up. If the admiral did it, he 
couldn’t overcome the expedition towards the west of the 
Atlantic Ocean. It was impossible for a seaman, who had 
made such mistake.  
22. Columbus discovered Cuba after Espanola during his 
first travel and determined that it was at 420 north latitude. 
The error made by the well-known sea traveler was 200. 
After Anthill islands were discovered, it turned out that 
their geographic coordinates had been determined 
correctly. Then, why did he make error of 200 when 
determined geographic coordinates of Cuba? The well-
known sea traveler had described territories he discovered 
during his first travel with wrong coordinates in order to 
keep them secret. Otherwise, Spanish monarchs could 
organize expeditions towards the Caribbean Sea 
independently. That’s why Columbus leaded great navy 
during his second expedition and could easily reach Haiti. 
Geographic coordinates of other geographical points 
discovered during expeditions were fixed correctly. Alonso 
de Ojeda, Pedro Alonso (Peralonso) Nino and Vicente 
Yanez Pinson leaded different expeditions and travelled 
towards the huge territory located on the southern coast of 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    296
the Caribbean Sea without admiral’s assistance and 
investigated those territories.  
23. Columbus risked his life and revealed an important 
secret out – he proved that, the huge territory located in the 
west of the Atlantic Ocean wasn’t eastern part of Asia, it 
was the fourth continent of the Earth. He proved that, the 
territory described on Nasiraddin Tusi’s map made in XIII 
century on the other side of the Atlantic Ocean was 
unknown territory. So, investigations carried out by the 
Azerbaijani scientist in Maragha observatory resulted in 
real discovery.  
Columbus should be grateful to Tusi for his success and 
probably, the seaman had kept the scientist’s map until the 
end of his life. Because Tusi had described the territory 
located on the other side of the Atlantic Ocean together 
with its coordinates, divided the Earth into 24 meridians 
and mentioned that the first meridian was near the Atlantic 
Ocean, determined that, storms, cyclones and tsunamis 
weren’t caused by winds, they were caused mostly by the 
Moon circulation. Those investigations were very 
important for geographers and navigators.  
Columbus could prognosticate the weather in accor-
dance with those results. He asked to stop the navy, which 
should be sent to Spain, for several days though the 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    297
weather was fine when it reached Espanola in 1498, as he 
had prognosticated that, the weather would be stormy on 
that part of the Caribbean Sea. But owing to the stubborn 
governor, most vessels of the expedition were destroyed by 
the storm. 
24. Columbus was the most skilful and experienced sea 
traveler of his time and he knew how to use winds and 
flows on the ocean better than any seaman. He sailed to 
England, Ireland and Guinea and analyzed directions of 
flows and winds blowing from the eastern part of the 
Atlantic Ocean to the west and made a diary about it before 
starting difficult travels. He could sail to the western part of 
the Atlantic Ocean by means of the Canary current and 
return back by means of flows blowing towards Europe on 
30th and 40th parallels and near the equator.  
Surely, Columbus could use the flow blowing near the 
equator during his first travel, but he used the northern 
current by basing on Tordesillas treaty (1494) signed 
between Portugal and Spain. Thus, Columbus knew all 
routes, but didn’t want to share his knowledge with others. 
N. Tusi wrote that, there were several strong flows blowing 
towards the west and east on the Atlantic Ocean. Columbus 
used this necessary information professionally. 
  
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    298
                             Literature 
                  
Абрамсон, М. Л. Кириллова, А. А. Колесницкий Н. 
Ф. и др.; Под ред. Колесницкого Н. Ф. История средних 
веков: 2-е изд. испр. и доп. Москва, «Просвещение», 1986. 
Андре М. Подлинное приключение Христофора 
Колумба. Пер. с фран. М-Л., Земля и фабрика, 1928 
Azərbaycan Beynəlxalq Universiteti. N. Tusinin 800 illik 
yubileyinə həsr edilmiş Respublika konfransının materialları. 
Bakı-2001 
Афанасьев. В. Л. Текст воспроизведен по изданию: 
Бартоломе де Лас Касас. История Индии. Ленинград, 
«Наука», 1968. 
Bakıxanov A. A. Gülüstani-irəm. Bakı, 1951 
Bakıxanov A. A. Seçilmiş əsərləri. Bakı, “Yazıçı”, 1984 
Белый Ю. А. Тихо Браге. М. «Наука», 1982. 
Берри А. Краткая история астрономии. 1946. 
Бертельс Е. Я. Суфизм и Суфийская литература. М., 
1965 
Бейкер Дж. История географических открытий и иссле-
дований. Пер. с англ. М., «Иностранная литература», 1950 
Бейклесс Дж. Америка глазами первооткрывателей. 
Пер. с англ. М., «Прогресс», 1969 
Велиев С. С. Древний, древний Азербайджан. Баку, 
«Гянджилик», 1983 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    299
Верлинден Ч. Христофор Колумб, Ернан Кортес. 
Ростов-на-Дону, «Феникс», 1997  
Веселовский, Н. Белый. Ю. А. Николай Коперник. М.: 
1974. «Наука», стр. 65 
Qаbusnamə. Bakı, “Azərnəşr”, 1989  
Qacar Ç. Azərbaycanın görkəmli şəxsiyyətləri. Bakı, 
“Nicat”, 1997  
Голант В. Я. Планету открывали сообща. М., «Наука», 
1971 
Qasımov R. Ə. Xristofor Kolumb, Nəsirəddin Tusi və 
Amerika qitəsinin həqiqi kəşfi. Bakı, “Çaşıoğlu”, 2002 
Гуляев В. И. Доколумбовы плавания в Америку: мифы 
и реальность. Москва, «Международные отношения», 
1991 
Гумилевская М. А. Как открывали мир. Москва, 
«Д.Л.», 1997 
Дитмар А. Б. Родосская параллель. Жизнь и деятель-
ность Эратосфена. Москва, «Мысль», 1965 
Hüseynov R. Ə. Astronomiya. Ali məktəblər üçün dərslik. 
Bakı, “Maarif”, 1997 
Hüseynov R. Ə. “Bilgi” dərgisinin “fizika, riyaziyyat, yer 
elmləri” seriyası. Nəsirəddin Tusinin astronomiya elmində 
xidmətləri. Bakı, 2002, №2  
Əbu Əli Həsən ibn Əli Xacə Nizamülmülk. Siyasətnamə. 
H. Məmmədzadənin əlavəsi. Bakı, “Elm”, 1989 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    300
Əbu Əli Həsən ibn Əli Xacə Nizamülmülk. Siyasətnamə. 
R. Sultanovun yazdığı müqqədimədən. Bakı, “Elm”, 1989 
Ионина Н. А. Автор-составитель. Сто великих чудес 
света. Москва, «Вече», 2000 
Исаченко А. А. Развитие географических идей. 
Москва, «Мысль», 1971 
История античности. Сост. Томашевская М. Н. 
Москва, «Правда», 1989, II том 
Каган В. Ф. Основание геометрии. М-Л., 1949 
Кечори Ф. История элементарной математики. Одесса, 
1971  
Клацко-Рындзиун. Журнал Ассоциации искусствен-
ного интеллекта. Новости искусственного интеллекта. М., 
1993  
Коротцев О. Как измеряли мир. Глобус. Ленинград, 
«Д.Л», 1980 
Купер Ф. Дж. Мерседес из Кастилии или путешествие 
в Катай. Одесса, «Маяк», 1985 
Kəndli-Herisçi Q. Xaqani Şirvani. Bakı, 1988 
Лас Касас Б. История Индии. Пр. с исп. Ленинград, 
«Наука», 1968 
Магидович И. П. Христофор Колумб. М., 
«Географгиз», 1956 
Магидович И. П. История открытия и исследования 
Северной Америки. Москва, «Географгиз», 1962 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    301
Магидович И. П. История открытия и исследования 
Центральной Южной Америки. Москва, «Географгиз», 
1965 
Магидович И. П., Магидович В. И. Очерки по 
истории географических открытий том I, Москва, 
«Просвещение», 1983 
Магидович И. П., Магидович В. И. Очерки по 
истории географических открытий том II,Москва, 
«Просвещение», 1983 
Максудов Ф. Г., Маммедбейли Г. Дж. Мухаммед 
Насирэддин Туси. Баку, «Гянджилик», 1981  
Марко Поло. Книга Марко Поло. Пер. старофран-
цузского текста. Москва, «Мысль», 1965 
Mehrəliyev E. Babakuhi Bakuvi Ş.M. (Nişapuri, Şirazi) və 
Pirhüseyn Şirvani. Bakı, “Nafta-Press”, 2002 
Mehrəliyev E. Şirvan Elmlər Akademiyası. Bakı, 
“Çaşıoğlu”, 2000 
Mehrəliyev E. Şirvanilər. Bakı, “Çaşıoğlu”, 1996 
Məmmədbəyli H. C. Mühəmməd Nəsirəddin Tusi. Bakı, 
“Gənclik”, 1980 
Məmmədbəyli H. C. və Haşımzadə M. “Şəklül-qita” 
kitabının fiyaziyyat tarixində əhəmiyyəti. Az.SSR EA., Xəbər-
ləri, 1951 №8 
Морисон С. Э. Христофор Колумб – мореплаватель. 
Пер. с англ. Москва, «Иностранная литература», 1958 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    302
Муромов И. А. Сто великих путешественников. 
Москва, «Вече», 2000 
Рашид-ад-дин. Сборник летописей том III, Москва, 
1946 
Самин Д. К. Сто великих научных открытий. М, 
«Вече», 2002 
Самин Д. К. Сто великих ученых. Москва, «Вече», 
2002 
Страбон. География. Пер. с гречес. Москва, «Наука», 
1964 
Строева Л. В. Государство Исмилитов в Иране в XI-
XIII вв. Москва, «Наука», 1978  
Субботин М. Ф. Работы Мухаммеда Насирэддина по 
теории движения Солнца и планет. «Известия АН Азерб. 
ССР», №5, 1951 
Свет Я. М. Колумб. Москва, «Молодая гвардия», 1973 
Свет Я. М. Севильская западня. (Тяжба о Колумбовом 
наследстве) Москва, «Молодая гвардия», 1969 
Томашевская М. Н., Составитель, Историки антич-
ности. Москва, «Правда», 1989, том II 
Фукидид. История том I, Москва, 1915 
Xacə Nəsirəddin Tusi. Rəhim Sultfnovun farscadan 
tərcüməsi. Əxlaqi-Nasiri. Bakı, “Lider nəşriyyat”, 2005. səh. 
235 
Ханке Х. Люди, корабли, океаны. Москва, «Прогресс» 
1984 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    303
Харт Г. Венецианец Марко Поло. Пер. с англ. М., 
«ИЛ», 1956 
Хауз. Д. Гринвечское время и открытие долготы. 
Москва, «Мир», 1983. 
Хепгуд Ч. Древние карты морских королей. 
Христофор Колумб. Путешествие. 1952 
Шкловский В. Земли разведчик. М., «Молодая 
гвардия», 1966 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    304
Table of contents 
 
Scientific editor…………………………………… 4-7 
Preface…………………………………………….. 8-12  
Development of the astronomy in ancient times… 13-37 
Astronomers of the Eastern world……………….. 38-43 
Sheikh Muhammadali Babakuhi Bakuvi……....... 44-50 
Main scientific works of well-known scientists….. 50-66 
The founder of Maragha observatory –  
Nasiraddin Tusi………………………………………. 66-76 
The policy of Nasiraddin Tusi…………………… 76-101 
Construction of the immense observatory in  
Maragha……………………………………………. 102-111 
Maragha observatory and its scientists…………... 112-124 
Application of “Zij-i Ilkhani” in other astronomi- 
cal catalogues………………………………………. 125-136 
The most grandiose academy of sciences was  
located in Maragha………………………………… 137-147 
Development of astronomy by Nasiraddin Tusi..148-159  
     Scientific results achieved by Nasiraddin Tusi...159-178 
     Misappropriation of Nasiraddin Tusi’s invention  
by Regiomontanus…………………………………. 178-196 
The scientist known for scientific works……… 196-203 
Preparation for discovery of America………… 204-209 
The map made in Maragha in Europe………… 209-216 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    305
Christopher Columbus and the discovery of  
global importance…………………………………. 216-235 
Destiny of the map of Maragha………………. 235-244 
The sensational map found in the Topkapi  
palace Museum of Istanbul……………………… 245-258 
Who is the real author of the map – admiral  
Piri Reis or Nasiraddin Tusi?................................ 258-277 
Achieved results………………………………. 278-297 
Literature……………………………………... 298-303 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                     
 
  
                                                                            
                                                    306
 
  
 
                              Ramiz Daniz 
 
 
          The scientist passed ahead of senturies   
                         - Nasiraddin Tusi  
 
 
 
                                  Format: 60 x 84 1/16 
                                  Volume: 19 
                                  Edition: 1000 
                                  Price: Contract-based 
 
 
 
                        Printed in the Printing-House of the  
                                     “Nasir” enterprise 
 
                       
 
                                 Tel: (050) 314 09 37; 
                                         (012) 431 11 00 
 
