1 
 
 
 
 
ELSHAD  ABDULLAYEV  
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE NAGORNO-KARABAKH 
PROBLEM IN THE LIGHT 
OF INTERNATIONAL LAW 
 
 
 
 
 
"...Considerable parts of the territory of Azerbaijan are still occupied by 
Armenian forces and separatist forces are still in control of the Nagorno-
Karabakh region ". 
 
Council of Europe 
Parliamentary Assembly 
Resolution 1416 
Strasbourg, 25 January, 2005 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TƏHSİL 
BAKU-2005
2 
 
”Nagorno-Karabakh is an integral part of Azerbaijan… Azerbaijan will liberate its 
territory from occupation at whatever cost.” 
 
HAYDAR ALİYEV 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
ELSHAD ABDULLAYEV 
Doctor of law sciences 
 
 
 
 
 
THE NAGORNO-KARABAKH 
PROBLEM IN THE LIGHT 
OF INTERNATIONAL LAW 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
«TAHSIL» 
PUBLISHING HOUSE 
BAKU-2005 
4 
 
 
81.2 Ing.  
A14 
 
Translated into English by: 
Dr. BAYLAR 1SLAMKHAN HAJIYEV 
 
 
Reviews:               Latif HUSSEYNOV, 
                              Doctor of law sciences 
                              Alish GASSIMOV, 
                              Doctor of law sciences 
 
Dr. Elshad Abdullayev 
A 14 The Nagorno-Karabakh problem in the light of international law.  
Publishing house «Tahsil», 2005, 224 p. 
 
The  book   investigates  the   background   of the  Armenia-Azerbaijan, 
Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, which has turned into a national problem of our 
people, the course of negotiations on settlement of the issue, as well as the fairness 
of the international community's position regarding this issue. The author's primary 
intent is to deliver to readers the real essence of a very complex problem, which 
endangers peace and stability in the entire South Caucasus today, also to prove the 
necessity for the world community to be guided by fair criteria in relation to the 
issue. The book is a valuable aid for those wanting to shed light on the reasons of 
the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, which affects negatively the life of not only 
Azerbaijan people, but also all the peoples of the region as well. 
 
 
 
A  4702060204      2005                                                                    81.2 Ing. 
     053 
  
 
 
© Publishing house «Tahsil», 2005 
5 
 
Nagorno-Karabakh problem can be solved only based on international 
legal norms 
 
The resolution adopted by European Council Parliamentary 
Assembly considers aggressive Armenia an invasive state and the 
fictitious Nagorno-Karabakh government a separatist regime 
 
Putting an end to aggression by Armenia against our country is the main 
goal of the Azerbaijan state. Recently many significant steps and urgent measures 
have been taken in this field for restoration of the territorial integrity of our 
country. This policy, founded by the national leader Heydar Aliyev and followed 
successfully by the President Ilham Aliyev, has produced real results and created a 
basis for international exposure of Armenia's aggression. Azerbaijan has succeeded 
in bringing the Armenian aggression to the agenda of different international 
organizations and achieved adoption of respective resolutions. Recently, one more 
resolution by the European Council Parliamentary Assembly was adopted in regard 
to the conflict. 
The articles contained in the resolution put forward the EC's admission of 
the fact that Armenia has occupied Azerbaijan territories, and condemn this act of 
aggression. Let's note that the EC has always kept the Armenia-Azerbaijan, 
Nagorno-Karabakh conflict in the focus of attention. However, unfortunately, in 
many cases, the EC adhered to an unfair position but after the admission of our 
country to membership in the organization in 2001 the situation changed. 1992, 
following the official appeal to the European Council on providing Azerbaijan with 
the status of "specially invited guest", the organization adopted several significant 
documents concerning the settlement of the conflict. One of them was adopted in 
February 1992 at the European Council Parliamentary Assembly's Committee for 
Relations with the Non-EC European countries. The statement reflecting the EC's 
position concerning the conflict expressed concern over the deterioration of the 
situation in Nagorno-Karabakh and recommended that the parties concerned stop 
the fighting and settle the conflict peacefully. On March 12, 1992, the Committee 
of Ministers of the European Council adopted as well a statement on the conflict. 
This document neither assessed the problem objectively, nor reflected its essence. 
In April 1993, the EC Committee of Ministers adopted one more statement 
regarding the Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. In this statement, 
the EC Committee of Ministers backed the UN requirements concerning 
restoration of peace in the region and cessation of hostilities. However, it did not 
mention Armenia as the invader at all. 
6 
 
In January 1994, while delivering the initiative of holding a meeting 
concerning the settlement of the conflict in Strasbourg, the EC Committee for 
Relations with the Non-EC European countries invited representatives of the 
separatist regime in Nagorno-Karabakh to negotiations as well. This led to an 
annulment of the meeting and the Azerbaijan side did not join the negotiations. 
In July the same year, negotiations concerning the Armenia-Azerbaijan, 
Nagorno-Karabakh conflict were conducted in Strasbourg at the initiative of the 
European Council. Azerbaijan took part in these negotiations taking into account 
the necessity of relations with the EC. The meeting decided to send a delegation to 
the region. On November 14, the delegation visited Azerbaijan. A few days before 
that, on November 10, the European Council Parliamentary Assembly had adopted 
its first resolution on the Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. This 
resolution titled "On the conflict in Nagorno-Karabakh" did not provide a fair 
assessment of the problem and distorted its essence. 
On June 28, 1996, Azerbaijan received the status of "specially invited 
guest" to the European Council. In April 1997, the EC PA adopted one more 
resolution on the Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. The resolution 
"On the Conflicts in Caucasus" stressed the necessity of the EC's assistance in the 
settlement of the conflicts in Abkhazia and Nagorno-Karabakh. The document's 
clause dedicated to the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict reflected the release of the 
occupied territories and peaceful regulation of the conflict as a recommendation by 
the European Council. However, one of the resolution's negative points was that it 
emphasized the necessity of Azerbaijan, Armenia, and Nagorno-Karabakh 
conducting direct negotiations. This again meant that the separatist regime in the 
Nagorno-Karabakh was acknowledged as an independent side, and therefore was 
of no real meaning. 
On June 28, 2000, the EC PA adopted a decision to accept Azerbaijan as a 
full-fledged member to the organization. On January 17, 2001, the EC Committee 
of Ministers made a similar step by providing this decision with legal force. That 
year on January 25, the ceremony of Azerbaijan's acceptance to the European 
Council took place and thus, a new stage started in the history of our country's 
relations with Europe. 
Due to the initiative and the diplomatic activity by the head of the 
delegation representing Azerbaijan at the EC PA, Ilham Aliyev, deputies from 
Azerbaijan managed to take significant measures aimed at international exposure 
of Armenia's invasive policy. Exactly due to this, official information at the 108th 
session of the EC Committee of Ministers assessed the occupation of Azerbaijan 
territories by Armenia as an aggressive policy. 
7 
 
On April 24, 2001, the Azerbaijan delegation took an active part at the 
discussions on the "Struggle of Europe against Economic and Transnational 
Organized Crime" at the EC PA session in Strasbourg. Mr. Ilham Aliyev delivered 
a speech at the discussion and mentioned the issues worrying our country: 
"Azerbaijan is particularly concerned over this issue. Because one of the centers of 
organized crime in Europe is exactly in our territory. The region called "The 
Republic of Nagorno-Karabakh" is not controlled either by the Azerbaijan 
government bodies or by any international organization responsible for the struggle 
against this crime". During the session, our delegation prepared and spread among 
the deputies a special draft document concerning the presence of Azerbaijani 
hostages and captives in Armenia and Nagorno-Karabakh. This document showed 
that as a result of the occupation of Azerbaijani territories, 
4959 persons have vanished. One thousand ninety two of them were 
released from 1992 to 2001, and 176 of them arc deceased. The document points 
out that there are 783 captives, including 18 children, 43 women, and 56 older men 
on the territory of Armenia and in occupied Azerbaijani lands. 
Many deputies from Hungary, Russia, Luxemburg, Spain, Turkey, 
Netherlands, Latvia, Lithuania, Sweden, the Ukraine and other countries, signed 
the document, and the draft spread among the parliamentary delegations of the 
states taking part at the EC PA session. 
The documents, prepared by the Azerbaijan delegation on destruction and 
appropriation of Azerbaijan cultural monuments by Armenians, destruction of the 
ecological balance by Armenia in the invaded lands of Azerbaijan, both reflect the 
tragic results of the Armenian aggression against our country. 
In the period hereafter, our delegation succeeded as well to spread many 
important documents exposing Armenia's aggression. The proposals on the 
discussion of the Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict at the EC PA, 
are the following: "Education rights of the refugees and internally displaced 
persons (IDPs) in Azerbaijan in the context of further development of education in 
Europe", 2) "On the nuclear technologies and nuclear wastes in the occupied 
territories of the Azerbaijan Republic", 3) "On Observation of International 
Principles and Rules in the Member States of the EC". The report delivered by the 
chairman of the EC PA Committee for Migration, Refugees & Demography Rut-
Gabi Vermot-Mangold on "The state of the refugees in Armenia, Georgia and 
Azerbaijan", and the report made by Ali Abbasov, member of our delegation on 
"The State of Culture in the South Caucasus", and other significant documents 
indicated the facts that approximately one million people have been driven out of 
their lands due to the occupation of Azerbaijan territories by Armenia and that is an 
act of invasion. Massive terror and acts of genocide have been committed against 
8 
 
the people of Azerbaijan, and monuments of historical culture have been savagely 
destroyed. 
In the summer session of 2001, the Azerbaijan delegation had sent an 
inquiry by Milli Mejlis delegation at the European Council Parliamentary 
Assembly to the EC Committee of Ministers about Armenia, about the refusal by 
Armenia to recognize the territorial integrity of Azerbaijan at the 108th session of 
the European Council Committee of Ministers. This inquiry marked that non-
recognition of Azerbaijan's territorial integrity by Armenia did not correspond 
either to the EC PA principles or in general, the principles of international law. The 
Azerbaijan delegation wanted to know the official position of the EC PA about the 
issue. Discussions based on the inquiry were held and the Committee of Ministers 
declared officially that it admits the principle of inviolability of Azerbaijan's 
territorial integrity and invited Armenia to sign this document as well. 
Consequently, Armenia changed its position on the issue and signed the document. 
The summer session of 2003 conducted discussions on the "Positive 
experience of autonomous regions in Europe". At the proposal of Mr. Ilham 
Aliyev, a provision was added to the document about autonomous regions having 
no right to violate the territorial integrity. Despite the grave resistance by the 
Armenians, the sentence "grant of autonomy should be based on the sovereignty 
and territorial integrity of the state itself was added to the document. This was 
actually a very important measure that put a wall before the claims of the Nagorno-
Karabakh separatist regime for independence. 
One of the essential accomplishments of the many-branched activity of the 
Azerbaijan delegation at the EC PA is that it achieved an appointment of a reporter 
on the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. The discussions conducted at the winter session 
of the EC PA in 2005, as well as the resolution adopted, prove the success of this 
step once more. The report prepared by the EC PA deputy David Atkinson "On the 
Nagorno-Karabakh conflict" was put to discussion at the EC PA Committee for 
Political Affairs and presently, that document is included in the agenda of the 
Parliamentary Assembly. The report points out the control over seven Azerbaijan 
regions by the Armenian army and separatist Armenian forces, realization of large-
scale ethnic clearance operations in these territories, implementation of the plan of 
creation of a mono-ethnic territory, the necessity of protecting the state 
sovereignty, as well as the interests of Azerbaijani and Armenian communities at 
the settlement of the issue, and other significant matters. "Hundreds of thousands 
of people are still living in grave conditions as internally displaced persons. 
Considerable parts of Azerbaijan territories are still occupied by Armenian forces 
and separatist forces are still in control of the Nagorno-Karabakh region" says the 
resolution. 
9 
 
The second clause of the document severely criticizes the ethnic clearance 
policy run by Armenia and states that the EC PA condemns such kind of actions: 
"The Assembly expresses anxiety of that the military operations and the ethnic 
hostility widely spread prior to these operations have led to wide-scale driving out 
of people from their native lands for their national identity and creation of mono-
ethnic territories resembling a horrible ethnic clearance conception". As it is 
known, Armenia, which has grossly violated the principles of international law, is 
presently trying to strengthen the results of it's military aggression and 
implementing the policy of illegal settlement of Armenian population in the 
occupied territories of Azerbaijan. This is an integral part of the mono-ethnic 
territory plan, whereas this kind of policy contradicts the articles of international 
law, as well as those of the IV Geneva Convention adopted in 1949 on Protection 
of Civilian Population at Wars, which has been repeatedly mentioned by the 
Azerbaijan President. 
The EC PA has assessed the fact of the occupation of the territories of one 
member-state, Azerbaijan, by another member-state, Armenia, as a rude violation 
of norms of international law, as well as the principles adopted by the EC. "The 
Assembly repeats once more that the occupation of a foreign territory by a 
member-state is a serious violation of this state's liability as a member of the 
European Council and confirms once more that the internally displaced persons 
from the conflict territory have the right to return to their places with safety and 
dignity". Let's note that this issue has been raised before the EC over and over 
again. Mr. Ilham Aliyev mentioned this issue at his speech in the EC PA last year, 
and characterized the occupation of the territory of one member-state by another 
member-state as a step contradicting EC principles. 
The resolution expresses as well the fact that Armenia neglects the norms of 
international law and ignores the implementation of the UN resolutions. The third 
clause of the document indicates that based on the resolutions 822, 853, 874 and 
884 of the UN Security Council, the EC PA calls on all sides to obey these 
resolutions immediately, particularly to avoid any military operations and 
withdraw the armed forces from all the occupied territories. Undoubtedly, this 
relates directly to Armenia, for exactly Armenia has occupied Azerbaijan 
territories, and this issue has been reflected as well in the above-mentioned 
document. 
In general, the resolution is of an obvious objective character and confirms 
once more the possibility of solving the Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh 
conflict based only on the principles of international law. The main importance of 
the document is that its provisions provide Azerbaijan with additional legal 
arguments in the process of negotiations, because the fact of occupation of 
10 
 
Azerbaijan territories by Armenia has already been confirmed in resolutions of 
such authoritative organizations as the UN, EC, The Organization of Islamic 
Conference, as well as statements spread by heads of different states. Norms of 
international law require punishment of Armenia as an invader, and the 
international community is able to apply respective sanctions for this. 
 
Elshad Islam ABDULLAYEV, 
 
Head of the "State & Law" Research Center, 
Azerbaijan International University, doctor 
of law sciences, professor Academician of the 
Russian Academy of Education 
 
AUTHOR'S NOTE 
 
Dear reader! 
The book being introduced is investigating the history of the Armenia-
Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, the core of the problem, and the causes of 
its pendency today. The book is aimed at giving a clear idea of international talks 
for the conflict and, on the whole, of the attitude of international community 
towards this issue. 
As everybody knows the Nagorno-Karabakh problem is of vitally important 
for Azerbaijan. Once solved this problem will initiate a new stage in socio-political 
progress for the whole region. Despite this, the international community has not 
given proper attention yet to this conflict that has now lasted for 17 years. The 
negotiation process has not yet yielded any results, which has caused, major 
anxiety in the world, especially in Azerbaijan. 
Much was done under the leadership of the national leader Heydar Aliyev to 
objectively inform the world community about the conflict. While at, the same 
time, we have been making significant progress in other direction as well. The 
creation of a modern and strong state has become a reality for Azerbaijan and a just 
settlement of the conflict is the next stage. Currently Azerbaijan has taken the lead 
over Armenia both in economic and political progress. This has caused a belief that 
the problem can and should be settled in the framework of international legal 
regulations whereby the territorial integrity of our republic can be ensured. It is 
noteworthy that our President Ilham Aliyev is very instrumental in moving this 
progress forward. 
We all know that the Nagorno-Karabakh problem has become a core 
national issue for Azerbaijani people. It is everybody's responsibility to liberate our 
11 
 
lands from foreign occupation. Thus, it takes a special significance for each citizen 
of Azerbaijan to be aware of the essence of the conflict, and its bitter and tragic 
consequences. I believe that the book "The Nagorno-Karabakh Problem in the 
Light of International Law" will be a real and valuable guide for reader in this 
matter. 
Dear reader! 
The facts in this book reflect the historical truth. But to see the future it is 
very important to investigate the past. Nobody doubts as to an ultimate settlement 
of the Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh problem in the frame work of 
territorial integrity for Azerbaijan. The facts and information in this book are a 
weighty but optimistic argument for the future. However, this does not give 
grounds to rest. The struggle is going on and each Azerbaijani citizen, irrespective 
of a social status or position must advance and push for a just settlement of this. 
This book and assemblage of documents is written for such people! 
 
FOREWORD 
 
The settlement of the Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict is a 
dominant factor which will determine the conditions of our country's general 
development and its integration into the world community. The reforms carried out 
in our republic have successfully resulted in our state system of consolidation, and 
our prolonged stability and sound success in the economy. Azerbaijan today enjoys 
a major role in the world arena and is being regarded as the most dominant country 
in the Transcaucasia. 
As our national leader Heydar Aliyev was elected, all spheres of social life 
underwent social changes inspiring progress inside the country. The changes have 
also had a decisive impact upon the international authority of Azerbaijan. Currently 
there is some view among the public that the Azerbaijan possesses enough 
economic and intellectual potential to make it possible to solve our problems with 
Armenia. The continuation of Heydar Aliyev's course by Ilham Aliyev is viewed as 
the most reliable guarantee of the country's future prosperity. This view relates not 
only to the approach to sociopolitical issues, but also is evident in the general 
public expectations concerning the Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh 
conflict, which continuous to worry each citizen. 
The background of this conflict, different stages of its evolution, as well as 
some difficulties arising at the time of the settlement process reveal the 
complicated and contradictory nature of the issue. Settlement of the Armenia-
Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict has now turned into one of the most 
important and priority issues of the region. Azerbaijan, itself, has been 
12 
 
experiencing the psychological and political impact of this problem for 17 years. 
Over one million people have become refugees and internally displaced persons. 
Yet, the tragic results of the Nagorno-Karabakh problem are reflected not only in 
the statistical data. But we can see that the real consequences of the Armenia-
Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict are much more severe and tragic. This 
conflict means Khojali tragedy for the Azerbaijani people. This conflict is carried 
in everybody's memory as a miserable symptom of a difficult defeat. The main 
point of this conflict includes not only the loss of lives, but the main realization of 
loss of land. Despite the fact that large number of Azeri people has been badly 
treated, they have nevertheless passed the historic test of optimism about the future 
with unbreakable will and persistence. 
The characteristics of the contradiction and the complexity of the problem 
are also associated with the fact as time goes by the conditions that require the 
resolution of the problem is changing. The realization of justice in this, new era is 
putting us in a more difficult and hopeless situation. The majority of our people 
still believe strongly in the freeing of Karabakh. 
A solution of the conflict has now reached the stage where the role of the 
international community could be significant. Our national leader Heydar Aliyev 
after 1993 has been conducting his policies only in the direction of tying them with 
international law norms. Very important steps have been taken in this direction 
through both economic standpoint, the creation of strong relationships with the 
world's powerful countries, and diplomatic negotiations with various international 
organizations now has caused Armenia to be officially acknowledged as the 
invader. 
But all those achievements have not been able to lift the factor of double 
standards. There have been no constructive points of view on behalf of Armenia as 
compared with Azerbaijan's peace loving policy. This policy continues and will 
continue. One of the main conditions of freeing Azerbaijan lands has been to 
inform the international community objectively. Nevertheless, this does not seem 
to be moving us forward in finally resolving the issues with Armenia. Others have 
argued for the continuation of war. But we must persist and keep moving forward 
and insisting on the rule of law and assistance from international agencies. 
The book by professor Elshad Abdullayev, doctor of Law Sciences entitled 
"The Nagorno-Karabakh Problem in the Light of International Law" is a good 
investment for those who want to find out about the subject of the conflict. The 
book has been primarily enriched with objective facts and materials of the historic 
problem. In this book are stated facts from inhabiting Azerbaijan with Armenians 
and at a certain point in time in annexing of our land to Armenia. The author 
explains the dispute not only as a territorial claim, but also as to the logical 
13 
 
outcome of the policy of deportation and genocide against the Azerbaijani people. 
The fact of inhabiting Azerbaijan with Armenians and touching upon the 
permanent evidence E. Abdullayev explains it as an unpleasant plan for the tearing 
apart of Azerbaijan. The first part of the book explains the reality of the problem. It 
is necessary that Armenians in the past two hundred years have been creating a 
false opinion about Nagorno-Karabakh and about Azerbaijan, and one can admit 
that they were pretty successful in doing this. 
The atrocities committed against Azeri people and the facts of mass 
genocide which took place from the beginning of the 19th century till the end of 
the 20th century has been reflected in the section "Tracking historical facts" in the 
book. The author divides these negative politics of Armenians into separate stages 
as he analyzes them and arrives at a conclusion that this is unlimited hate of one 
people to other, this is the scenario of a dirty game played by some forces. There 
were wide explanations of the acts of genocide against Azeri people and the results 
from it. 
Elshad Abdullayev has been writing with a heartache about the times of the 
former Soviet Union when there were undertaken several attempts to put life into 
an illusion of "Great Armenia" and to add parts of Azerbaijan to Armenia. One can 
observe that there was favoritism in the Soviet Union in the relationship towards 
Azerbaijan and Armenia. Being under the protection of the Soviet leadership 
Armenians were shown as oppressed and timid people and giving them the 
protection welcomed their revival, improved their economic and political situation 
and welcomed the junction of various parts of Azerbaijan to Armenia. This had 
played a significant role in politics towards South Caucasus of both Lenin and 
Stalin governments. It is very sad that very rarely had there been any appointments 
to high rank on behalf of Azerbaijanis and there were purges and terrorist acts 
committed against Azeri intellectuals at this point of time. 
Taking our attention to Armenians tricks in order to satisfy their claims on 
Nagorno-Karabakh in the 70s of the last century the author shows the fact that 
permanent and smart policy of the Azerbaijan leader Heydar Aliyev had been a 
barrier to this. Resolution of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict in favor of Armenians 
was taken away by Heydar Aliyev. In 1977 the committee that had been working 
on the new Constitution of the Soviet Union there was a proposal on taking 
Nagorno-Karabakh from the territory of Azerbaijan SSR and adding it to Armenia 
SSR. The reactions by Heydar Aliyev, the first secretary of the Azerbaijan 
Communist Party Central Committee, and his categorical denial to the passage of 
this act prevented it from passing. 
Without a doubt at the time of Soviet Union being in existence one could 
not expose or oppose Armenians openly. It could be considered as propaganda 
14 
 
against Soviet people unity. And for that purpose our national leader Heydar 
Aliyev being right used appropriate pragmatic politics. His solution of the problem 
did not take an emotional but instead addressed a realistic approach. In the first 
part of the book these issues were reflected as well. The author writes that "Heydar 
Aliyev without backing down in front of anyone or anybody has put his signature 
under very risky laws without hesitation. The placement of railroad from Baku to 
Khankendi (Nagorno-Karabakh) was done during his leadership and the reason 
behind this was to increase the amount of communications connecting Baku and 
Nagorno-Karabakh. This has established the fact of Karabakh being inseparable 
part of Azerbaijan having closer ties with the center, the autonomous region being 
part of Azerbaijan not Armenia." 
The author of the book brings to the attention of the reader that the national 
leader prevented Armenians from territorial gains and by language of historical 
facts not allowing the connection of land with Armenia, stating that the main 
reason for removing Heydar Aliyev from USSR leadership was the annexation 
process and question of Nagorno-Karabakh. As we all know the situation in 
Karabakh started to deteriorate after this happened. After Heydar Aliyev was 
removed from power new opportunities for Armenian activity opened up. "Heydar 
Aliyev's removal from the position of being in Political Bureau and the first deputy 
to the Council of Ministers in 1987 could be described as a logical conclusion to 
this. The main obstacle of Armenian appetite towards Nagorno-Karabakh was 
removed and now the rest of the plan has the technical character," writes the 
author. 
The flow of the events in the first part of the book after 1988 are described 
in chronological order, a thorough explanation is given to the misfortunes of war 
during the first years of it. The disorder in Azerbaijan at the beginning of the 
1990's and lack of existence of a functioning governmental apparatus that would 
protect our national interest shows as the main reason for losing Nagorno-
Karabakh. Only after coming to power our national leader Heydar Aliyev took 
effective steps in preventing Armenia's occupying policy. The author, notes that 
starting in 1993 Heydar Aliyev provided strong and effective leadership in 
addressing this issue: "Heydar Aliyev as a person with the good political 
experience, has been able to create the correct propaganda in the international com-
munity and has been able to bring the attention of the world's powers to the fact of 
occupation." 
The book's first part ends with Heydar Aliyev's speech at the "Milli Mejlis" 
(the "Parliament") debates associated with the Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-
Karabakh conflict in 2001. This was the optimal variant. Only Heydar Aliyev knew 
the depth and details of the problem. During the speech discussed at Milli Mejlis 
15 
 
our national leader outlined the full story of the problem and the reasons for 
understanding the difficulties. That is why including this speech in the book 
increases the influence of the book for the reader. 
In the first part of the second chapter of the book there is a discussion of the 
issues and the adopted resolutions that came as a result of this discussion. In this 
book, starting from the United Nations all the way to the Organizations of Islamic 
Conference, the attitude of different organizations to the problem found its 
reflection. The author explains noncompliance to the four UN Security Council 
resolutions as a manifestation of the incomplete understanding on behalf of the 
international community. 
Azerbaijan being a member of the international community while constantly 
bringing forth the issue in the separate arguments, bringing in the facts that 
confirmed that Armenia was an occupier, the world community still didn't address 
specific steps to punish the occupier. These factors could only lead to the 
conclusion of the existence of double standards. All this confirms one more time 
that at different points in time different documents, laws, and statements have been 
adopted concerning Armenia's occupying policy against Azerbaijan. This could be 
marked as non-willingness to punish the aggressor on behalf of the international 
community. There is only one way of resolving the Nagorno-Karabakh problem 
and this can be done only by the principal following this country's territorial 
integrity. 
Everybody understands that Armenia is an occupying state as a result of 11 
years of constant policy deliberations at the international level. At the different 
levels of meetings, summits, and conferences this issue has been the center of 
attention, and the legal issue of territorial integrity repeatedly found its reflection. 
In all of these documents there is evidence that more than one million people live 
as refugees and IDPs. In some of the forums this, unfortunately, did not correspond 
to the official point of view. In many cases, however, there were successes and 
these created excellent opportunities to put on the forefront the execution of the 
international norms. 
The second chapter of the book gives a wide explanation of the historic 
significance of OSCE's role as a mediator. Here at this stage the forum dialogue is 
the direct result of the president's oral presentation and puts into perspective the 
creation of the OSCE group. It is no longer a secret that the non-constructive point 
of view of Armenia was the reason behind no movement in the negotiation process. 
Official Yerevan does not make any move toward a just resolution of the conflict 
and brings the negotiations to a standstill. Even at times there were opportunities 
for strong compromise on behalf of both sides for signing a peace, but Armenia 
does not back down from its occupational resolve. This event has a more thorough 
16 
 
explanation within the second part of the book. But even here in the period after 
proclaiming the ceasefire one can observe huge advancements in the economic and 
political differences between the two countries. The strong economic potential, 
powerful government and quick democratization in Azerbaijan are the major 
influencing factors and has proven Azerbaijan to be the possessor of the stronger 
ideals in the process of negotiations. There are new opportunities for interregional 
projects and there are many opportunities for peaceful resolution of the project, but 
to no avail at the time Professor Abdullayev prognoses that as the solution to the 
signing of a real peace: "The process that would benefit Azerbaijan does not go 
slowly, and changes really fast on a daily basis". 
The third part of the second chapter reflects the discussion process in the 
framework of the European Union. Attention is given to discussions that took place 
with respect to the Nagorno-Karabakh problem and to the changes in the approach 
towards this problem that took place in the last most recent years. The author 
stresses the noticeable changes that took place after 2001 whereas before 2001 the 
accepted resolutions about the relationships between Azerbaijan and EU were not 
determined in light of the factual history of the events. 
Professor Abdullayev stresses the major victory of Azerbaijani diplomacy at 
this time. The Azerbaijan delegation to the European 
Union Parliamentary Assembly under the leadership of Ilham Aliyev 
eventually and successfully acknowledged the fact of Armenian occupation of 
Azerbaijan lands. 
The book stresses that the attitude of the European Union towards the 
Nagorno-Karabakh problem was in comparison with other organizations more 
objective. This was due to the fact that the representatives of our delegation gave 
direct and accurate information, including the distribution of official documents. 
The result of all of this established a more just approach to the Nagorno-Karabakh 
problem. 
A strong part of this book is in noting that through official resolutions and 
statements of international organizations regarding the conflict, as well as three 
proposals of the OSCE Minsk group. All these documents express the attitude of 
the international community towards the problem. Without hesitation the 
mentioned advantages of the book is in finding out about the Armenia-Azerbaijan, 
Nagorno-Karabakh conflict and this book is a good investment for those who want 
to know more about this conflict's place in Azerbaijan history and region. 
Latif HUSSEYNOV  
Doctor of law sciences, professor 
Alish GASSIMOV 
Doctor of law sciences 
17 
 
 
I PART 
 
HISTORY OF THE ARMENIA-AZERBAIJAN, NAGORNO-
KARABAKH CONFLICT 
 
1. TRACKING HISTORICAL FACTS 
 
While speaking about the history of the Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-
Karabakh conflict, the necessity of paying attention to the settlement of Armenians 
in Azerbaijan emerges first of all. The point is that Armenians were moved to 
Azerbaijan much later. Historical facts show that no Armenian had ever lived in 
Azerbaijan before the XIX century. Their settlement in this territory always served 
the private interests of the Russian Empire. The events taking place in the XIX 
century in the whole of Eastern Europe, as well as Russia (Russian-Turkish, 
Russian-Iranian wars) led to the gradual weakening of positions of the Northern 
neighbor of Azerbaijan in the region. Russia was seriously anxious as well about 
the presence of a Moslem and Turkish country in its southern border and that's why 
it started thinking about the realization of the idea of settling Armenians in 
Northern Azerbaijan. 
Following the conclusion of the Gulustan and Turkmanchay Treaties in 
1813 and 1828 respectively, the process of moving Armenians to Azerbaijan 
territories substantially increased. At that time 86,000 Armenians from Turkey and 
40,000 Armenians from Iran were moved to the territory of Western Azerbaijan, 
which is presently annexed to Armenia. The Armenians were settled mainly in the 
territories of Nakhichevan, Yerevan and Karabakh khanates. Afterwards, the 
efforts on the disintegration of Azerbaijan kept on, and an Armenian province was 
created here. True, later in 1846 this province was abolished; nevertheless, the 
process of settlement of Armenians in Azerbaijan left its negative trace in its 
history. 
Settlement of Armenians in the Caucasus was carried out stage-by-stage at 
different times. Approximately 200 years ago the czar of Russia signed a decree for 
the settlement of part of the Armenian population in Derbend and Guba. The 
decree "On the privileges of the Derbend and Mushkir Armenians and their right to 
move freely" provided Armenians with rather extensive rights and marked the 
necessity of their settlement in fertile lands in order to improve their living 
conditions. 
18 
 
In 1723 the czar of Russia Peter I signed a decree on allocation of special 
places for the settlement of Armenians in the territories of Baku, Derbend and 
Guba in accordance with the treaty dated on the 12th of September. 
In 1726, Yekaterina II issued a decree expressing the necessity of showing 
special mercy to Armenians and patronizing them. 
In 1729, a group of Armenian meliks was accepted to Russian citizenship 
by the decree of the Russian czar. 
In 1799, the czar Pavel the First gave a special instruction to the Kartli-
Kakhetiya czarship about assistance in the settlement of Armenians in the territory 
of the Caucasus. 
Moving of Armenians to Azerbaijan territories was reflected not only in 
individual decrees and instructions, but also in the intergovernmental agreements. 
The Turkmanchay peace treaty signed in 1828 between Russia and Iran included 
an article saying that the Armenians living in Iran "are provided with the right of 
free movement" to the territory of Russia. In fact, this was the creation of a ground 
for Armenians' movement to the territories of Azerbaijan, because the territories of 
Russia meant exactly the territories of Azerbaijan, which were located much closer 
to Iran. 
Following the Turkish-Russian wars in 1828-1829, an agreement was 
achieved about the movement of the Armenians in Turkey to the territories of 
Azerbaijan. In order to accelerate this process, a special committee was established 
in Russia and general guidelines covering 12 articles were defined. This policy 
referring to testaments of Peter was mainly targeted at the creation of a shield 
against the possible threats from the south through ethnical disintegration of 
Azerbaijan territories and settlement of Armenians here. Thus, Armenians were 
gradually settled in Azerbaijan territories, good conditions were created for them 
here, and fertile plots were allocated for them. 
According to estimations made by the famous traveller and ethnographer 
I.Shopen, at the beginning of the XIX century 2400 Azerbaijani families and 12 
thousand Azerbaijanis lived only in the city of Iravan. Although a part of the 
population moved to Iran after the city was occupied by Russians, Azerbaijanis 
still constituted a big majority of the city's population. That is, in accordance with 
the information for 1829, only in the city of Iravan four fifths or 80 percent of the 
population were Azerbaijanis. In compliance with the first census of the population 
in the Russian Empire, 313.178 Azerbaijanis lived in Western Azerbaijan-Iravan 
province in 1897. However, in a few years these figures changed completely. 
After settling in our territories, Armenians started to think about creating 
their own state. This was the reason of the massive genocide actions carried out by 
Armenians in 1905-1906. During these years, they assassinated Azerbaijanis 
19 
 
massively in Baku, Tbilisi, Iravan, Nakhichevan, Ganja, Karabakh and Zangazur, 
thus committing terrible crimes. Historical sources confirm that during those 
events Armenians razed 75 Azeri villages to the ground in the territories of 
Zangazur, Shusha, Javanshir and Jabrayil and destroyed more than 200 settlements 
in the provinces of Iravan and Ganja. 
Since the day the "no-capital" republic was created, Armenian chauvinists 
committed massive massacres in the Lambali, Shorayal provinces, in Zangazur, 
Goycha and other places mostly populated by Azerbaijanis. The facts show that in 
1918-1920, when inveterate nationalists governed the Republic of Armenia, they 
greatly succeeded in the realization of the "non-Turkish Armenia" motto. As a 
result of the savagery committed against Azerbaijanis at that time, 565.000 out of 
the 575.000 of Azerbaijanis living in the present Armenian territory were either 
killed or forcedly driven out of their lands. After the Soviet power was established 
in Armenia, only 60.000 of the Azerbaijanis could return to their native lands. 
In March-April 1918 thousands of Azerbaijanis were killed in Baku, 
Shamakhi, Mughan, Guba and Lankaran, tens of thousands of people became 
internally displaced persons. The massive genocide acts committed by Armenians 
at that time in Baku and Shamakhi were especially terrible. Around 30.000 people 
were killed with a particular cruelty and ferocity in Baku. 58 villages in Shamakhi 
were turned into ruins, 7000 people were killed (1653 of them were women, 965 - 
children), in the Guba province 122 villages with Moslem population were burnt 
and destroyed. More than 150 villages of Karabakh located in the mountainous 
areas were razed. The operations carried out by Armenians in these villages were 
some of the most ruthless events of the world history for their tragic scope. The 
Armenians savagely destroyed 115 villages in the Zangazur province with the 
same methods, plundered and burnt 211 villages in the Iravan province and 92 
villages in Gars. 
All of these confirm once again that settlement of Armenians in Azerbaijan 
served to the disintegration of our nation's historical territory, annihilation of 
Azerbaijanis as a nation, and obstruction of our independent state, Armenians 
played the most brutal role in this disgusting process. The massive deportations 
and genocide acts were aimed at one single purpose of preventing the formation of 
a mighty Moslem and Turkish state in Southern Caucasus. Both the Gulustan and 
Turkmenchay Treaties proved this once more. The efforts of dividing Azerbaijan 
territories ethnically were finally to cause the country's political and geographical 
division. As painful as it is, an analysis of the events taking place and the historical 
chronology testifies of the implementation of a certain part of these plans. 
At the beginning of the XX century, the processes happening in the 
Southern Caucasus led to a logical consequence of a big part of Azerbaijan 
20 
 
territories being under Armenian subjection already on the eve of the establishment 
of the Soviet power. The strangest thing was that namely Azerbaijanis were the 
majority of the population in those territories. However, for some reason this 
significant factor played no role in presentation of our lands to Armenians. 
Historical sources show very distinctly that there was no Armenian state 
ever. Interests of some major powers required creation of an Armenian state in the 
Southern Caucasus. It was the people of Azerbaijan, who had to suffer its heaviest 
consequences in their own fate. 
At the end of 1920, after the soviet power was established in Armenia, the 
Armenians started the policy of creating an Armenian state, which they dreamt of 
for centuries, and territorial claims against the neighbors. The claims of the 
Armenians expanding their territories into Azerbaijan lands during the 70-year 
soviet power kept on increasing. One of the disgusting intentions the Armenian 
lobby achieved through nesting in the governmental bodies in Moscow, was the 
policy of deportation carried out against Azerbaijanis at the state level with 
I.Stalin's blessing on the pretext of settling the Armenians coming from abroad 
after the war. 
Armenians receiving the Zangazur province of Azerbaijan in 1920 wanted 
to annex Nagorno-Karabakh to Armenia as well in 1921. The principal position, 
the great personality, distinguished social and political figure Nariman Narimanov 
adhered to, destroyed their plans. However, in late 1922, after N.Narimanov went 
to Moscow, they achieved the autonomy of Nagorno-Karabakh in July 1923. 
Nevertheless, they would not refuse the claim of getting Nagorno-Karabakh and 
raised issues on this repeatedly. 
As it is seen, even when living within the Soviet Union, discrimination in 
relation to Azerbaijan and Armenia was observed clearly. Adhering to the 
testimonies of their predecessors, leadership of the Soviet Empire presented 
Armenians as a humble and poor nation, supported their revival, economic and 
political development, and made efforts to annex Azerbaijan territories to Armenia. 
This course had a special place in the Southern Caucasus policy of the Soviet 
Empire during the years of Stalin's leadership. Not accidentally, that at that time 
cadres from Azerbaijan were very rarely appointed to higher positions; terrorist 
acts and repressions were carried out in regard to the distinguished intelligentsia of 
our nation. 
In the 1930s the injustice the most distinguished intellectuals, scientific 
figures, state and political figures of our nation faced with the brand of the "traitor 
of the motherland", displays once again the most antipathetic purposes this policy 
served. This period has left a deep trace in the memory of our nation as one of the 
most tragic pages of our history. The USSR, which had promised liberty and 
21 
 
freedom to peoples, contradicted the principles declared by it through leading a 
policy of discrimination against Azerbaijanis and trying to destroy the genetic fund 
of this nation every now and then. Until the 70s of the last century, Azerbaijanis 
very rarely got education at the higher education institutions of the Soviet Union, 
creation of professional national military cadres was prevented, and this displayed 
itself clearly even in relation to the soldiers serving in the army. The policy of 
"divide and rule" led to more tragic and heavy consequences first of all for our 
people. 
Interestingly, both at that time and further, Azerbaijan was the republic 
which affected significantly the development of the USSR and made the biggest 
contribution to strengthening of its ground in the Caucasus. Rich natural resources 
of our country and extensive labor potential were among the major factors in this 
issue. Only one fact would suffice to note that the oil of Baku played the main role 
in the victory of the Soviet Army over fascism during the Second World War 
because more than 70 percent of the fuel manufactured at that time was produced 
exactly in Azerbaijan. 
Following the war, in November 1945 the first secretary of the Central 
Committee of the Armenian Communist Party G.Arutyunov wrote a letter to I. 
Stalin, which raised the issue of annexing Nagorno - Karabakh to the Armenian 
SSR taking into account it's bordering on the Armenian SSR and ostensibly close 
connection with the latter's economy. I.Stalin sent the letter to G.Malenkov. He, in 
turn, sent the document to the leadership of Azerbaijan SSR for reply. In his letter 
M.J.Baghirov provided extensive information and confirmed that Nagorno-
Karabakh is a historical and eternal land of Azerbaijan. At the end of the letter, he 
stated that except for the Shusha region, Azerbaijan does not refuse this suggestion, 
with a condition that the territories in the Armenian SSR, Georgian SSR and 
Daghistan ASSR, which are mostly populated by Azerbaijanis, border on 
Azerbaijan, and are integral part of Azerbaijan should be given back to Azerbaijan. 
In this case, Armenians use another trick to move the Azerbaijanis living in 
Armenia and mainly in the regions bordering on Azerbaijan. Armenia puts forward 
a proposal for the deportation of Azerbaijanis in the territory of Armenia, and 
placing instead the Armenians coming from abroad here on the pretext of 
providing the cotton-growing regions in the Mughan-Mil plains of Azerbaijan with 
a labor force, and succeeds in accomplishing it. 
A copy of the letter signed in December 1947 by M.J.Baghirov and 
G.Arutyunov on this issue and sent to Stalin is kept in the archive of political 
parties. The letter contains concrete proposals on the above-stated issues. 
Consequently, on December 23, 1947 the USSR Council of Ministers 
adopts the resolution 4083 "On deportation of collective farmers and other 
22 
 
Azerbaijan population to the Kur-Araz lowlands of Azerbaijan SSR". This 
document signed personally by I. Stalin and beginning directly with the decision, 
thus containing no introduction, was prepared very hastily, as can be seen from its 
content. Not surprisingly, on March 10, 1948 the USSR Council of Ministers had 
to adopt a second resolution in addition to the first one. This second resolution, 
which contained an additional note to the resolution dated on December 23, 1947 
and signed by I. Stalin, widely reflected the plan of measures connected with the 
deportation of Azerbaijanis. 
The first clause of the resolution dated on December 23, 1947 stated that 
one hundred thousand collective farmers and other Azeri population living in the 
Armenian SSR should be moved to the Kur-Araz lowlands of Azerbaijan SSR in 
1948-1950 "on a voluntary basis". 
Thus, the Republic of Armenia and the former USSR leadership violated the 
main principles of General Statement on Human Rights adopted on December 10, 
1948, the "International Act on Civil Political Rights" adopted on December 16, 
1966, the Convention "Against addresses and punishments threatening human 
dignity and other cruel, inhuman or humiliating treatments" adopted on December 
10, 1984 as well as other significant international legal documents. 
Resolutions 4083 and 754 of the USSR Council of Ministers dated on 
December 23, 1947 and March 10, 1948 respectively were the next historical 
criminal acts against the Azerbaijan nation. In 1948-1953 more than one hundred 
and fifty thousand Azerbaijanis were sent into exile from their native lands in the 
territory of Armenian SSR. During the execution of these resolutions, which 
contradicted common legal norms, the present repression rules of the authoritative-
totalitarian regime were widely applied, and thousands of people, including the old 
and the juvenile, died, not tolerating the heavy deportation conditions, severe 
climatic changes, physical percussions and moral genocide. Not only the criminal 
policy of the Armenian chauvinist circles and the former USSR leadership 
contributed to this process, but also the then Azerbaijan leadership's position 
against their own nation and their participation in the organization and realization 
of the crimes committed against our compatriots. 
Unfortunately, the fact of deportation of Azerbaijanis from the territory of 
Armenian SSR was not duly analyzed in the past 50 years and these events were 
not appreciated from the legal-political standpoint. 
The first sentences of the decree of the President of Azerbaijan Republic 
Heydar Aliyev dated on December 18, 1997 "On the massive deportation of 
Azerbaijanis from their historical-ethnic lands in the territory of the Armenian SSR 
in 1948-1953" say: "Due to the ethnic clearing policy carried out purposefully 
against Azerbaijanis in Caucasus during the recent two centuries, our people were 
23 
 
subjected to heavy deprivations. As a result of such inhuman policy carried out 
stage-by-stage, Azerbaijanis were driven out from the territory presently called 
Armenia - their native historical-ethnic lands and subjected to massive killing and 
slaughters; thousands of historical-cultural monuments and settlements were 
destroyed and ruined".
1
 
Historical facts fully prove this doubtless truth that the territory now called 
Armenia was a pure Turkish land - a territory where Azerbaijanis lived. Only since 
the day the czar colonialists entered these places, Armenian seed started sowing on 
our lands, which soon produced their poisonous sprouts. However, despite the 
massive movement of Armenians from Iran and Turkey to this territory by efforts 
of the ruling circles of the czar Russia, they never succeeded to become the major-
ity of the population here. As it is known, on May 27, 1918 when announced as the 
"Republic of Armenia", this fictitious state did not have even a capital. The 
National Council of Azerbaijan was obliged to acknowledge the city of Iravan as 
the capital of the Republic of Armenia at its meeting dated on May 29, 1918 with 
majority of votes under pressure of the historical condition. 
We should note as well that leadership of the Armenian SSR that was 
obliged to agree with the return of a part of the Azerbaijanis to Armenia were 
never willing to put an end to their pursuits and deportation, and made use of such 
ruthless measures readily at every single opportunity during the totalitarian regime. 
The opportunities for such measures had arisen as far back as before the Second 
World War, in the years of the massive kolkhoz movement and repression. Strange 
as it is, a majority of the people in the Armenian SSR, who opposed the kolkhoz 
movement and were subjected to repressions in those years, were Azerbaijanis. 
That's why in the 1930s more than 50,000 Azeri population from Vedibasar, 
Zangibasar, Gamarli, Daralayaz, Aghbaba and other regions was exiled with whole 
families to Kazakhstan prairies, and a big part of them perished, failing to adapt to 
the severe climatic condition. The case was that most of the families, who wanted 
to get back to their home after the exile finished, were not let in Armenia. They 
made excuses that this so-called republic borders on Turkey. However, many of 
those, who came back at the cost of great deprivations, were again deported. 
The resolutions of the USSR Council of Ministers 4083 and 754 dated on 
December 23, 1947 and March 10, 1948 respectively, which were fairly assessed 
as "A following historical criminal act against Azeri people" in the decree of the 
President of Azerbaijan Republic Heydar Aliyev, "grounded" the deportation of the 
Azerbaijanis living in their native lands this time at the level of state policy. 
                                                          
1  "Azerbaijan" newspaper, December 19, 1997. 
 
24 
 
Despite that there is no Azeri left in the Western Azerbaijan provinces, 
which were once populated mainly by Azerbaijanis - Zangibasar, Vedibasar, 
Zangazur, Goycha, Aghbaba, Derechichek, Sisyan, Gafan, Gamarli, Garagoyunlu, 
Girkhbulag, Sharur, Surmali, Seyidli, Sardarabad, Abaran, Garnibasar and other, 
these provinces are engraved in the history's memory as ancient Azeri lands. 
In late 60s and, early 70s of the last century, annexation of the Nagorno-
Karabakh Autonomous Region to the Armenian SSR turned into one of the issues 
discussed even in the Kremlin and the Political Bureau. With the help of their 
protectors, Armenians continued their efforts on annexing Azerbaijan territories to 
Armenia. In May 1969, the Supreme Soviet of this country adopted a resolution on 
connection of some villages in the territory of Gazakh and several other regions to 
Armenia. This resolution was ratified as well by the USSR Supreme Soviet. 
Nevertheless, the election of Heydar Aliyev as the first secretary of the Central 
Committee of the Azerbaijan SSR Communist Party prevented the realization of 
this resolution. It is not difficult to understand what it meant not to implement a 
resolution of the legislative body in such a huge state as USSR. However, Heydar 
Aliyev took a big risk in the name of his nation's national interests preventing 
annexation of Azerbaijan lands to Armenia. Notwithstanding this, in 1986 some 
territories intended in that resolution were annexed to Armenia due to the 
indifferent attitude of Azerbaijan leadership. 
In 1977 the committee working out a new Constitution of the Soviet Union 
suggested disintegrating the Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Region from within 
the Azerbaijan SSR and annexing it to the Armenian SSR. The stern response of 
Heydar Aliyev, the first secretary of the Central Committee of the Azerbaijan SSR 
Communist Party, and his decisive rejection of this suggestion prevented its 
implementation. 
Our national leader touched upon this issue at the discussions conducted in 
the Azerbaijan parliament in 2001 saying: "In 1977, when the USSR Constitution 
was to be adopted, a committee was established to prepare the constitution. The 
committee was headed by the then General Secretary of the Communist Party 
Brejnev and representatives of the republics, including me, were members of this 
committee. During the period when the committee was preparing the draft, for 
about one year, many proposals were received claiming Nagorno-Karabakh should 
be disconnected and given to Armenia. Some efforts were even made to consider 
this issue at the committee. Understand me the right way, please; I am saying what 
really happened. I prevented this at that time. However, it was difficult to prevent. 
25 
 
Nevertheless, I did it. I prevented this with my will, protecting the national 
interests of Azerbaijan people by my soul and blood".
1
 
However, famous intellectuals, politicians and scholars of Armenia were 
preparing people psychologically to "fight against Turks". The way to the "Great 
Armenia" was passing through occupation of Karabakh lands, and that is why 
Armenians tried to disconnect this territory from Azerbaijan by various methods. 
Anyway, there was quite a serious obstacle to this way - Heydar Aliyev. The first 
secretary of the Central Committee of the Azerbaijan SSR Communist Party began 
creating obstacles for the realization of the dream of annexing Nagorno-Karabakh 
to Armenia, not only in the political and legal, but also in the economic and 
psychological standpoints. Due to the far-sighted policy he was running, the plans 
of annexing the territories settled by Armenians to Armenia failed. 
During this time, the republic's leadership did everything to provide for 
economic development of the region. The region's communication lines with other 
regions were much improved. Armenians could not find any argument to reason 
the "necessity" of connecting the Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Region to 
Armenia. Heydar Aliyev remembered that time as follows: "during the time when I 
was leading Azerbaijan - it should be said openly - we were creating mostly 
economic conditions for Nagorno-Karabakh and preferred development of its 
economy. Because this issue was always raised that ostensibly, the Nagorno-
Karabakh is pressed in Azerbaijan, and Armenians cannot develop in the Nagorno-
Karabakh. In order to preserve the integrity of Azerbaijan, to protect its entire 
territory, I am saying again, we were paying most attention to the Nagorno-
Karabakh then. True, later some dilettantes blamed me because I was doing this. I 
am saying it also today, I was doing this, I was. I was doing this, because, not to 
give the Armenians an opportunity to raise this issue." 
"Then things went the wrong way. After this conflict started, I was again 
blamed in the press, in the USSR press of ostensibly pressing Armenians while I 
was heading Azerbaijan. Armenians were saying these things, and even when these 
issues were discussed at the session of the USSR Supreme Soviet, their 
representatives, even the president of the Armenian Academy of Sciences 
Ambarsumyan - we had elected him once the honorary member of Azerbaijan 
Academy of Sciences, he was elected as well the member of the Georgian 
Academy of Sciences in order to strengthen our friendship - was mentioning my 
name for pressing Armenians in Nagorno-Karabakh. I was not surprised of this 
                                                          
1 "Azerbaijan" newspaper, February 24, 2001. 
 
26 
 
much, but I was surprised that at that time some people in Azerbaijan were again 
blaming Heydar Aliyev and agreed with those very words. 
Finally, the utopists of the "Great Armenia" made up their mind to change 
the tactics and targets. Later, when speaking about this, the first secretary of the 
Central Committee of Armenian CP Karen Damirchiyan was saying: "In the XX 
century Turks have had two mighty persons. Ataturk and Heydar Aliyev. One of 
them is alive. Be aware, as long as he is alive, we will not be able to get either 
Karabakh, or other territories".
1
 
So, Armenians directed all the means of struggle in their arsenal to 
extinguishing Heydar Aliyev. Under the support of their Moscow high-rank 
defenders, Armenians resorted to different methods in order to achieve their odious 
goals and did not even refrain from supporting some people financially for this. 
Despite all the pressure and resistances, Heydar Aliyev succeeded in preventing 
settlement of the Karabakh issue in Armenia's favor. The region closely connected 
with Azerbaijan from the economic and political points of view. Later, in 1988 
when the issue of Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Region annexation to Armenia 
was once again raised on public agenda, Heydar Aliyev was subjected to 
accusations of the Armenian propagandist network and its supporters in Moscow 
again. The most painful thing is that there were some Azerbaijanis among the 
participants of this many-branched process. 
Heydar Aliyev would not hesitate to certify even the most risky decisions, 
not fearing anything and anybody. The railroad from Baku to Khankendi was 
inserted namely during his leadership, and this was mainly aimed at increasing the 
number of the strategic communications linking Nagorno-Karabakh to Azerbaijan. 
This provided much better relations of the Nagorno-Karabakh as an integral part of 
Azerbaijan with the center, as well as much closer economic relations of the region 
not with Armenia, but with Azerbaijan. The relations between the institutions 
serving to develop the region's economy and the plants and factories operating in 
other regions of Azerbaijan were strengthened. 
However, the Armenians, failing to resist Heydar Aliyev and seemingly 
helpless to prevent the measures made by him, were not going to relinquish their 
intentions. In 1982, Heydar Aliyev came to USSR leadership and this incited 
Armenians to a more organized activity. The presence of Heydar Aliyev in politics 
meant the failure of the idea of annexing Nagorno-Karabakh to Armenia; therefore, 
Armenians started very extensive-spectrum "anti-Aliyev" propaganda. 
                                                          
1 'Heydar Aliyev in the eyes of the world, Baku, 2003, p. 123. 
 
27 
 
Michael Gorbachov, who was appointed the general secretary of the Soviet 
Union Central Committee in 1985, did his best for the realization of this shabby 
intention. With M.Gorbachov's coming to power, Armenians gained a defender in 
the person of the leader of the country and tried to use this opportunity to the 
maximum extent. Removal of Heydar Aliyev from the Political Bureau and from 
the post of the first deputy chairman of the Council of Ministers in 1987 can be 
appreciated exactly as a logical consequence of these efforts. The main obstacle 
standing in the way of the Armenians' appetite for Nagorno-Karabakh was 
removed; further realization of the plan carried a technical character. 
In 1988, Armenians started to realize the hostile policy against Azerbaijan 
openly. The conflict, which was even more deteriorated with the killing of two 
Azerbaijanis in Karabakh and the destruction of the Topkhana forest, displayed 
once more the seriousness of the problem. The processes were happening so 
quickly that Azerbaijanis had no opportunity to understand the logics of 
Gorbachov's indifference to the events who has received a valuable gift from 
Armenians, the republic's actual neglect of a big territory, or the careless and 
inexperienced policy of those in power. Meanwhile, the conflict's geography kept 
on expanding. In 1989, the Armenian SSR Supreme Soviet adopted a resolution on 
the unification of Nagorno-Karabakh to Armenia, which had no legal ground. This 
actually meant the annexation of Azerbaijan territories. Armenians had already 
brought the struggle to the level of military aggression, and from this standpoint, 
the public protest actions in Azerbaijan were too weak to change the course of the 
processes. 
Undoubtedly, the support of outer forces played a much bigger role in the 
realization of Armenians' aggressive policy. In this aspect, the endeavors of the 
then leadership of USSR drew attention in a particularly distinct way. The 
operations conducted by the Soviet Army in Baku in 1990 confirmed this once 
more. The meetings held as a protest against annexation of Nagorno-Karabakh to 
Armenia were suppressed with bullets of the soviet soldiers. Hundreds of 
Azerbaijanis were killed and about one thousand people became missing during 
this military action. A state of emergency was declared in the country, which lasted 
for several months. All of these tactics were targeted at breaking the Azerbaijan 
nation's fighting determination, shaking its belief in ideas of liberty, and rendering 
assistance to the process of Karabakh's annexation to Armenia. 
During these bloody events the people witnessed once again the negligence 
of the republic's leadership. Again, specifically Heydar Aliyev expressed his 
protest against this terror act. The whole world listened to the echo caused by his 
furious and resolute statement at the building of the Azerbaijan representation in 
Moscow on January 21, 1990. Despite of all the pressures and threats, in front of 
28 
 
the entire world Heydar Aliyev accused those responsible for the tragedy of his 
nation just a one-step distance to the Kremlin. Following the tragedy of January 20, 
activity of the Armenian military units at the front-line increased even more. The 
villages and regions occupied one after another testified of the inch-by-inch loss of 
Karabakh. 
In February 1991 at the session of the Azerbaijan Supreme Soviet, Heydar 
Aliyev was calling everybody to confess this common truth: "I think, the 
'normalization of the situation in Nagorno-Karabakh' means putting the issue in a 
narrow frame. 'Restoration of the territorial integrity of Azerbaijan' - the issue must 
be put like this. We should look for a way out of this". This was not only a 
rejection to the direction of the discussions conducted in the parliament. 
Heydar Aliyev was trying to make the society aware of the existing 
realities. The reality was that Karabakh had been lost due to the political 
indifference of Azerbaijan power, and this reality being understood, the entire 
prospective activity should be directed to changing it. Heydar Aliyev was saying at 
that session: "We should analyze how it happened that we lost Nagorno-
Karabakh!" It was a rather interesting and fair question. However, undoubtedly, the 
political team headed by A.Mutallibov was not interested itself in the analyses of 
the answer to this question. 
At a time when military operations at the front-line began to receive a wider 
scope, Armenians started making plans for the occupation of Nakhichevan. 
Nevertheless, they failed to realize these plans. In the summer of 1990, Heydar 
Aliyev came to Nakhichevan. The situation in the autonomous republic was very 
strained. The population of Nakhichevan, who were fated to live under grave 
conditions of the economic blockade, believed that this return was a big turning 
point in their destiny. Heydar Aliyev succeeded in making serious changes in 
Nakhichevan in a very short time and with limited opportunities. Immediately after 
he was elected, a deputy to the Nakhichevan ASSR Supreme Soviet, the word 
"SSR" was removed from the autonomous republic's name exactly at his initiative. 
The three-color flag of the Azerbaijan Republic was accepted as a national 
emblem. On September 3,1991, the Supreme Soviet of Nakhichevan adopted a 
resolution on the appointment of Heydar Alirza oghlu Aliyev as the chairman of 
the Supreme Soviet. The new leader of the autonomous republic paid attention to 
the settlement of economic problems and fulfilled the mission of de-escalating the 
bloody fights going on at the front. Heydar Aliyev's coming to power compelled 
Armenians to postpone their plans on the start of military operations in the 
direction of Nakhichevan. 
Since 1992, the geography of the military operations the Armenian armed 
forces conducted in the territories of Azerbaijan expanded even more, and the 
29 
 
republic's regions began to be occupied one after another. The horrible genocide 
act carried out by Armenians in 1992 in Khojali makes it possible to imagine the 
scope of the Armenian brutality clearly. Six hundred thirteen Azerbaijanis were 
killed in this terror operation, which was realized by the support of the 366th 
motoshooting regiment of Russia. Sixty three of the people killed at the Khojali 
tragedy were children, 106 were women. Four hundred eighty seven men were 
made invalids, 1275 were captured and a big part of these captives were old 
people, women and children; 8 entire families were killed.
1
 Khojali was engraved 
in history as one of the most distinct examples of the hostile attitude Armenians 
have had towards Azerbaijanis for centuries. However, it should be confessed that 
the then leadership also has a big moral and political responsibility for this tragedy. 
In May 1992, Shusha was occupied by the Armenian invaders. With 
occupation of Shusha, the entire Nagorno-Karabakh actually came under the 
control of Armenians. If one takes into account the city's geostrategical 
importance, this was the biggest defeat of Azerbaijan since the beginning of the 
Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. Shusha was situated in such a position that it was 
possible to protect it even with a little force. Nevertheless, the anarchy and chaos 
present in Azerbaijan, non-control of the armed forces from a single center, and the 
absence of a standing army were the main facts stimulating this defeat. Shusha was 
also known as one of the ancient cultural centers of Azerbaijan. Its loss shook as 
well the nation's moral-psychological fighting spirit. 
The scope of the military operations carried out by the Armenian invaders 
expanded even more after this city's occupation; in only a few days, on May 17-18, 
the enemy captured Lachin, which was situated between Armenia and the 
Nagorno-Karabakh region of Azerbaijan.
2
 
Occupation of Lachin was a serious shock for Azerbaijan for several 
important reasons. The first point is that occupation of the above-mentioned  
region showed  that the war had  left the boundaries of Nagorno-Karabakh. This 
actually proved that the expansionist policy of Armenia did not serve the 
"provision of the Nagorno-Karabakh Armenians with the right to determine their 
own fate", but exactly to the mythology of the "Great Armenia". Let's note that at 
the initial stage of the military operations, they were claiming that their aim was 
only the liberation of Nagorno-Karabakh. Occupation of Lachin proved that these 
claims were not based on this logic, but that the expansionist intention of Armenia 
covered much wider boundaries. 
                                                          
1 "Khalg newspaper", February 26, 2003. 
2 "Azerbaijan" newspaper, May 17, 2002. 
30 
 
The second important point concerned purely military-strategic issues. The 
case was that after Lachin was invaded, Armenians got the opportunity of 
rendering direct military assistance to Nagorno-Karabakh. Lachin began to play the 
role of a communication corridor between Nagorno-Karabakh, invaded by 
Armenians, and Armenia itself. Armenian armed units in the territory received 
arms and ammunition, as well as food through this corridor. Therefore, the 
mentioned region became a very significant tool that provided Armenians' superior 
position in the war. Nevertheless, even the fact that the war had left the boundaries 
of Nagorno-Karabakh did not cause active intervention by the international 
community in the process. On the contrary, Azerbaijan had to observe the 
indifferent attitude of the world community once again. 
Despite the fact that Azerbaijan succeeded to run successful military 
operations in the front-line, especially in directions of Gulustan and Aghdere in the 
summer of 1992, this action did not keep on until the end. The struggles for power 
inside the country, and inexperience of the power, created a new stimulus for new 
defeats. On April 1993, Kalbajar located outside the territory of Nagorno-Karabakh 
was invaded. Following the occupation of Kalbajar, the Security Council of the 
United Nations Organization adopted its first resolution
1
 on the Armenia-
Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. However, the measures intended in this 
resolution have not been implemented up to this date. 
In the summer of 1993, Azerbaijan confronted the threat of civil war. In 
order to put an end to all of this, create social-political stability in the country, and 
provide the general safety of the community, Heydar Alirza oghlu Aliyev was 
invited to Baku after the necessary insistence of the overwhelming majority of the 
people. Heydar Aliyev succeeded to eliminate the threat of civil war that pressed 
the country, and he provided the creation of social-political stability. Due precisely 
to his wise actions, Azerbaijan escaped from the threat of civil war. Therefore, 
June 15, 1993 entered the history of Azerbaijan state as the Day of National 
Salvation. 
On October 1993, Armenians invaded the Zangilan region of Azerbaijan. 
This was the last occupational operation of the Armenian army in the front region. 
Because Heydar Aliyev's coming to power had changed the situation radically, in 
only several months the presence of a strong authority in the country had begun to 
draw attention. The famous address of Heydar Aliyev to the country's citizens 
following the occupation of Zangilan marked the beginning of the army-building 
history in Azerbaijan. This address resulted in the volunteer military service of tens 
                                                          
1 "Armenian intervention to Azerbaijan and international organizations". Baku, 1998, p.87. 
 
31 
 
of thousands of men. In a very short period of time, the army was subjected to a 
single command, significant reforms were made in the military field, and all of 
these were carried out in parallel with the process of the creation of social-political 
stability. 
Later Heydar Aliyev had to prevent many diversions as well in order to 
achieve social-political stability. This showed itself in A.Humbatov's efforts to 
create a fictitious republic in August 1993, in the events of October 4, 1994 and in 
March 1995. The people's support of Heydar Aliyev in each of these events, and 
their defense of his position, was memorized as an historical fact displaying 
Azerbaijan people's adherence to the ideas of national statehood. The whole world 
saw that Azerbaijanis are determined to protect decisively their national interests as 
one nation. Thus, Heydar Aliyev's coming to power in 1993 was recorded in our 
history also as one stage of the formation of the national statehood mind. 
Outburst of the Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict at that 
time was also causing serious obstacles for provision of safety and stability in the 
entire region. The fact that this problem, which aggravated even more after the 
collapse of USSR, became a subject of international discussions toughened the 
chances of solving it. 
However, it was possible to settle the problem initially through directing it 
to a positive course. The authority teams, which headed the country in the first 
years of independence, were thinking only about "how to maintain the power". 
Many times, they used the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict for political interests. Just 
because of this Armenia had succeeded to form a false opinion in the world 
community about the true essence of the conflict and win the information war.
1
 
Azerbaijan started to implement the policy targeted at prevention of this failure 
exactly in 1993. The successes achieved in the front-line after Heydar Aliyev's 
coming to power were accompanied by new accomplishments. 
As a politician, who was deeply informed of the controversial and unfair 
realities of the modern world, Heydar Aliyev first of all succeeded to build 
propaganda properly at the international level and thus to direct the world states' 
attention to the real reasons of this fact of invasion. 
The national leader Heydar Aliyev's return to power stimulated the creation 
of a quite successful model of Azerbaijan's system of political relations and the 
community's aggregation around a single ideology. Not depending on who and 
how evaluates it, this event makes the basis of a stage, which is of exceptional 
importance in Azerbaijan history, and the management system created by Heydar 
                                                          
1 "Armenian intervention to Azerbaijan and international organizations". Baku, 1998, p. 87. 
 
32 
 
Aliyev defines the most successful parameters of the country's economic and 
political development. 
After returning to power, Heydar Aliyev had to solve several serious 
problems, which Azerbaijan inherited from inexperienced leaders. Important steps 
were made to create successive social-political stability in the country. The decline 
in the economy was put an end to, and Heydar Aliyev's famous statement in 
November 1993 about the state of the army thereto entered the history as the 
starting point of the military system formation process. In a short period of time, 
Armed Forces of Azerbaijan struck a serious blow to the Armenian army's position 
in Horadiz. Consequently, more than 20 occupied villages were released. The 
Horadiz operation was the biggest victory Azerbaijan achieved during the 
Karabakh war and this caused serious concern in Armenia. Very rapid formation of 
the military system in Azerbaijan made the opposite party abstain from its invasive 
plans, and in May 1994, the president of Armenia was obliged to agree to sign the 
a ceasefire agreement. Let's note that proposals about ceasefire were put on the 
agenda also before this, but Armenians would not agree with this at all. The 
changes taking place in the force proportion after Heydar Aliyev's coming to power 
created a completely different situation and this time Armenia had to suggest a 
ceasefire. In May 12, the fire at the contact point of Armenian and Azerbaijan 
armed forces ceased. 
However, the ceasefire did not mean the end of the war. Achievement of the 
ceasefire simply provided Azerbaijan with an opportunity to gather and form its 
own forces, and in a very short period it was possible to create social-political 
stability in the country and eliminate economic tremors. "In 1994 we stopped the 
fire. Some people say different opinions about this. Today I state once more that 
the ceasefire in May 1994 was a very significant measure and we did it quite 
consciously. The passed time also shows that - despite that, the problem has not 
been solved yet - this measure had to be taken. Now, unfortunately, many people 
have forgotten the war, they are living peacefully, they are calm. Unfortunately, 
they have forgotten how the situation was during the war. People live peacefully, 
our economy advances, foreign investments expand, the process of state building 
keeps on, our independence strengthens, and Azerbaijan runs a daring foreign 
policy. All of these were impossible to realize in condition of the war".
1
 These 
ideas of our national leader provide an opportunity to assess once more the signifi-
cance of the ceasefire. 
The agreement was not significant only for these reasons. Azerbaijan made 
successful diplomatic maneuvers in the creation of a political-psychological 
                                                          
1  "Azerbaijan" newspaper, February 27, 2001. 
33 
 
ground for the fair and objective settlement of the conflict exactly after the 
ceasefire. A profound idea needed to be formed in the international community 
about why, how and when the conflict started, and the double standards in the 
international organizations and states attitude towards the problem needed to be 
eliminated. Now, after already 11 years have passed since the armistice, it may 
safely be said that these complex tasks have been successfully implemented. 
In general, our country suffered great losses because of the Armenia-
Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. More than 20 percent of our republic's 
territory is occupied. Around one million people have to live as refugees and 
internally displaced persons. More than 18.000 Azerbaijanis died, more than 
20.000 were wounded and more than 50.000 men became disabled. More than 
4,000 industrial and agricultural enterprises, 660 schools and kindergartens, 250 
hospitals and medical institutions, 724 cities, villages and settlements were 
plundered, burnt and destroyed. 
In 2001, Milli Mejlis (National Assembly) of Azerbaijan Republic 
conducted extensive discussions on the Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh 
conflict at the initiative of the national leader Heydar Aliyev. During those 
discussions, our great leader performed a comprehensive and essential speech 
clarifying the points which serve to form the profound ideas about the essence of 
the conflict: "Why did it happen? Not because Azerbaijan people are weaker than 
Armenians. No. Our centuries-old history displays the abilities of Azerbaijan 
people. First, because Armenians, Armenia had long prepared for this, while 
Azerbaijan had forgotten about this issue. Those very years were forgotten. 
Secondly, when this conflict started, I mean, after the Armenia's territorial claim 
emerged, all the Armenians - both in Armenia and those living in all parts of the 
world forgot all the internal controversies and attitudes; all of them united. All of 
them united around the idea of "miatsum"
1
 and brought us to today's situation 
uniting all their force. Differently from them, our nation failed to unite when this 
event started, the persons heading the people displayed inconstancy and in a couple 
of years, the issue of Nagorno-Karabakh was forgotten. Internal controversies, 
fights, and struggles for power burst out. That's why under such circumstances 
Armenians occupied the territories of Azerbaijan very easily".
2
 
The Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict still maintains its 
topicality as an important problem in the life of the Southern Caucasus. In fact, it is 
fully natural. The fact that the conflict's hotbeds remain inextinguishable on the 
background of the significant changes taking place in the region affects negatively 
                                                          
1 In Armenian it means: Unite. 
2 "Respublika" newspaper, February 24, 2001. 
34 
 
the general situation and plays a role of a determinant factor in relations of the 
states, which have got interests here. 
The issue has already left the limits of the regional plane for several years 
and begun to attain international importance. However, still the forces able to 
affect the process really (both the authoritative international organizations and 
individual states) do not want to use concrete pressure mechanisms in order to 
achieve the overall settlement of the problem. Certainly, it is important to consider 
the influence of different factors here, but anyway the conflict should be solved 
and there is only one way for that: international legal norms. 
The above-listed facts are separate details of the conceptual activity process 
directed at the conflict's settlement based on the principles safeguarding national 
interests of Azerbaijan. Following Heydar Aliyev's coming to power in 1993, many 
things have changed in Azerbaijan, including in the field of the elimination of 
Armenia's act of aggression. Azerbaijan, which was unable to demonstrate its will 
even in the geographic region it was located in during the Azerbaijan Popular 
Front-Musavat leadership, became a strategic partner of the world's most powerful 
states during Heydar Aliyev's leadership. 
 In the past years our country got an opportunity to be represented in such 
an authoritative organization as the Council of Europe with a full-fledged 
membership status. It succeeded to use this tribune for forming a set of objective 
ideas in the world's public opinion about the causes and effects of the Karabakh 
problem. This is another front, and now we have a basis to say without hesitation 
that in the battles on this front, it was Armenia who got the knock from Azerbaijan. 
In 1994, the Contract of the Century determining the region's economic 
perspective was signed and the foundation of the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan was laid, 
which many people called a legend. Armenia remained outside this project, in 
which the world's most powerful states took part, and so, lost the battle once again. 
Azerbaijan has signed a trilateral mutual safety pact with Turkey and 
Georgia and put Armenia actually face-to-face with the reality of living surrounded 
by three strategic partners. Armenia has been left alone in this front, too. 
The USA prolongs vitiation of the 907th amendment it applied to 
Azerbaijan. Instead it shows Armenia among the countries which support terrorism 
and are engaged in human trafficking. The report of the US State Department 
qualifies Nagorno-Karabakh as an integral part of Azerbaijan and notes that is was 
occupied by Armenia. The amount of the financial aid allocated to Armenia keeps 
on reducing from year to year. In his speeches, the president George W.Bush 
expresses his concern over the fact that Azerbaijan territories have been occupied. 
This is another victory for Azerbaijan. 
35 
 
Azerbaijan is becoming one of the most powerful states in the post-soviet 
space for its economic parameters, while Armenia has been compelled to pledge its 
state-owned enterprises instead of the foreign debts. Azerbaijan has become the 
most trustworthy country in the Southern Caucasus from the standpoint of social-
political stability, development of democracy and internal safety, while in Armenia 
terror is a common attribute of the political life. 
Therefore, it may surely be said that perhaps Armenia needs a continuation 
of the peaceful negotiations and their successful conclusion more than Azerbaijan 
does. This is linked with both the country's internal social-political situation and 
the fact that the region is on the threshold of significant changes. From next year, 
Azerbaijan will start exporting its petroleum to world markets through Baku-
Tbilisi-Ceyhan oil pipeline, which means new economic progress and a new 
political situation. This process is surely not in favor of Armenia - either from the 
economic or from the political point of view. Increase of Azerbaijan's economic 
potential from day to day puts the aggressive party to a more unsuccessful position 
in the negotiations process. Moreover, if taking into account the problems existing 
inside the country, one can easily imagine Yerevan's state. 
All of these factors augment Azerbaijan's chances to dictate its own 
conditions in the negotiations. Every day a more favorable condition appears for 
the achievement of the conflict's fair settlement. Apparently for this reason the 
president Ilham Aliyev has repeatedly stressed in his speeches that Azerbaijan does 
not hurry. In his inauguration speech, Mr. President said: "The Armenia-
Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict is the hardest problem for our country. We 
have long been living in the state of ceasefire. Unfortunately, the activity of the 
OSCE Minsk group, which has been directly dealing with this issue, does not 
produce any results yet. We do not lose our hopes yet. We still hope that the co-
chairmen will deal with this problem in a more serious and responsible way. This 
problem should find its solution. This problem can be solved only based on the 
international legal norms: Azerbaijan territories must be released from occupation, 
one million refugees and internally displaced persons must return to their native 
lands, territorial integrity of our country must be restored. Azerbaijan will never 
reconcile with this situation, with the fact that its territories are under occupation. 
Everybody should know that despite that we are supporters of peace, we want the 
war not  to start  again  and this issue to be settled in a peaceful way, but our 
patience is not endless. Azerbaijan will release its territories at any cost".
1
 
The recent observations also show that Azerbaijan is willing to adhere to the 
principles it has defined in regard to the conflict's settlement, and it has very 
                                                          
1 “The Successor of the great road”. Baku, 2004, p.18. 
36 
 
serious reasons. First, Azerbaijan's position is a fair position and based on the 
fundamental principles of international law. Second, the conflict's consequences 
have affected Armenia no less than Azerbaijan. The fact that this country keeps our 
territories under occupation has put it aside all of the trans-regional projects and 
now Armenia is at a one-step distance to economic catastrophe. Third, Nagorno-
Karabakh has caused quite a heavy blow as well on advantages of the states having 
interests in the region; therefore they also need the conflict to finish. Fourth, this 
conflict brings negative features to the character of relations both in the Southern 
Caucasus and in much greater scope international relations. This should not be 
avoided. 
 
2. PRESENTATION OF THE AZERBAIJAN PRESIDENT 
HEYDAR ALIYEV AT THE DISCUSSIONS IN MILLI MEJLIS 
ON FEBRUARY 23, 2001 ON THE PROBLEM 
OF NAGORNO-KARABAKH 
 
- Respected Milli Mejlis! 
Respected deputies, ladies and gentlemen! 
I greet you, Milli Mejlis of Azerbaijan, the newly elected Milli Mejlis 
sincerely and wish you successes in the works you are going to do in the 
forthcoming five years. 
This Milli Mejlis is the second Milli Mejlis elected after Azerbaijan gained 
state independence. The Milli Mejlis elected in 1995 did much for strengthening of 
Azerbaijan's independence, for development of the process of legal, democratic 
and worldly state building, for conduction of socio-economic, legal-political 
reforms, and the main essence of the performed activities is the laws adopted. I can 
say it boldly that in the past five years Milli Mejlis of Azerbaijan worked very 
productively, adopted laws, which are of great importance and a complex 
character. These laws have been very important for development of the 
independent state of Azerbaijan, for conduction of economic reforms, provision of 
superiority of the law and creation of a legal state. At the same time, Milli Mejlis 
has contributed its share to our general work through inter-parliamental relations 
and other means in realization of the foreign policy of Azerbaijan state. Therefore, 
today we should appreciate the activity of the Milli Mejlis, which was elected 
based on the first Constitution of Azerbaijan following our independence, the 
activity of the former Milli Mejlis properly and with pleasure. 
I suppose the Milli Mejlis which is elected the second time is of higher 
quality for its structure and level. I am completely sure that the Milli Mejlis, which 
37 
 
has newly started its work, will work even more fruitfully than in the past and 
make efficient use of the gained experience. Thus, it will fulfill the responsibilities 
falling on it for even more strengthening of the state independence in Azerbaijan 
and implementation of the tasks standing before the independent state as a supreme 
legislative body. I am meeting with you the first time, I congratulate you for being 
elected as deputies to the Milli Mejlis and wish successes to the new Milli Mejlis 
once more and once again. 
The issue put for discussion today is not of a character to be fully discussed. 
This issue is put forward for discussion by the Milli Mejlis at my initiative. A 
question emerges, "why was not this put to discussion at the Milli Mejlis before 
and is put now?" I am explaining. 
First, because recently proposals have been put forward, claims have been 
expressed in the Milli Mejlis, particularly in the opposition camp, that the heaviest, 
most difficult and the biggest problem, which impedes our development - the 
settlement of the Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, release of the 
occupied territories of Azerbaijan, and return of the internally displaced persons 
(TDPs) back to their native lands - should be discussed in the Milli Mejlis. Some 
people have even put forward such a proposal that a committee must be created in 
the Milli Mejlis to deal with this issue. However, as the President of the Azerbaijan 
Republic, I have not considered these proposals expedient. Therefore, in recent 
years I have tried to fulfill the duty falling on my share, naturally not alone, but 
together with all the authoritative bodies, appropriate executive bodies and 
leadership of the Milli Mejlis. 
The Minister of Foreign Affairs Vilayat Guliyev gave information about the 
main issues for this period. Today this issue has been put in Milli Mejlis for you to 
take part in its discussion, or to say it more exactly, for you to appreciate properly 
the current situation and for uniting the efforts of yours, and not only yours, of the 
entire Azerbaijan community, all the political forces of Azerbaijan, including all of 
the opposition forces. We have decided that the course of the meeting should be 
fully recorded and it will be broadcasted that not only the Milli Mejlis, but also the 
Azerbaijan community citizens be deeply aware of the issue. 
My purpose is that, I want you to know, and the Azerbaijan community to 
know what has been done for settlement of the problem so far, what has been 
possible to achieve and what the priority thing to do is. This conflict has a long 
history. For the first time in 1988 Armenians, I mean the Armenians in Armenia 
and Nagorno-Karabakh, began a very serious and severe movement for the 
disconnection of Nagorno-Karabakh from Azerbaijan and its annexation to 
Armenia, and they almost finished this activity successfully. 
38 
 
The word "miatsum" is forgotten now. It is an Armenian word. 
Nevertheless, it is a word which is repeated several times a day by every Armenian 
living in Armenia, in Nagorno-Karabakh, or in any part of the world. 
Because I have long been familiar with these issues and was dealing directly 
with the problems of the Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Region when I was 
heading Azerbaijan, I know well in general the history of this problem and its 
complexity. This territorial claim of Armenians is not a new thing. You know that 
in the past, when both Azerbaijan and Armenia, generally the Caucasus was within 
Russia, there was no republic and no border between the republics. 
Since the czar Russia became owner of Northern Azerbaijan following the 
wars of 1804-1813 and 1826-1828, it strengthened its own leadership here 
gradually, from year to year, and finally applied its own polity. That is, for many 
years it applied the polity applied by the Romanovs generation and already then 
this part of Russia was divided into provinces and districts. The czar's 
governmental representatives governed the provinces, districts and the entire 
government bodies. That is, there were no borders. Everybody lived wherever 
he/she wanted to live. 
However, at the same time, we have our history. We know in what territory 
Azerbaijan was. We know it well. We know it all, and remembering our history we 
say it with a heavy heart that the territory of Azerbaijan used to be much bigger, 
much wider than it is now. However, at certain stages of history some parts of this 
territory passed to Armenians - once, twice, thrice. 
In 1918, the People's Republic was created in Azerbaijan for the first time. 
At the time the People's Republic was established, a war was going on in the 
Nagorno-Karabakh province. Then the People's Republic fell quickly and the 
Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic was created. In 1922, the USSR was created. 
Azerbaijan was one of the organizers of the USSR. At that time, the borders were 
defined. Today remembering the past, we can say with full assurance that 
Azerbaijan was encroached as well in those years, a part of Azerbaijan lands was 
given to Armenia, and the borders were not properly divided. In 1923, the 
Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Region was created. Its history is also known. 
Armenians think that at that time there was unfairness towards Armenians. 
Nevertheless, we considered and consider it today that Azerbaijan was encroached. 
Because creation of an autonomous province in Nagorno-Karabakh for that a part 
of its population belonged to the Armenian nation means that a certain territory 
within Azerbaijan was made autonomous and rights based on autonomy principles 
were provided to this territory. 
Then Armenia, and I can say that mostly the nationalist circles of Armenia, 
not all of them, but chauvinist intellectuals, the dashnak party - which as you 
39 
 
know, appeared at the end of the last century, functioned in different countries and 
does it as well today - all of these forces raised periodically the issue of 
disconnecting Nagorno-Karabakh from Azerbaijan and giving it to Armenia in the 
period when the USSR existed. 
I said that I know these things well because of my former activity. This 
issue was raised in 1950s, 1960s. The feature of the field I was working in at that 
time was so that I know these very well. Finally, I have headed Azerbaijan since 
1969. These issues were raised as well then. In 1977, when the USSR Constitution 
was adopted, a committee was arranged to prepare the Constitution. The committee 
was headed by the then General Secretary of the Communist party Brejnev. 
Representatives of the republics, including me, were members of this committee. 
During the period the committee was preparing the draft constitution, for about a 
year, many proposals were received that, Nagorno-Karabakh should be separated 
and given to Armenia. There were even some efforts to consider this issue at the 
committee. 
Understand me the right way; I am saying what really happened. I 
prevented this at that time. However, it was difficult to prevent. Nevertheless, I did 
it. I prevented this with my will, protecting the national interests of Azerbaijan 
people by my soul and blood. However, in the meantime, the situation in Nagorno-
Karabakh was always provoked. Therefore, during the time when I was leading 
Azerbaijan - it should be said openly - we were creating mostly economic 
conditions for Nagorno-Karabakh and preferred development of its economy. 
Because this issue was always raised that ostensibly, Nagorno-Karabakh is pressed 
in Azerbaijan and Armenians cannot develop in Nagorno-Karabakh. In order to 
preserve the integrity of Azerbaijan, to protect its entire territory, I am saying it 
again, we were paying most attention to Nagorno-Karabakh then. True, later some 
dilettantes blamed me because I was doing this. I am saying it also today, I was 
doing this, and I was. I was doing this, in order not to give the Armenians an 
opportunity to raise this issue. 
Then the things went the wrong way. After this conflict started, I was again 
blamed in the press, in the USSR press of ostensibly pressing Armenians while I 
was heading Azerbaijan, of having changed the demographic situation there, 
having taken some measures for Armenians to leave those places and consequently 
the number of Armenians in Nagorno-Karabakh fell down. Armenians were saying 
these and even when these issues were discussed at the session of the USSR 
Supreme Soviet, their representatives, even the president of the Armenian 
Academy of Sciences Ambarsumyan - we had elected him once the honorary 
member of Azerbaijan Academy of Sciences, he was elected as well the member of 
the Georgian Academy of Sciences in order to strengthen our friendship - was 
40 
 
mentioning my name. That is why now Armenians want to annex Nagorno-
Karabakh to Armenia. 
My goal in saying all of these to you is that you know, this is not a new 
problem. The Armenian party was working on this. This fact should not be 
neglected as well, that this process began very speedily in 25 days after I was 
estranged from all the posts. A month after that all of the Armenians in Nagorno-
Karabakh revolted and made a decision that Nagorno-Karabakh should be annexed 
to Armenia. Then these tragedies started and its consequences are obvious. 
Today I think that we have not gathered here to seek for the guilty - who is 
to blame, who is not, why the territories were occupied - not. I would like to ask 
you to leave these issues aside. However, I want to express my opinion about one 
issue. 
Why did it happen? Not because Azerbaijan people are weaker than 
Armenians. No. Our centuries-old history displays the abilities of Azerbaijan 
people. First, because Armenians, Armenia had long prepared for this, while 
Azerbaijan had forgotten about this issue. Those very years were forgotten. 
Secondly, when this conflict started, I mean, after the Armenia's territorial claim 
emerged, all the Armenians - both in Armenia and those living in all parts of the 
world forgot all the internal controversies and attitudes, all of them united. All of 
them united around the idea of "miatsum" and brought us to today's situation unit-
ing all their force. Differently from them, our nation failed to unite when this event 
started, the persons heading the people displayed inconstancy, and in a couple of 
years, the issue of Nagorno-Karabakh was forgotten. Internal controversies, fights, 
fight for power burst out. That's why under such circumstances Armenians 
occupied the territories of Azerbaijan very easily. 
I am saying it again and ask that today we do not touch upon these issues 
during the discussions. This is a case for the future - if needed. The purpose of my 
coming here today and my address to the Milli Mejlis, my initiative is that both the 
Milli Mejlis and the community, the people, to know it. Nevertheless, not only that 
they know it. Let's together, all of us, think about this hard situation. Not only 
think, but also cooperate together so that the persons to deliver speeches here will 
not touch upon the history, not blame anybody, or say that somebody is to blame, 
the other is not. Today we do not need all of these. None of these is needed. Today 
we need to decide how to fulfill the task standing before us. 
What have we done so far? The Foreign Minister said this. And I will say a 
few words. However, what should we do in the present situation? Twenty percent 
of Azerbaijan territories have been occupied - first Nagorno-Karabakh, then the 
seven regions around Nagorno-Karabakh. We have got one million refugees from 
the invaded territories - if to take into account as well those driven out from 
41 
 
Armenia. Particularly the people, who have been driven out from the occupied 
territories, have been living in oppressive conditions in tents, not for a year or two, 
but for 12 years. 
In 1994, we stopped the fighting. Some people say different things about 
this. Today I state once again that the ceasefire in May 1994 was a very urgent 
measure and we did it fully consciously. The past period also shows that - despite 
that the problem has not been solved - this measure had to be taken. Now, 
unfortunately, many have forgotten the war, they are living peacefully, they are 
calm. Unfortunately, they have forgotten how the situation was during the war. 
People live peacefully, our economy advances, foreign investments expand, the 
process of state building keeps on, our independence strengthens, Azerbaijan 
pursues a courageous foreign policy. All of these were impossible to realize in a 
condition of the war. 
When stopping the fighting, we were hoping that we would achieve a 
peaceful settlement of the issue during the armistice. Anyway, maybe some people 
do not know. At that time, we escaped from a big tragedy. Then mainly Russia was 
mediating in this issue, although the Minsk group was also present. However, 
Russia had taken the initiative. The cease-fire agreement was signed and the 
Defense Minister of Russia asked immediately to let the Defense Ministers of 
Armenia and Azerbaijan come to Moscow so we could consult on how to release 
the territories thenceforth. We believed this. We sent our Defense Minister there. 
At that time, we had a Defense Minister, whose surname was Mammadov. 
Unfortunately, some of the Defense Ministers then were not decent persons. But 
what happened the next day? Then there was no co-chairman of the Minsk group, 
only a chairman. Jan Eliasson from Sweden was the chairman. He had been to 
Armenia, and then he came here. He was also taking part in the ceasefire. I 
negotiated with him. Suddenly I was informed that the Moscow TV broadcasts that 
Grachov (Defense Minister of Russia) is conducting a big meeting and making 
decisions about what should be done in Azerbaijan. I became very angry at once. I 
looked for our Defense Minister in Moscow. What happened? It appeared that such 
a negotiation is going on there, with agreement of Rasul Guliyev from here and 
participation of our ambassador in Moscow that Russia must send its separating 
troops to the region to provide for a ceasefire. Is Hassan Hassanov here? 
Hassan Hassanov (ex Foreign Minister): Yes, Mr. President. 
Heydar Aliyev: Do you remember it? 
Hassan Hassanov: Yes, I remember it very well. 
Heydar Aliyev: How many hours from night until the morning... 
Hassan Hassanov: We found him at seven a.m. 
42 
 
Heydar Aliyev: At 7 o'clock I made him get on the plane immediately and 
come here. Do you remember? 
Hassan Hassanov: He hid for some time. We could not even find him for 
two hours; he arrived late. 
Heydar Aliyev: Yes. He hid; he betrayed us. However, things did not finish 
with this. 
In three days after that, generals of the Russian Defense Ministry came to 
Azerbaijan in a big staff with the plans that "we are going to locate here and help 
you" so that Armenian troops leave this place. I listened to them and said, "thank 
you for your initiative. But we do not need it." They tried much; "maybe we should 
go; think once more". I said, "No. Please, go back to your place from here". We 
escaped such a threat at that time. 
However, the positive feature should as well be noted that we have 
succeeded maintaining an armistice between Armenia and Azerbaijan for more 
than 10 years without any separation forces. This is not only our merit; perhaps we 
should confess the positive attitude of also the Armenian party concerning this 
ceasefire. I am saying it again, the negotiations conducted thenceforth have not 
produced the wanted result. Nevertheless, I would like to say a few words about 
the process of peaceful negotiations for you to have more extensive information. 
In 1992, the OSCE Minsk group was created and the United Nations 
Organization put this organization under patronage of OSCE. The OSCE 
established the Minsk group and the Minsk Conference. The Minsk group includes 
12 states. In 1993, when starting the work here, Italy, Deputy Foreign Minister of 
Italy Rafaelli was the chairman. Then in 1994, Sweden, the Foreign Minister of 
Sweden Jan Eliasson was the chairman. After 1994, we changed the situation. 
However, at the same time, right when the war was going on, representative of the 
Russian Foreign Minister, the known person Kazimirov was dealing with this 
issue. He visited the region once a month. He invited our representatives to 
Moscow. Then Tofig Zulfugarov was the Deputy Foreign Minister and he was an 
expert of such issues. He went there and took part in the negotiations. Gukasyan, 
the "foreign Minister" of Nagorno-Karabakh was also brought there. In turn, we 
sent Bahmanov, head of the Azerbaijan community of Karabakh from here. The 
work kept on this way, in parallel. At the time when I witnessed it, Italy, then 
Sweden presided over the Minsk group. Finally, in 1994, we changed the situation 
at the Budapest summit of OSCE. I mean, we made it a little legal. 
I'll say openly, the United States of America and Russia negotiated about a 
certain other issue there. Hassanov also knows it. Probably, Azimov knows it as 
well. He was there, too. Tofig Zulfugarov also knows it. There Christopher met 
with the Foreign Minister of Russia and they agreed that Russia and Finland would 
43 
 
be the co-chairmen of the Minsk group in order to solve their own problems. Then 
we lived this period until December 1996. 
In December 1996, a certain progress was achieved at the Lisbon summit. 
Until that, it was impossible to do anything. However, in December 1994, in 
Budapest we determined first the issues of Minsk group chairmanship; secondly, 
the first time the decision was made there, that peaceful forces of OSCE should be 
created, and in case the agreement is achieved, exactly the peaceful forces of 
OSCE, and not of any other country's, enter here to our region. We intended that 
the peaceful forces would include representatives of individual countries which 
have no interest in this region. It was a very important decision. We did it. 
We achieved serious progresses at the Lisbon summit. I mean, progress to 
what - it is known. The first time it was written that the territorial integrity of 
Azerbaijan and Armenia is acknowledged; Nagorno-Karabakh is provided with the 
status of self-rule within Azerbaijan; and the safety of Nagorno-Karabakh 
population, both the Armenian and Azeri population, should be provided. 
It has already been said here, at the report. I should say everything openly to 
you. It is not so much an admissible thing for us, but we wanted to advance a little. 
Therefore, we considered it as a big step forward. This project was developed in 
Finland, then in Vienna and brought to Lisbon. In Lisbon Armenia rejected this 
project completely. How many efforts we made there - we have spoken about it 
repeatedly. Armenia rejected. In Lisbon there is a rule that a consensus should be 
present. No consensus was achieved. 
I have said it, you know. I was obliged; maybe, it is a rare case in the 
history of diplomacy that I made such a step. I did agree with the decision of the 
entire Lisbon summit. Thus, if one country does not agree, the Lisbon summit 
could not adopt a resolution. Why did I do this? Because, at least I made the 
participating states of the summit show an attitude to Azerbaijan. Afterwards the 
known statements were adopted. Again Armenia did not vote for it; 53 states 
voted. 
What happened in the next period? After the Lisbon summit, we thought 
that the co-chairmen of the Minsk group should strengthen even more. Finland left 
the co-chairmanship; Russia stayed. The United States of America suggested its 
service and we accepted it. We proposed the United States of America. Neither 
Armenia nor Russia agreed with this. They accepted France. We did not agree with 
that. Finally, there were three co-chairmen instead of two, since the states failed to 
achieve an agreement among them: Russia, the United States of America and 
France. You should know that until that we had not received any written concrete 
proposal from the Minsk group. 
44 
 
I am saying again, on the one hand, Kazimirov, the representative of Russia, 
was working very actively. Every two to three months our representatives met with 
those of Armenia, even with those of Nagorno-Karabakh in Moscow or another 
place. No result was achieved. The Minsk group was headed already by three 
major powers and we demanded that they give concrete proposals. 
Vilayat Guliyev spoke about these proposals here. The first proposal, 
"package settlement" proposal was presented in June 1997. Now you will say, 
somebody will say, why did you accept it? We accepted it because we wanted to 
see if we could achieve progress or not. I remember even when I met with Clinton 
in the White House, Washington on the first of August, he appreciated it very 
highly. He even asked me, tell during your speech - because, he also performed a 
speech, as me - that you accept it. I said it. Armenia did not accept it. 
Afterwards the second proposal, "stage-by-stage settlement" proposal was 
given. We again accepted it, but not because it was expedient for us. True, it was a 
bit more expedient than the previous one. Vilayat Guliyev spoke about this. But we 
wanted a little movement to start. Armenia did not accept it, either. Vilayat 
Guliyev has spoken about the following processes. 
Finally, Ter-Petrosyan from Armenia accepted the second proposal. We 
made a joint statement in Strasbourg that we will work based on this. An 
opposition appeared in Armenia against Ter-Petrosyan. Thus, in  February 1998 
Ter-Petrosyan  resigned  and  a  little  after  that Kocharyan was elected the 
president. There was nothing in 1998; the Minsk group was not giving anything. 
Why don't they give? They answered that "we are waiting, a new president is being 
elected in Armenia, a government is established", and so on and so forth. We 
waited and waited; at last, in late 1998 the proposal of "common state" was given 
to us. There is a saying in Azerbaijan, "it is much blacker than black". In 
comparison to the previous proposals, it was much more unfavorable for 
Azerbaijan. 
The persons taking part in those negotiations may remember. As soon as I 
heard it, I said that we do not even want to discuss it. They tried much to convince 
me. I said, "I do not want to discuss it. You put us in such a position that two states 
appear in the territory of Azerbaijan - Azerbaijan and Nagorno-Karabakh, while 
Azerbaijan has no right upon Nagorno-Karabakh. And you cover it saying that 
thus, territorial integrity of Azerbaijan is maintained". I said, "What are you 
thinking? Are we so mad not to understand what it means?" We rejected this. But 
Armenia accepted this, and up to now Armenia states everywhere, performing 
speeches, that if Azerbaijan had accepted the formula of a "common state" at the 
end of 1998, now there would be peace, the conflict would have been finished. 
Certainly, in their favor. The situation is like this. 
45 
 
You should know that today, while leading this discussion, I am saying to 
you, all three of these proposals have been left in the past. They cannot come back 
again. I think the last proposal was a big sabotage against Azerbaijan and we 
rejected it totally. After that the Minsk group has not presented any proposal. 
Both yesterday and today I heard that there were different stories when 
these issues and proposals were presented to the mass media. Even the opposition 
parties, I don't know, organizations and so on in our country gathered and made a 
racket that Heydar Aliyev wants to accept the "common state" formula; I don't 
know, he wants the parliament to accept it, et cetera. You know, the terrible thing 
is that the misfortune of our people, our nation, is this. 
Hey our citizens, the persons living with groundless political ambition, you 
have been invited here. Do listen. If Heydar Aliyev has not backed Azerbaijan's 
interests in this issue, stand up and cut off his head. 
Nevertheless, they concoct it; they make a hubbub. Yesterday the ANS TV-
channel informed us that 50 political parties have made a decision to hold actions. 
You know, I would advise the ANS TV-channel to live much more based on the 
principles of fairness, not the sensational. In fact, there are not even 40 parties in 
Azerbaijan. Those calling themselves parties are not parties; even if we consider 
them, again their number does not reach 50. All the registered parties are known 
and they have been invited here. However, Murtuz muallim said that some of them 
have not come. Why don't you come? On the one hand, you want discussions; you 
want us to say our ideas openly so that you know everything. On the other hand, 
not knowing anything, you just concoct things and make a false noise. One says, 
we need to hold an action; another says, we should raise the people up. I want them 
to know, nobody can do it. Azerbaijan has got its Constitution and laws. Those 
times have passed. Azerbaijan state is a powerful state. Everybody can act within 
the framework of the Constitution, negotiations, democracy, political pluralism and 
superiority of the law. Nevertheless, if anybody wants to act outside of all these, he 
will receive a due answer. 
As the President of Azerbaijan, I state that the cases taking place in the past 
cannot repeat. The persons having created a condition of civil war here in 1993, 
those who divided Azerbaijan, and those who supported these persons - I do not 
want to expand it now - now ostensibly think about Azerbaijan and think more than 
we do? Therefore, I state that none of the published proposals have been accepted 
and will not be accepted. 
This morning I was told that Armenia expressed its discontent that 
Azerbaijan has violated confidentiality and published the proposals. This 
information was given as well yesterday. They have even addressed the Minsk 
46 
 
group. I was told in the morning that ostensibly they have also published this last 
proposal, which contained the "common state" formula. 
First of all, we have not promised anybody to keep this a secret. Yes, I 
supposed and suppose today that the negotiations process should be kept a secret. 
Information must be given after the result is achieved. I am saying it to you also 
today. I am saying it to the entire community, to the people. If we achieve any 
result, if we come to any decision, any conclusion, nobody, including the president 
Heydar Aliyev can hide it. 
Undoubtedly, first the Milli Mejlis must discuss it. After that it should be 
presented to the people's discussion. If the people and Milli Mejlis do not accept it, 
can the President of Azerbaijan Heydar Aliyev solve an issue alone? First of all, 
you should know that neither today nor tomorrow Heydar Aliyev can accept 
anything that contradicts Azerbaijan's interest. 
Secondly, if due to any compromises, there appears a conclusion that yes, 
this can be done, this will never be kept in secret. The negotiations process is going 
on secretly and will keep on secretly as well. Because, if we take the course of this 
negotiation process to the market, to the community, nothing will happen. 
However, what is my purpose today? Today my purpose is that you know 
everything. The community, the people know it and say, "What do we need to do?" 
Why am I saying this? Because, after the "common state" formula proposal, the 
Minsk group has not given any proposal. 
In April 1999 in Washington, at the 50th anniversary of NATO, the 
leadership of the United States of America, President Clinton and the Secretary of 
State Mrs. Albright, asked that we meet with Kocharyan and speak. We met and 
spoke. There it appeared that we could reach an agreement on certain issues. 
Therefore, this negotiation process continued. In 1999, we met several times. I 
went to Geneva two times for this, then we met at the border. In October 1999, 
more closeness in the positions became possible. However, in 1999, after the terror 
act in the Armenian parliament, Armenia refused the certain, though little, 
agreements achieved. 
Now, after these meetings have started, the Minsk group says, the co-
chairmen of the Minsk group say, OSCE says, the European Council says that two 
days ago heads of the European Union were here. And they say to let the two 
presidents solve the problem, and we will agree with this, however they solve it. 
The two presidents' settlement is very difficult because, the territories of one 
president's country are occupied, and it has one million refugees. The other 
president's country has got big economic difficulties, but its army keeps Azerbaijan 
territories under occupation. 
47 
 
Vilayat Guliyev gave the information here. Nevertheless, I would like to 
cite several figures. You know, since 1993 up to now I have conducted 485 
meetings with presidents, the heads of 68 countries. Either I have been at an 
official visit, or they have been to Azerbaijan. Many of the meetings took place 
while we were in international organizations. Do know, at all of these meetings, 
even at the meeting with the sultan of Brunei, I have raised this issue. I have asked 
them to help Azerbaijan, to support Azerbaijan. 
I have got the number of these meetings. For example, I have discussed this 
issue with the President of the United States of America, with its foreign Minister 
18 times; with those of France - 16 times; Russia - 28 times; with all of the heads 
of Turkey repeatedly - 78 times. I do not want to spend your time with this. 
I have conducted ten meetings with the leadership of the United Nations 
organization - the former secretary Boutros Gali, Koffee Annan on this issue. If 
you remember, Boutros Gali came and performed a speech here. I have performed 
three speeches at the summit of the United Nations Organizations. My speeches 
have been published, in all of them I have criticized the United Nations 
Organizations that "you do not fulfill the resolutions you have adopted". What do 
they say? They say that "we adopt these resolutions, but we do not have a 
mechanism for fulfilling them". What did I tell them? I have said this at three 
NATO summits - in Washington, Madrid and other places. I have met four times 
with general secretaries of the NATO. I have said this to all of them. At OSCE 
summits -1 have already said this - in Budapest, Lisbon and the last time in 
Istanbul. 
I see it at press; they write that the issue was ostensibly solved at the 
Istanbul summit and so on. Falsehood. Why do you write the things you do not 
know? Why do you invent the things you do not know? No issue was solved there. 
There the State Secretary of the USA Albright, Foreign Ministers of France, Russia 
and Turkey, chairman of OSCE, I think the Prime Minister of Norway and us, the 
two presidents discussed the issue and failed to come to any conclusion. 
We are a member of the Commonwealth of Independent States. There was 
not a single meeting of heads of the slates where I did not raise this issue. Our 
friends, brothers, other countries have pronounced it that Armenia is the aggressor. 
The word "fight against separatism" appears in some documents of the 
Commonwealth of Independent States. Armenia rejects it. But I suggest that the 
word "fight against separatism" should be written. All the heads of states ask me to 
withdraw my suggestion as well as our brothers, Central Asian countries. 
The Organization of Islamic Conference has conducted two summits. I have 
delivered a speech, spoken there. The Economic Cooperation Organization - the 
48 
 
ECO has held four summits. Heads of the Turkish-speaking countries have had 
five summits. I have conducted numberless meetings. 
I want to say as well that Turkey - our friendly, brotherly country - 
considers Armenia as an aggressor and states it everywhere. The Organization of 
Islamic Conference is the only organization that we can write the formula of 
Armenia's aggression to Azerbaijan in the resolutions and protest this aggression. 
Iran states that Armenia has encroached upon Azerbaijan. Nevertheless, except for 
these, no country of the world says that Armenia has encroached upon Azerbaijan. 
The Security Council of the United Nations Organization has adopted four 
resolutions. I asked Vilayat Guliyev to have a look at those resolutions. This 
morning I have also looked through them. All four of those resolutions write that 
the occupation troops must leave the invaded territories of Azerbaijan. However, 
the word "Armenia" is absent; I mean the word "Armenian armed forces" is not 
present in them. Anyway, in one of the resolutions it is written that Armenia should 
be demanded to influence on Nagorno-Karabakh. In reality, it is an Armenia-
Azerbaijan war. In reality, Armenia has encroached upon Azerbaijan. However, no 
document of an international organization, except for the ones I have mentioned, 
regards Armenia an aggressor in any statement of any state. 
We say - I have rammed this formula to people's brain - the Armenia-
Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. But what do others say - the Nagorno-
Karabakh conflict. Because all of them think that this conflict is not something 
between the two countries, but between Nagorno-Karabakh and Azerbaijan. I have 
said it repeatedly, if this is the case, let Armenia step aside. It is our business what 
kind of negotiations we will conduct with Nagorno-Karabakh and what we will do. 
We can settle it in a very short period. However, presently Nagorno-Karabakh and 
Armenia are one single country. They have been a single country for already 11 
years. Nevertheless, nobody wants to recognize this truth. 
Now everybody turns to me regarding my meeting with Kocharyan. You 
are, I don't know, a strong leader, strong-willed person, and so on and so forth. 
You solve the problem. I say, "How should I solve it?" You say it as well to 
Armenia, let Armenia also display a constructive position in this issue, like us. 
Then we will solve it. They say, "Armenia is miserable, Armenia is poor". I don't 
know, "Armenia's economy is in a hard condition", et cetera. 
There is a friendly relation to Armenia in big countries, the American 
Congress, or parliaments of other countries, but not to Azerbaijan. Although we 
have been subjected to aggression, they are the aggressors. We saw this as well at 
entering the European Council. True, the opposition tried here, so to say, to blame 
Azerbaijan leadership once again that we have no democracy and so on. Therefore, 
do not accept us to the European Council. 
49 
 
I have said it openly and said it as well when delivering a speech in 
Strasbourg. I said it in front of the entire European Council that double standards 
should be avoided in the world. Today I am saying again that double standards 
exist in the world. 
Once I asked one person: "elections have taken place in Armenia, 
Azerbaijan and Georgia. What is the difference among these elections? Tell me the 
truth". He said, "There is no big difference". I said, "Why do you blame us that 
elections have been violated in our country, but not them?" They do not answer, 
pass through these issues. I do not think that elections have been violated in our 
country. At the same time, I do not think that everything is fully perfect in our 
country. I do not. I have said it repeatedly, everything has got a certain stage. If to 
take that stage, Armenia, Azerbaijan and Georgia - we all are at the same stage. 
However, for the economic development we are much better than both Georgia and 
Armenia. We are very good for internal stability. What does a country need? A 
country needs peace. A country needs internal political stability. A country needs 
economic development. However, these issues have been left aside; some people 
keep talking about democracy, democracy and democracy. The persons speaking 
about democracy simply misuse it. I have said and I am saying, democracy is 
present in Azerbaijan, democracy develops and will keep on developing. Nobody 
should misuse this issue. Nobody can affect Azerbaijan in this issue with his/her 
different means. Our Azerbaijan has its own way. Our people have its own 
mentality. Nobody should think that today here, in Azerbaijan, democracy will be 
just like in France. Many years must pass for this. 
I am saying it in order to bring these double standards to your account. This 
double standard is presently applied in the Armenia-Azerbaijan conflict: "they are 
poor, they need to be saved. Your country has got natural resources, a great 
future", and so on and so forth, solve it. How should I solve it? Now you are also 
asking: "How should I solve it?" 
From all the negotiations conducted, the proposals presented by the Minsk 
group, I understand one thing that they want to solve the issue either by providing 
Nagorno-Karabakh with a status close to independence, or to give it full 
independence. Only this and nothing else is evident from the Minsk group's 
proposals. We have not agreed with this and cannot do it. 
I do not want to disclose our negotiations with Kocharyan. However, one 
thing is evident that they have invaded our territory and their main purpose is that 
to tell it shortly, Nagorno-Karabakh can never again be subordinate to Azerbaijan 
state. This is what they think. 
I am conducting these negotiations and will keep on doing this. Some time 
ago, the president of France Chirac gave me a call. Because on January 26 we - 
50 
 
Kocharyan and I met there privately, then three of us met together. Some time ago, 
he called me - Kocharyan was again in France - to ask, "Could you come here to 
meet face to face?" I did not refuse. On March 4 I will have a private meeting with 
the president Kocharyan in Paris, and on March 5 the three presidents, the 
president Chirac, president Kocharyan and the President of Azerbaijan, will meet. 
Now who can say that France has adopted a resolution about "genocide"? 
Why are you going there and so on? These are different issues. Settlement of this 
issue has nothing to do with that. We have expressed and express now our protest 
against the unfair decision of France. I have said this directly to the president 
Chirac. But at the same time, France is a co-chairman of the Minsk group. If there 
is any opportunity, if it is possible to achieve something here, we should use this 
and cannot refuse this. Therefore, I am going to this meeting. I cannot say what 
will happen and what will not. However, I want to say that the situation is very 
complex. 
Vilayat Guliyev said here that the Minsk group has stopped its activity, but 
the Minsk group has not stopped its activity. For example, the fact that one of the 
co-chairmen of the Minsk group, the president Chirac is engaged in this issue 
displays that the co-chairmen of the Minsk group have not stopped their activity. 
When saying co-chairmen of the Minsk group, we mean their representatives, but 
the heads of the states are the leaders. 
For example, when the Russian President Vladimir Putin came here I spoke 
to him privately for two-to-three hours very comprehensively. Then we had 
telephone conversations. Therefore, presently the Minsk group has not stopped its 
activity. I have stated more than once that the Minsk group and its co-chairmen 
should know that the direct meetings of the Armenian and Azerbaijan presidents 
should go in parallel with the Minsk group's activity. This does not replace its 
activity and will not. I have said it repeatedly and I am saying it again. We should 
strengthen the Minsk group's activity and make a profound use of our 
opportunities. 
I explained the situation to you. So far, I have done everything possible. Not 
only me, but also all of our appropriate executive bodies take an extensive part in 
this; Milli Mejlis takes part in this. However, naturally, the main part of the 
negotiations falls on my shoulders. At the same time, both our foreign minister and 
the deputy foreign ministers conduct negotiations. Negotiations keep on as well at 
other levels. Representatives of our parliament raise this issue when going to 
different countries. I mean, we all do this. Nevertheless, either the persons working 
at our executive body or directly me hold the main negotiations with the Minsk 
group. What is my purpose? The situation is like this. You have said that we have 
discussed this at the Milli Mejlis. Someone says "let's create a committee". Tell me 
51 
 
what this committee is going to do, what it is able to do, what proposals it can 
give? 
It is nothing for the political parties of Azerbaijan - opposition or non-
opposition - to make a noise. The time of these noises has already passed. Before 
the elections some people deliver speeches saying "we have got an idea". Give 
your idea! You blame Azerbaijan President Heydar Aliyev for not being able to 
solve this issue for 7 years. I am telling you the situation as it is. You say that you 
can solve it - give your perception. You don't give it to me or to the Milli Mejlis, so 
give it to the Minsk group. If you do not give it to the Minsk group, give it to the 
United Nations Organization. Give, give and give! But none of you has any 
conception, any proposal, or any idea about the complexity and deepness of this 
issue. 
However, despite this, today I am turning to you once again. I am turning to 
the members of the Milli Mejlis, to the representatives of our community, 
particularly to our scholars, men of culture, writers, and all the other intellectuals, 
who are so to say, the cream of our community. I am turning to all the political 
parties, even those which display a hostile attitude to me - give your proposals. If 
you do not respect me, then do not. This is your business. Give them to the Minsk 
group. Bring it, as some people delivering speeches on TV used to put a paper like 
this saying "this is one of our ideas, and that is the other". However, only God 
knows what is written on this paper. If you want, take that paper five times and put 
it back saying this is one proposal, two proposals, and three proposals and so on. If 
you have got a proposal regarding this issue, take it and give to the Minsk group. I 
will create a condition that the co-chairmen of the Minsk group meet with you. 
Give it to them in a written form, explain how to solve this issue through that way. 
Nevertheless, some statements are spread that I don't know, Nagorno-
Karabakh should be provided with cultural autonomy, Nagorno-Karabakh should 
not be given a province autonomy and so on. Let's think sensibly. They did not 
tolerate this province autonomy, which was created in 1923. They started the war, 
the conflict; so much blood was shed; they invaded our territories. Now is it 
possible to bring back to the very province autonomy? It is impossible. 
Some people say, "Do the war; we should have a strong army". Azerbaijan 
has got a strong army. I have discussed this several times at the Council for 
National Security. Azerbaijan has got a strong army. It is possible to do the war. 
But, do we need it? Whoever is the supporter of the war, let him write, so we'll see 
what will happen at the end of this war? First, seven regions of ours besides 
Nagorno-Karabakh are under occupation. People live in tents. How much time will 
be needed and how much blood will be shed to release every occupied region? 
Second, how will the current world community accept the war? Third, from the 
52 
 
beginning the world community has had such an idea that Azerbaijanis have 
slaughtered Armenians there. Now, if we start the war, they'll say, "yes, 
Azerbaijanis want to slaughter Armenians now, just like in the past". However, I 
do not avoid the war. If our entire community comes to this conclusion and reason 
it, and the people wanting the war determine a concrete strategy that we need the 
war, and how we should do the war, - our army is strong enough to do this. Do not 
worry at all. 
Some people say, "no, let's form a strong army in five to ten years, then 
we'll start". Others say, "Let's freeze the issue". How long should we freeze it? 
Well, say we froze the issue for five more years. Do the poor refugees have to live 
in the tents for five more years? 
What will we do after that? Some people have an idea that in Armenia the 
economy is in a very hard condition, people leave the country and so on. There is 
some truth in this. The economy of Armenia is in a grave condition. However, 
Georgia's economy is in an even graver condition. Everybody, all the world 
experts, representatives -just two days ago I received heads of the European Union, 
they have got full information - say that our country's economy is higher. How 
long should we wait so that Armenia's economy gets destroyed, Armenia gets 
completely destroyed, Nagorno-Karabakh gets destroyed? Then we go and get 
these lands back? How long should we wait? If there is such an idea, let's reason it 
as well. I mean, I am ready to consider every proposal with full seriousness, full 
responsibility. That's why I gave this information to you. 
Today's discussion should aim at proposals. I am asking the persons who 
are going to deliver speeches, do not speak about either history, or who is to blame, 
who is not to blame, why did it happen to us - do not speak about these, put these 
things aside. It is a matter of the future. What should we do today? Through which 
method should we achieve this? The occupied territories must be released. At least, 
the occupied regions around Nagorno-Karabakh should be released. 
Perhaps I was not thinking to speak so comprehensively. However, anyway, 
I suppose this is such a complicated matter that there was a need for me to give you 
profound information concerning this. I am waiting for your proposals. I am 
waiting for your assistance. I wish our people to unite, get hand in hand and solve 
this issue. 
Thank you. 
53 
 
FINAL SPEECH OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE 
AZERBAIJAN REPUBLIC 
HEYDAR ALIYEV AT THE MEETING 
OF MILLI MEJLIS DATED ON FEBRUARY 24 
 
- Respectful Milli Mejlis! 
Respected deputies, ladies and gentlemen! 
The discussion going on for two days at the supreme legislative body of 
Azefrbaijan, Milli Mejlis on investigation of the ways of settlement of the 
Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict is, I think, of great importance to 
both for us, I mean the participants of this discussion and the Azerbaijan 
community, our people. 
I am very pleased that the discussion took place. I think this discussion 
showed once more to everybody how difficult, how grave the situation is. Some 
speeches wondered why this discussion was so late, said we should have done it in 
time, that we should have given our proposals and solved the issue. I do not agree 
with these. Because, the discussion conducted just yesterday and today displayed 
that there is nobody to give a concrete proposal. In the recent years I, as the 
President of the Azerbaijan Republic, and the persons directly engaged in this issue 
together with me have tried to achieve a peaceful settlement of this issue. First of 
all, this was done through the Minsk group of OSCE and at the same time, through 
all the international organizations of the world, with the help of the major powers 
of the world. Since we ran these works and failed to come to a concrete result, we 
considered it unnecessary to bring this issue to discussion and simply talk about it. 
The discussions conducted both yesterday and today confirmed this idea for me 
once again. 
Speaking, expressing feelings, stating once more that you love your 
motherland, stating that the territorial integrity is the most significant issue, stating 
how dear Karabakh is for us, stating that "Azerbaijan cannot live without Nagorno-
Karabakh" - all of these have been said already for hundreds, thousands of times 
for 12 years. Everybody says this. The majority of the speeches both yesterday and 
today contained this. Anyway, how should we solve this issue? In recent years we 
have tried at least, when approaching toward a settlement of the issue, when some 
option is acceptable for Azerbaijan, to bring it to a discussion of the Milli Mejlis to 
see how Milli Mejlis reacts to this. If the negotiations we have conducted so far 
have not satisfied us, that is, if we have not agreed with the proposals given to us 
and the proposals put forward during the negotiations, what is the use of bringing 
the issues we have not agreed with to discussion? Some people said both yesterday 
and today that we would have discussed the ways out if you had taken this matter 
54 
 
to discussion several years before. Ok, let's suppose that we are to blame. Though I 
do not think so, however, let's assume this conditionally. What do you say today? 
I am saying it particularly to those, who pull us to pieces. One says we gave 
a proposal in 1994, I don't know, for discussing the issue at the Democratic 
Congress. You know, this is a blatant lie. In 1994, those opposition forces were 
dispersed; they ran and hid. They were saving their lives. All of them crept into 
any hole for the fear of Surat Huseynov. Could they give a proposal at that time? 
I do not want to cite names, but I have to cite one name. Following the 
events of 1993, the ex Prime Minister Panah Huseynov hid for more than three 
years. Then he was ran across somewhere and arrested. He stayed there for a while. 
I said, "OK, he ran and hid, now he has come". I thought and said, "Perhaps this 
man's faults should be forgiven". I even asked to bring him to me from the jail. 
I spoke to him for three hours. There is a record of that conversation. 
During the conversation he said that everything we are doing is right' he told the 
mistakes his organization had made. He even criticized the attitude of the 
organization to which he belonged to the events during the coup d'etat Surat 
Huseynov tried to realize in Azerbaijan in 1994. I said, "Thank God that he has 
grown wiser". I then asked the law-enforcement bodies to release him, let him go. 
Maybe he will really be able to explain it to the others. He left. 
However, in a few months, that person raised a general alarm in the 
opposition, confused everything, and he himself, not deserving anything, started 
instigating people against each-other that "you will become a leader, you will 
become a leader and you will become a leader"... So, now they say that we gave 
our proposals. Those persons were in such a condition in 1994. Why are you lying? 
Why are you lying? 
I am saying it openly; no opposition party has ever given a single concrete 
proposal. If they want to refute my words, let them bring out those proposals, state 
them, and publish them. If there is really a rational idea there, I am ready to 
apologize to them. 
You know, the people taking such a disorderly position, living with the 
claim for authority, and sacrificing Azerbaijan's independence, sovereignty, 
integrity, and Azerbaijan's position to their own personal ambitions, cannot 
consider themselves as citizens of Azerbaijan. For these reasons today I have the 
right to say that so far we have not received any proposal from any organization, 
from anywhere. We have done what we could. I said it as well yesterday. 
I was closely operating with the Minsk group since I started my activity in 
1993. I said it yesterday, "I have met with the cochairmen of the Minsk group 98 
times during their joint visits to Azerbaijan". Every meeting lasted for two, three, 
four hours. Have we conducted empty talks? Finally, what does the proposal given 
55 
 
by the Minsk group in 1997 show? It shows that they regard the possible settlement 
of the issue only based on the current reality. 
I think the things we have done so far have been useful. It would be 
impossible to do anything more than this. However, both yesterday and today, 
when we took this issue to discussion of the Milli Mejlis and during the discussion, 
both the community and the people sitting in this hall know how the situation is. 
Now, when the situation is like this, we should understand the real situation and 
follow the possible and real ways. It is impossible to do anything with the hubbub 
now. 
I could not receive a proposal here. Yes, let us do the war; it is known for a 
long time. Let us conduct peaceful negotiations; we have been doing it for 7 years. 
What should we do then? Nobody said anything else. Finally, I am negotiating 
with the Armenian president Kocharyan. Nevertheless, why are these not solved 
peacefully? Because, I said it yesterday, I am saying it as well today: the Armenian 
armed forces occupied Nagorno-Karabakh as far back as in 1990. As far back as in 
1989, the USSR government created Ad Hoc Committee in Nagorno-Karabakh and 
withdrew it from within Azerbaijan. In the following wars, Nagorno-Karabakh was 
invaded. 
Finally, in 1992, here, at the period when the fight for authority was on in 
Azerbaijan, when the fight for authority was going on between the then leadership 
and the National Front, on May 9 Shusha was occupied. On May 14, here, in this 
hall some forces brought Mutallibov to power. Then he was attacked. On May 17, 
Lachin was occupied. In May 18, the National Front took the power in this hall and 
elected the chairman of the parliament. In two months, it elected the president. 
Occupation of these two regions connected Nagorno-Karabakh to Armenia already 
then. These are the realities. 
Regions were occupied as well afterwards. It is also a reality. These regions 
have been under occupation for already many years. The population has been 
driven out from there. Nagorno-Karabakh has been actually annexed to Armenia. 
Now, in such a situation no power in the world wants to take measures for 
withdrawing the Armenian armed forces from there or wishes to affect it - neither 
the Minsk group comprised of 12 states, nor the United States of America, France, 
Russia or other states. This is a reality. 
Turkey is the most friendly and brotherly country to us. It fully supports us. 
However, it cannot take any measures for withdrawal of the Armenians from the 
regions they have occupied. Because it has no opportunities. Others may be have 
such an opportunity, for they assist Armenia - the United States of America, 
Russia, and France. However, they do not do this. On the contrary, it is quite 
evident who the aggressor is. They help the aggressor; they assist the aggressor; 
56 
 
they have enacted the 907th Amendment against Azerbaijan, and they have not 
eliminated it so far. 
The former president of America Mr. Clinton - with whom I have met 
repeatedly and spoken - promised me several times. Our statement writes that the 
907th Amendment must be annulled - he sent me a letter three days before 
resigning saying "we can annul the 907th Amendment, but you do a gesture 
towards Armenia". What is the gesture? Open the border at least in the Gazakh 
region or in any other region so that trade takes place between Armenia and 
Azerbaijan. Then we will eliminate the 907th Amendment. 
I must say this to you. I said, "No. I cannot do this. If you, such a major 
power, fear the Armenian Diaspora there in America and suggest this to me, I 
cannot do this. We have been living under pressure of the 907th Amendment for 8 
years; we can keep on living like this further." This is the real condition. 
The respected ambassador of Turkey gave me information at the break. An 
issue has been raised at the Congress of the California state - it also has got 
Congress to declare April 24 the "Day of Genocide" and to issue an appropriate 
resolution against Turkey. So, this work is going on in Turkey and will go on. 
However, what is added now? It is added that the events of 1988 in Sumgayit and 
1990 in Baku and consequently the claims about massive deportation of 350,000 
Armenians from Azerbaijan were reflected as well. This is the Armenian Diaspora. 
I want to say to Arzumanli once again, the majority of the Azerbaijanis living in 
America live in California. Does any one of them think that Azerbaijan should be 
protected? True, they are the Azerbaijanis having moved from Iran. I am saying the 
truth, "what will happen more than this?" Most of them do not consider themselves 
Azerbaijanis. They say, "We are Iranians". The reality is this. Therefore, not 
general words, I am saying it again, concrete proposals... 
All the works we have done come to the point that Armenia can withdraw 
its armed forces with the condition that the status of Nagorno-Karabakh is defined. 
If this does not happen, Armenia will not do anything. All the other countries also 
say this to us. 
Naturally, Nagorno-Karabakh is an ancient land of Azerbaijan. It is a dear 
land for us. However, the truth is that the majority of the people living there were 
Armenians. Seven regions located around Nagorno-Karabakh have been occupied. 
They are living in tents as refugees. Here some people again said "let's wait, let's 
freeze", et cetera. I would like the persons saying these words, thinking this way - 
someone said here, I agree with him - give their home to refugees for one month 
and himself go and live in that tent for 10 days - now, this very minute. You know, 
this is the truth in Azerbaijan. 
57 
 
We are building a market economy; we conduct economic reforms. As a 
result of this, one part of the population engaged in business has become rich and 
has become too rich. One part lives at the middle level. One part lives in a poor 
condition, but the refugees are living in an even harder condition. The refugees are 
in such a condition that it is impossible to stand it. Nevertheless, the persons who 
are not rich, I mean they have their own house - the rich, the wealthy, they do not 
know where to put their money - build domains not only in Baku, but also in other 
places - live comfortably. The other, the middle class also lives comfortably. 
We have provided economic and political stability in all the parts of 
Azerbaijan, in Baku. Restaurants work until 2 a.m., 3, 4, 5 a.m. at night. People 
make wedding parties. People invite 300-400 men and 3-4 orchestras to each 
wedding party. People live comfortably, and when electricity turns off for two 
hours, they raise a racket: "why did I not have electricity for two hours?" One has 
three television sets, five washing-machines, and four heating machines in his 
home. Do they have any idea about what condition the refugees live in? As well as 
the middle class. Not only do the rich go to restaurants and bars. The middle class 
also goes. Even the poor class, which is poor, has little money, but has a house, at 
least, how to say, has a cover over his head, lives under his roof. We have created 
this comfort. 
The people coming from abroad say that the comfort, that is, the public 
order in Azerbaijan, is not present anywhere now. Presently one lives a very rich 
life, a second lives a bit lower than him; the third lives a bit lower than the second; 
even the poor have a certain place for living, a certain opportunity. What about the 
people living in the tents? Should we think about them or not? Should we give 
them that very difficulty? However, they say, "no, let's give Nagorno-Karabakh a 
status which is even lower than autonomy". Nobody accepts this. Nobody accepts, 
and our territories are not released. Our territories are not released; people suffer. 
There is no end of this. 
Therefore, I am asking once again, once more from everybody; I am turning 
as well to the opposition; I am turning to our intellectuals. Now I saw that the 
persons delivering speeches in the Milli Mejlis have not got such important 
proposals. Nevertheless, let each of them sit down, and think, write and give it to 
the Milli Mejlis. Perhaps we all, the people of Azerbaijan, Azeri nation should find 
the way, which we have failed to find so far. We are blamed that we have failed to 
find it; let them come and show the way. Then we will entrust settlement of this 
issue to them. Let them come and show. However, do know, the issue cannot be 
solved through general talks. Nothing will happen if we keep on requiring that 
Armenians must be withdrawn from there. We should know the real condition. 
58 
 
Finally, my word is that as the President of Azerbaijan I consider 
yesterday's and today's discussion very useful for myself. Because, I found an 
opportunity to state everything clearly, not hiding anything from you and the entire 
Azerbaijan people through you. At the same time, it gave me an opportunity to see 
what assistance the other persons invited to the Milli Mejlis, or common citizens 
can render us in this, what proposals they can give. Saying these words to you I do 
not want at all to say that we are hopeless. No. We will surely solve the issue. 
However, everybody should know how difficult, how hard it is to settle the 
problem. I am saying it once again, whoever can show his service in this field will 
be highly appreciated by the Azerbaijan state. Some of the speeches here voiced 
the idea that we should turn to the United Nations Organizations or OSCE on 
behalf of the Milli Mejlis. I support these proposals. 
I would like to say to you that on the 1st of March the acting chairman of 
OSCE, the foreign minister of Romania, will be in Azerbaijan. Whoever wants 
may try and meet with him to tell his ideas. I suppose, until then, we will have the 
time to prepare the address of the Milli Mejlis and to present it to the OSCE 
chairman. Twelve states are included in the Minsk group of OSCE. It has co-
chairmen. So, we need to send it to the co-chairmen - to the President of America, 
President of Russia and President of France. Milli Mejlis can do it as well. I would 
ask you, if the deputies agree, to send this address to the co-chairmen of the Minsk 
group on behalf of the Milli Mejlis because of this discussion. 
Finally, somebody said here that we should make the Security Council of 
the United Nations Organization issue resolutions. I agreed with him. However, I 
think he can send such a letter to the General Secretary of the UN Kofi Annan and 
to the chairman of the UN Security Council on behalf of the deputies of Milli 
Mejlis and Azerbaijan people, and put if before them why the resolutions they have 
adopted are not fulfilled. 
We have not been able to do this. Maybe somebody can do it or Milli Mejlis 
can do it. Let them do it. Understand me, please, I am not saying this for formality, 
I am answering to you this way so that you think. I accept this as a real truth and 
want us to show our pressure and influence to these organizations from all the 
directions. 
What about me. First, the Minsk group must continue its activity and 
thenceforth I will conduct intensive negotiations with co-chairmen of the Minsk 
group as well. I will put forward our proposals for a fair settlement of the issue and 
ask them to take new measures regarding the fair settlement of the matter. This 
issue has always taken the major place in my negotiations and will take the major 
place as well further, in my entire foreign political activity. We cannot refuse either 
the Minsk group or the OSCE because there is no other means. 
59 
 
I told you about our meetings with the Armenian president in Paris. These 
are very difficult and hard negotiations. Though these negotiations are very 
difficult and hard for me as a person, as a personality, we will conduct these 
negotiations again in Paris. If something happens afterwards, we will continue this. 
I thank you once more that Milli Mejlis discussed this issue for two days 
and I will provide the Milli Mejlis with information concerning any positive event 
achieved in the future. I am saying once again, negotiations are the first stage of 
the work, but the main thing, some achievement, is the second stage of it. If I reach 
any agreement, if I agree with any option which I understand and which is 
acceptable for us from my point of view, I will definitely present it to discussion of 
the Milli Mejlis. If the Milli Mejlis does not agree, I will not do anything without 
Milli Mejlis. My idea is that if Milli Mejlis agrees with any proposal, we should 
give it to the people's discussion then. We should not do anything without the 
people. 
I have dedicated almost a very big part of my life to this work and from now 
on there is nothing more important for me than this task in the field of my service 
before the Azerbaijan people. You can be sure that I will do my best to fulfill this 
task honorably as well further. 
 
II PART 
 
ARMENIA-AZERBAIJAN, NAGORNO-KARABAKH 
CONFLICT IN INTERNATIONAL 
ORGANIZATIONS 
 
1. KARABAKH PROBLEM IN THE FOCUS OF ATTENTION 
OF INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS 
 
United Nations Organization (UN) 
 
After the Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict started, this 
problem did not draw the attention of the international community for a long time. 
The first reason of this was that at the initial stage when the conflict started, the 
world community was not interested in its elimination. This problem was one of 
the many factors which speeded up the collapse process of the USSR, and its 
elimination could impede the destructive processes going on inside the Soviet 
Union. 
Interestingly that appearance of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict took place 
directly based on the Kremlin's scenario. Basing on the "divide and govern" 
60 
 
principle, the Union's leadership tried to distract attention from the country's main 
problems by creating regional conflicts and thus to obstruct expansion of the 
national liberty movement observed in the union republics. However, this plan 
played the role of a boomerang for the USSR, and ethnic conflicts not only failed 
to prevent collapse of the empire, but also speeded up the process even more. 
Armenians had conducted a serious campaign for getting support of the 
international community even before the conflict started. Here the opportunities of 
the Armenian lobby were used extensively as well. It is enough to cite just one fact 
that today there are very warm relations between the USA Congress, which has 
opportunities to control actually the social-political and economic processes going 
on in the world directly, and the Armenian lobby. The same words can be said as 
well about the French Senate. 
The fact that Armenia pursues aggressive policy against Azerbaijan was 
always accompanied with an indifferent attitude by the international union. 
Already in 1992 the Armenian armed units had sufficiently expanded the scope of 
their military operations targeted at occupation of our republic's territories. 
However, not a single international organization gave an objective assessment of 
these occupational actions, which were going on in front of everybody and violated 
international legal norms in a rude way. True, at different times certain resolutions, 
statements of UN, OSCE and the European Union concerning this issue appeared, 
but those documents did not assess accurately the true reasons of the conflict, did 
not put any difference between the aggressor party and the party that was subject to 
aggression. 
In 1991, after declaring its independence, the Azerbaijan Republic 
addressed all the international organizations, including the UN and world states, 
concerning this. That address showed that the principles of democracy, liberty and 
equality are the main strategic ways of the republic and expressed the country's 
desire to be accepted to the UN. In March 1992, Azerbaijan was accepted to the 
UN membership.
1
 In March the same year, Permanent Representation of 
Azerbaijan at UN opened in New York. 
Thereafter, Azerbaijan turned to the UN asking it to express its attitude 
toward the aggressive policy of Armenia and prevent this country's aggressive 
actions. A UN delegation paid a visit to the region based on this address and gave 
appropriate information concerning this to the UN General Secretary. The UN 
General Secretary stated it supports the efforts of the CSCE (Conference for 
Security & Cooperation in Europe - since January 1995 OSCE - Organization for 
Security & Cooperation in Europe) and is ready to render assistance to this 
                                                          
1 "Azerbaijan" newspaper, March 2, 2002. 
61 
 
organization for achieving the appropriate results. This was already the first 
symptom of the international community's cold attitude to the issue. 
In 1992 the occupation of Shusha made Azerbaijan turn to the UN once 
again. On May 12 the Security Council of UN sufficed by discussing the Nagorno-
Karabakh problem and issuing a statement.
1
 The statement was spread on behalf of 
the chairman of the Security Council. The statement expressed anxiety about the 
worsening situation in Nagorno-Karabakh and the necessity of rendering urgent 
assistance to the internally displaced persons. The document called the parties 
concerned to put an end to the violence and invited them to obey the provisions of 
the UN Charter. "The Members of the Security Council call upon all concerned to 
take all steps necessary to bring the violence to an end, to facilitate the work of the 
Secretary General's mission and to ensure the safety of its personnel. They recall 
the statements made on their behalf by the President of the Council on 29 January 
(S/23496) and 14 February 1992 (S/23597) on the admission respectively of 
Armenia and Azerbaijan to the United Nations, in particular the reference to the 
Charter principles relating to the peaceful settlement of disputes and non-use of 
force",
2
 - said the document. This displayed that the statement is in fact a common 
document not expressing anything about the real essence of the conflict. The only 
positive step of the UN Security Council was that the letter of the Permanent 
Representation of Azerbaijan to the chairman of the Security Council was spread 
as the official document of the latter. This letter assessed the military operations 
conducted by Armenia as an effort to violate the territorial integrity of a sovereign 
state. 
Naturally, Armenia was also trying to take alternative steps. Because of this, 
in August 1992 a new meeting of the UN Security Council was held based on 
Armenia's appeal, and a new statement of the Security Council chairman was 
spread. This document also called the parties concerned for a ceasefire and 
expressed UN's deep concern at the deterioration of the situation. 
In October 1992, the chairman of the UN Security Council accepted one 
more statement. However, this document did not differ at all from the previous 
ones either for its content or for its political essence. It also expressed deep concern 
at the grave situation, as well as the loss of human life, and stated that it supports 
the CSCE's activity concerning the settlement of the conflict. Noting the necessity 
of an urgent negotiation process for regulation of the problem, the Security Council 
invited the parties to take concrete steps in this direction. 
                                                          
1 "Armenian intervention to Azerbaijan and international organizations", Baku, 1998, p.103. 
2 www.oon.ru 
62 
 
In 1993, one more region of Azerbaijan, Kalbajar, was occupied by 
Armenians. Azerbaijan appealed to the UN regarding this and asked it to assess the 
aggressor's actions. On April 6, the statement of the UN Security Council was 
accepted. The statement expressed deep concern at the deterioration of the tension 
between Armenia and Azerbaijan and invasion of Kalbajar by "local Armenian 
forces". The statement once more reaffirmed the principle of sovereignty and 
territorial integrity of all the states and once again expressed its support for the 
CSCE peace process. However, this statement did not assess the problem properly. 
The point is that the attitude to Armenia's invasive policy was not reflected in the 
document and it stressed that ostensibly the "local Armenians" occupied Kalbajar. 
Let us note that this statement was mainly based on the information provided by 
Armenia. Armenia refuted the facts put down by Azerbaijan concerning 
participation in the occupation of Kalbajar and tried to prove that "local 
Armenians" were to blame in the region's occupation. 
The same year, on April 30, the UN Security Council adopted its first 
resolution regarding the Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. This 
document titled "United Nations Security Council resolution 822"
1
 was prepared 
with reference to the statements the chairman of the Security Council had given on 
January 29 and April 6, 1993. The resolution pointed out that stability and public 
order in the region is under threat, expressed grave concern at the displacement of 
a large number of civilians and the humanitarian emergency in the region. UN SC 
demanded the immediate cessation of all hostilities and hostile acts with a view to 
establishing a durable ceasefire as well as immediate withdrawal of all occupying 
forces from Kalbajar district and other recently occupied areas of Azerbaijan. 
"Recalling the statements of the President of the Security Council of 29 January 
1993 (S/25199) and of 6 April 1993 (S/25539) concerning the Nagorno-Karabakh 
conflict, 
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General dated 14 April 1993 
(S/25600), 
Expressing its serious concern at the deterioration of the relations between 
the Republic of Armenia and the Republic of Azerbaijan, 
Noting with alarm the escalation in armed hostilities and, in particular, the 
latest invasion of the Kalbajar district of the Republic of Azerbaijan by local 
Armenian forces, 
Concerned that this situation endangers peace and security in the region, 
                                                          
1  www.oon.ru 
 
63 
 
Expressing grave concern at the displacement of a large number of civilians 
and the humanitarian emergency in the region, in particular in the Kalbajar district, 
Reaffirming the respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States 
in the region, 
Reaffirming also the inviolability of international borders and the 
inadmissibility of the use of force for the acquisition of territory, 
Expressing its support for the peace process being pursued within the 
framework of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe and deeply 
concerned at the disruptive effect that the escalation in armed hostilities can have 
on that process, 
1. Demands the immediate cessation of all hostilities and hostile acts with a 
view to establishing a durable cease-fire, as well as immediate withdrawal of all 
occupying forces from the Kalbajar district and other recently occupied areas of 
Azerbaijan; 
2. Urges the parties concerned immediately to resume negotiations for the 
resolution of the conflict within the framework of the peace process of the Minsk 
Group of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe and refrain from 
any action that will obstruct a peaceful solution of the problem", - said the 
resolution. 
However, this resolution was in fact not powerful enough to stimulate the 
achievement of peace in the region. First because the resolution of the UN Security 
Council was loaded with only general words and did not serve the purpose of 
giving any concrete assessment to the issue. On the other hand, the resolution did 
not reflect implementation mechanisms of the provisions contained in it. Though 
the document confirmed the fact that Azerbaijan territories have been invaded, it 
did not specify who had done it and stressed that ostensibly the "local Armenians" 
had achieved the military operations. This, surely, did not provide an opportunity 
to define the aggressive party and explain concrete ways for settlement of the 
conflict. 
On July 23, 1993, the Armenian armed units occupied Aghdam region of 
Azerbaijan. Let us note that this already proved that Armenia does not care at all 
about the resolution adopted by the UN Security Council. At the end of July, the 
UN Security Council held a meeting and adopted the Resolution 853 concerning 
the Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. This resolution also demands 
the withdrawal of all the occupying forces from all the occupied areas of 
Azerbaijan, including Aghdam. The resolution expressed once again its grave 
concern at the displacement of large number of civilians in the Azerbaijan 
Republic and demanded the parties concerned to achieve a ceasefire in order to 
stop the conflict. The Security Council reaffirmed once again the sovereignty and 
64 
 
territorial integrity of Azerbaijan Republic and all other states in the region and 
endorsed the continuing efforts by the Minsk Group of the CSCE to achieve a 
peaceful solution. Meanwhile, the document particularly noted the deterioration of 
the relations between Armenia and Azerbaijan and the fact that some territories of 
Azerbaijan have been occupied, and as well concerned that this situation endangers 
peace and security in the region. Though in general, Resolution 853 of the UN 
Security Council looks more objective for some features than Resolution 822, here 
the issue was not accurately assessed as well because the Security Council did not 
name the aggressor, and preferred only sufficing with the "local Armenians" 
phrase, while already everybody knew who the aggressor was. And now only one 
thing was left to do - to confirm this officially. However, the UN Security Council 
did not take this step. 
In August 1993 after Armenia intensified its military operations in order to 
occupy the Fizuli region of Azerbaijan, a new statement of the UN Security 
Council was spread. The statement confirmed the fact of the occupation of 
Azerbaijan territories, stressed that Nagorno-Karabakh is an integral part of 
Azerbaijan, and expressed serious concern at the tensions in the region. 
The document stated that UN Security Council supports the settlement of 
the issue within the framework of CSCE, and at the same time is sure of the 
necessity that the parties themselves should take appropriate measures in order to 
eliminate the conflict. "The Security Council expresses its serious concern at the 
deterioration of relations between the Republic of Armenia and the Azerbaijani 
Republic and at the tensions between them. The Council calls upon the 
Government of the Republic of Armenia to use its influence to achieve compliance 
by the Armenians of the Nagorno-Karabakh region of the Azerbaijani Republic 
with its resolutions 822 (1993) and 853 (1993)". 
The Council also expresses its deep concern at the recent intensification of 
fighting in the area of Fizuli. The Council condemns the attack on the Fizuli region 
from the Nagorno-Karabakh region of the Azerbaijani Republic, just as it has 
previously condemned the invasion and seizure of the districts of Kalbajar and 
Agdam of the Azerbaijani Republic. The Council demands a stop to all attacks and 
an immediate cessation of the hostilities and bombardments, which endanger peace 
and security in the region, and an immediate, complete and unconditional 
withdrawal of occupying forces from the area of Fizuli, and from the districts of 
Kalbajar and Agdam and other recently occupied areas of the Azerbaijani 
Republic. The Council calls upon the Government of the Republic of Armenia to 
use its unique influence to this end. 
"The Council reaffirms the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the 
Azerbaijani Republic and of all other States in the region and the inviolability of 
65 
 
their borders, and expresses its grave concern at the effect these hostilities have had 
on the efforts of the Minsk Group of the Conference on Security and Cooperation 
in Europe (CSCE) to achieve a peaceful solution to the conflict."
1
 
The Statement reflected as well the necessity of the conflict parties to accept 
the specified version of the "Timetable of Urgent Steps" to implement UN Security 
Council resolutions 822 and 853. However, this Statement did not differ much 
from the previous documents either because it did not confess the fact that 
Armenia is the aggressive party, and the conflict was characterized as a problem 
between the Armenians living in the Nagorno-Karabakh region of Azerbaijan and 
Azerbaijan. 
This indefinite attitude created a favorable condition for the expansion of 
Armenia's aggressive operations. Armenians made use of the fact that the 
international union did not display an objective reaction to the events, and they 
achieved new aggression acts by invading Azerbaijan territories. 
Thus, Fizuli and Jabrayil regions were occupied as well. Notwithstanding 
that an agreement on ceasefire was achieved in August 1993, Armenians did not 
obey this and invaded Gubadli as well. Azerbaijan had to turn to the UN Security 
Council once more. This appeal reflected that Azerbaijan does not agree with the 
"Renewed Timetable of Urgent Steps" prepared by the Minsk group. On October 
14, 1993 the UN Security Council once again put the Nagorno-Karabakh problem 
to discussion and adopted the Resolution 874. This Resolution backed the 
"Renewed Timetable of Urgent Steps" prepared by the Minsk group and stated that 
it is possible to regulate the conflict based on this plan. 
This Resolution did not differ from the previous ones for its essence either. 
It also expressed concern at tensions between Armenia and Azerbaijan, 
reinforcement of the military operations in the front region, the deaths of many 
people, and occupation of Azerbaijan territories. It supported the CSCE's efforts in 
the direction of the elimination of the conflict and confirmed once more the 
inviolability of states' territorial integrity. However, meanwhile, it again did not 
name the aggressor party and the party subject to aggression, and stressed that the 
conflict is characterized only as a problem between the Armenians of the Nagorno-
Karabakh region of Azerbaijan and Azerbaijan itself. On the other hand, 
interestingly, Resolution 874 stated nothing about the regions of Azerbaijan, which 
were occupied recently, while the previous resolutions contained concrete names 
of the occupied territories. 
                                                          
1 "The aggression of Armenia to Azerbaijan and international organizations". Baku, 1998, p.29. 
 
66 
 
In October 1993, Armenia's indifference to the documents adopted by the 
international organizations displayed itself even more openly. The Armenian 
armed forces occupied Zangilan region of Azerbaijan when the CSCE chairman 
was on a visit to the region. This was consequently a following event expressing 
the necessity of the international community's objective assessment to the conflict. 
On November 11, 1993, pursuant to an appeal by Azerbaijan, the UN 
Security Council put the situation linked with the continuation of the conflict again 
to discussion and adopted Resolution 884. The resolution expressed serious 
concern at the occupation of Zangilan region and the city of Horadiz of Azerbaijan 
and demanded withdrawal of the occupying forces from these territories. Naturally, 
this resolution was not implemented. Let us note that principally, the fore 
mentioned document again did not differ at all from the previous resolutions of the 
UN SC. None of these resolutions could reflect fully the requirements of the 
respective Charter of UN. The point is that for some reasons the documents 
adopted by the UN forgot about the significant principles of international law and 
did not determine any concrete mechanism for punishment of the aggressor. While 
this organization, which has certain experience in conflict settlement, had quite 
extensive opportunities to put an end to the aggressive policy, Armenia was 
working against Azerbaijan and the achievement of true and stable peace in the 
region. This has been reflected both in the principles of international law, which 
have been accepted unanimously by all the states, and in the UN Charter. Simply, a 
demonstration of resolute determination was needed in order to realize these 
principles, and it seems that this was not of great importance for the international 
community. Anyway, the appearance of scores of facts, which confirmed the 
existence of double standards in regard to this issue after the conflict started, gives 
ground to think like this. 
The case is that pursuant to the UN Charter, the SC is provided with 
extensive authority to solve disputed issues, as well as conflicts. Even if the 
Council's Resolutions do not bear an obligatory essence and are of a 
recommendation character, the SC has the right to make compulsory decisions in 
case the resolutions are not implemented and the issue carries a threat for 
international peace. However, we did not observe this in the example of the 
Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. While on the one hand the act of 
aggression against our nation prevented the calm and peaceful life of our people, 
on the other hand it created serious problems for the regional safety. 
The UN Charter notes as well that the territorial integrity of any state is 
inviolable, and those violating this principle act against the norms of international 
law. Armenia proved its disregard to international legal norms in front of the entire 
67 
 
world. It was possible to use real pressure mechanisms in order to prevent this. 
However, the international union demonstrated indifference as well on this issue. 
The essence of the idea of aggression has been reflected in the UN 
Resolution adopted in 1974. In accordance with the Resolution: 
1. Application of force by one state against the sovereignty, political 
independence, or territorial integrity of another state; 
2. Application of armed force firstly by one state contradicting the UN 
Charter; 
3. a) armed intervention or attack of one state to the territory of another 
state, or annexation of another country's territory as a result of any military 
occupation or intervention irrespective of its temporary character; b) bombing of 
one state's territories by the military forces of another state; c) dispatch of the 
armed forces, the hired, irregular military units by one state or on behalf of this 
state are considered act of aggression. 
The aggressive state bears direct responsibility before the UN Security 
Council for this or that form of the act of aggression. 
This provides the Security Council with the authority to take compulsory 
measures in case of an aggression. There are scores of facts confirming the 
aggressive policy of Armenia against Azerbaijan, and these facts provide a ground 
to say that the military operations the latter country has conducted against our 
republic are exactly the act of aggression in concordance with all the criteria. 
However, despite all of these, the UN Security Council did not want to make 
appropriate decisions in order to punish the aggressor and make it void its illegal 
actions.  
OSCE 
 
Azerbaijan became a member of this authoritative organization in 1992. 
That year on January 30, Azerbaijan, which was a member to the Conference for 
Security & Cooperation in Europe, signed the organization's documents at the 
CSCE summit on July 8 taking place in Helsinki. In February 1992, the first CSCE 
mission came to our republic to prepare a report regarding the Armenia-
Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. In February, the report of the mission was 
listened at the meeting of the organization's Committee of High-Ranking Persons 
(CHRP) taking place in Prague. The report confirmed the fact that Nagorno-
Karabakh is an Azerbaijan territory. The Committee stated as well the necessity of 
achieving the conflict's peaceful settlement. 
In March 1992, CSCE representatives paid a second visit to the region, this 
time a report was listened to as well at the CHRP meeting, and the Committee 
68 
 
again sufficed with an invitation of the parties to create a condition for the Peace 
Conference on Nagorno-Karabakh. 
On March 24, CSCE Council of Ministers for Foreign Affairs discussed the 
issue and adopted a decision about summoning of a Peace Conference on Nagorno-
Karabakh based on the CHRP guarantee in order to provide a peaceful settlement 
of the conflict. This laid the basis of the Minsk process. 
In December 1994, a following summit of the heads of states and 
governments, which were members of the CSCE, took place in Budapest. One of 
the most significant decisions adopted at the summit was the expansion of the 
organization's activity in the direction of the restoration of peace and safety in 
Europe. Another of the most important events of the summit was that the 
organization was named the Organization for Security & Cooperation in Europe 
from January 1, 1995 in order to renew the CSCE structurally and expand its 
activity. 
Participants of the summit discussed the Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-
Karabakh conflict and agreed that the appropriate provision be added to the 
documents regarding this issue. The provision was called "Intensification of CSCE 
action in relation to the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict". This provision applauded the 
achievement of armistice between the parties and entrusted the acting chairman of 
CSCE to appoint the co-chairmen of the Minsk Conference. The first clause of the 
document says: "Deploring the continuation of the conflict and the human tragedy 
involved, the participating States welcomed the confirmation by the parties to the 
conflict of the cease-fire agreed on 12 May 1994 through the mediation of the 
Russian Federation in co-operation with the CSCE Minsk Group. They confirmed 
their commitment to the relevant resolutions of the United Nations Security 
Council and welcomed the political support given by the Security Council to the 
CSCE's efforts towards a peaceful settlement of the conflict. To this end they 
called on the parties to the conflict to enter into intensified substantive talks, 
including direct contacts. In this context, they pledged to redouble the efforts and 
assistance by the CSCE. They strongly endorsed the mediation efforts of the CSCE 
Minsk Group and expressed appreciation for the crucial contribution of the Russian 
Federation and the efforts by other individual members of the Minsk Group. They 
agreed to harmonize these into a single co-coordinated effort within the framework 
of the CSCE."
1
 
The document reflected as well the necessity of sending peaceful forces for 
the settlement of the conflict: "They declared their political will to provide, with an 
                                                          
1 www.osce.ru 
 
69 
 
appropriate resolution from the United Nations Security Council, a multinational 
CSCE peacekeeping force following agreement among the parties for cessation of 
the armed conflict. They requested the Chairman-in-Office to develop as soon as 
possible a plan for the establishment, composition and operations of such a force, 
organized on the basis of Chapter III of the Helsinki Document 1992 and in a 
manner fully consistent with the Charter of the United Nations. To this end the 
Chairman-in-Office will be assisted by the co-chairmen of the Minsk Conference 
and by the Minsk Group, and be supported by the Secretary General; after 
appropriate consultations he will also establish a Committee of High-Ranking 
Persons in Vienna to make recommendations on, inter alia, the size and 
characteristics of the force, command and control, logistics, allocation of units and 
resources, rules of engagement and arrangements with contributing States. He will 
seek the support of the United Nations on the basis of the stated United Nations 
readiness to provide technical advice and expertise. He will also seek continuing 
political support from the United Nations Security Council for the possible 
deployment of a CSCE peacekeeping force". This was actually a step made against 
Russia's efforts to place the peaceful forces organized from the Russian Army in 
the region. 
The CSCE summit recommended the Minsk Conference to increase efforts 
with the help of the Minsk group in acting appropriately for continuation of the 
existing armistice and signature of the peace agreement. After signature of the 
peace agreement here, it was intended to dispatch multinational peaceful forces to 
the conflict region. 
One of the major outcomes of the Budapest summit was the creation of the 
co-chairmanship institution in the Minsk group. The decision on the arrangement 
of the peaceful forces from military forces of different states prevented Russia's 
intention to solve the issue alone. Let us note that at that time official Moscow was 
trying hard to have the peaceful forces consisting of exclusively the Russian Army. 
In December 1996, three important documents (Lisbon Summit Statement 
of the OSCE countries, the Statement on the General and Comprehensive Security 
Model for the Europe of XXI century, and the document about parameters of the 
restriction process of common armed forces in Europe and their scope of cover) 
were to be adopted at the summit of the heads of states and governments-members 
of the OSCE taking place in Lisbon. However, one of the provisions reflected in 
the summit's statement, the 20th Article comprising the principles of settlement of 
the Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, caused rejection by the 
Armenian side. Armenia vetoed that article. Azerbaijan President Heydar Aliyev 
expressed his decisive rejection to the withdrawal of that article from the text of the 
statement and said he would veto all the documents of the summit. The conducted 
70 
 
negotiations could not oblige the Azerbaijan President to change his position, and 
our country made use of the right of not giving consensus and vetoed all the 
documents of the summit.
1
 This meant that the Lisbon summit would finish 
ineffectively. 
Article 20 showed that the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict could be settled on 
the basis of three principles: 
- territorial integrity of the Republic of Armenia and the Azerbaijan 
Republic; 
- legal status of Nagorno-Karabakh defined in an agreement based on self-
determination which confers on Nagorno-Karabakh the highest degree of self-rule 
within Azerbaijan; 
- guaranteed security for Nagorno-Karabakh and its whole population, 
including mutual obligations to ensure compliance by all the Parties with the 
provisions of the settlement. 
The mentioned principles were accepted as the formula of the conflict's 
settlement at the Helsinki meeting of the OSCE Minsk group in November 1996 
and in February the same year. The acting chairman of OSCE Flavia Kotty had put 
forward almost the same draft. 
Notwithstanding all the obstacles and difficulties, the Azerbaijan President 
adhered to his principles up to the last point and reasoned his position with quite 
serious arguments at the meetings with the heads of many countries. After long and 
tense discussions, a consensus was achieved that all the principles reflected in 
Article 20 were confirmed by a special statement of the acting chairman of OSCE. 
The statement said: "Co-chairmen of the Minsk group have defined 3 principles to 
be a part of the settlement of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. These principles are 
supported by all member States of the Minsk group. They are: 
- territorial integrity of the Republic of Armenia and the Azerbaijan 
Republic; 
- legal status of Nagorno-Karabakh defined in an agreement based on self-
determination which confers on Nagorno-Karabakh the highest degree of self-rule 
within Azerbaijan; 
- guaranteed security for Nagorno-Karabakh and its whole population, 
including mutual obligations to ensure compliance by all the Parties with the 
provisions of the settlement. 
It was a very important accomplishment achieved by our country on the 
diplomatic plane. First of all, Azerbaijan had succeeded to direct the attention of 
                                                          
1 "Lisbon sammit-96". Baku, 1997, p.96. 
 
71 
 
the whole world to the Karabakh conflict, and this was a very significant matter. 
The world's attitude towards the problem had not been formed based on objective 
information and at the Lisbon summit in just one day Azerbaijan managed to 
change the results of the long-term propagandist campaign conducted by Armenia 
and the Armenian lobby. 
On the other hand, Armenia once again demonstrated that it runs an 
invasive policy and acts contrary to the principles of international law, which have 
been accepted by the whole world. At the same time, all the members of OSCE, 
except Armenia, confirmed that the conflict's settlement is possible only with the 
conditions that the territorial integrity of Azerbaijan is maintained, Nagorno-
Karabakh remains as part of Azerbaijan, and the security of all the population of 
Nagorno-Karabakh (including the Azerbaijanis living in the region) is provided. 
Armenia was confronted with an attack by the international union for the first time 
exactly at this summit and was isolated. Finally, a legal basis was determined at the 
Lisbon summit, which provided for the national interests of Azerbaijan and was 
accepted by the international union for the further stage of the negotiations process 
regarding the settlement of the conflict. 
In 1999, at the Istanbul summit of OSCE, Azerbaijan made important steps 
in order to state its fair position to the world. The efficient negotiations conducted 
by President Heydar Aliyev at the Istanbul summit once more demonstrated the 
non-constructive position of Armenia. 
Official Yerevan was in fact trying by all means to delay the process of 
signing the peace agreement. While before the summit, many international 
observers, including the participants of the summit, had great hopes for signing the 
peace agreement. Articles 20 and 21 of the Declaration adopted at the Istanbul 
summit were fully dedicated to the Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh 
conflict, and stated decisively the necessity of continuing the peace process. 
While the OSCE as an organization serving to maintain peace and the 
expansion of interstate cooperation in Europe has been fulfilling its mediation 
mission up to date in the settlement of the Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh 
conflict, it has failed to take any concrete step. Even if the absence of concrete 
mechanisms in the organization for speeding up the settlement of the conflict play 
a certain role here, it should be confessed that the OSCE has opportunities to 
display certain pressure to the aggressive state and attract the world community to 
this process. OSCE has defined 10 security principles arising from the international 
law, which have all been violated by Armenia. Those principles are the following: 
1. Respect to sovereignty; 
2. Non-application of armed forces; 
3. Inviolability of the borders; 
72 
 
4. Territorial integrity of the states; 
5. Peaceful settlement of the conflicts; 
6. Non-intervention in each-other's internal affairs; 
7. Respect of human rights and freedoms; 
8. Respect of equality of the nations and the nations' right to self-
determination; 
9. Cooperation among the states; 
10. Fair fulfillment of the liabilities on international law.1 
Armenia has displayed that it does not take into account any of these 
principles by running an aggressive policy against Azerbaijan. It has encroached 
upon the sovereignty of Azerbaijan (the 1st principle); used armed forces against 
our country and our people (2nd principle); violated our borders (3rd principle); 
repeatedly demonstrated non-recognition of our territorial integrity at international 
events and confirmed this once more with its aggressive actions (4th principle); 
interfered with internal affairs of Azerbaijan, this is reflected in the processes, 
which started exactly with the instigation of the Armenian government in Nagorno-
Karabakh (6th principle); violated the rights of approximately one million refugees 
and internally displaced persons (7th principle); proved in deed that it does not 
respect the idea of equality of the nations and that it regards Azerbaijanis, as well 
as all the Turks as enemy (8th principle); incited unprecedented atrocity against our 
people making the self-determination of the Armenian nation a pretext, knowing 
that this nation has once determined its own destiny creating its own state (9th 
principle); does not fulfill any liability before the international law (10th principle). 
 
THE ORGANIZATION OF ISLAMIC CONFERENCE (OIC) 
 
The Organization of Islamic Conference has been the first organization to 
acknowledge the fact of aggression by Armenia against Azerbaijan. The 
organization's summits have always kept the problem of Nagorno-Karabakh in the 
focus of attention and accepted quite clear statements requiring observance of the 
norms of international law. The first resolution regarding the Armenia-Azerbaijan, 
Nagorno-Karabakh conflict was adopted at the organization's 21st conference of 
foreign ministers taking place in Karachi (Pakistan). The resolution decisively 
declaims Armenia's attacks against Azerbaijan and its occupation of our territories. 
The document stated the magnitude and severity of humanitarian problems 
resulting from Armenian aggression against the Republic of Azerbaijan which 
                                                          
1  "International organizations of Europe", Baku, 1999, p.43. 
 
73 
 
posed a threat to international peace, and security and demands the immediate 
withdrawal of Armenian armed forces from all occupied Azerbaijani territories. 
Moreover, the resolution urges Armenia to respect the territorial integrity and 
sovereignty of the Republic of Azerbaijan. The resolution calls for a just and 
peaceful settlement of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict on the basis of respect for 
the principles of territorial integrity of states and inviolability internationally 
recognized frontiers. 
The document states: "Proceeding from the principles and objectives of the 
Charter of the Organization of the Islamic Conference; 
Gravely concerned over the serious escalation of the conflict between 
Armenia and Azerbaijan over the Karabakh issue; 
Strongly condemning the recent Armenian offensive against Azerbaijan and 
the occupation of Azerbaijan territory; 
Deeply distressed by the magnitude and severity of humanitarian problems 
resulting from Armenian aggression against the Republic of Azerbaijan; 
Recalling the principled position taken by the Fifth Extraordinary Session of 
the Islamic Conference of Foreign Ministers, held in Istanbul in June 1992 on this 
issue; 
Also recalling the relevant paragraphs of the Final Communique adopted by 
the OIC Coordination Meeting of the Foreign Ministers at the United Nations, New 
York, on 23 September, 1992; 
Noting the efforts made by the neighboring countries and regional states 
notably the Islamic Republic of Iran and the Republic of Turkey to promote a 
peaceful settlement of the Karabakh issue; 
Conscious of the threat posed to international peace and security by this 
latest Armenian aggression; 
Aware of the disruptive effect that this new military offensive can have on 
the peace process being pursued within the framework of the CSCE; 
Noting with appreciation the Report of the Secretary General on this subject 
(Document No.ICFM/21-93/PIL/D.6/ Rev.I); 
Strongly condemns the Armenian aggression against the Republic of 
Azerbaijan. 
Demands the immediate withdrawal of Armenian forces from all occupied 
Azerbaijan territories and strongly urges Armenia to respect the sovereignty and 
territorial integrity of the Republic of Azerbaijan. 
74 
 
Calls for a just and peaceful settlement of the Karabakh issue on the basis of 
respect for the principles of territorial integrity of states and inviolability of 
internationally recognized frontiers."
1
 
At the same time, the Organization of Islamic Conference reaffirms its total 
solidarity and support for the efforts being made by the Government and people of 
Azerbaijan to defend their country. 
This document also calls for enabling the forcibly displaced persons to 
return to their homes in safety, honour and dignity, as well as requests the Member 
States, and the Islamic Development Bank and other Islamic institutions to provide 
urgent financial and humanitarian assistance to the Republic of Azerbaijan. The 
Organization requested the UN Secretary General and the president of the Security 
Council to use their full authority for the adoption a resolution condemning the 
Armenian aggression and demanding immediate withdrawal of the Armenian 
military formations from all the occupied territories of Azerbaijan. 
One more resolution concerning Nagorno-Karabakh was adopted in 
December 1994, at the next, Seventh Islamic Summit held in Casablanca, Kingdom 
of Morocco. The resolution says: "Proceeding from the principals and objectives of 
the Charter of the Organizations of Islamic Conference gravely concerned over the 
serious escalation of aggression by the Republic of Armenia against the Azerbaijan 
Republic which has resulted in the occupation of more than 20% of Azerbaijan 
territory. Deeply distressed over the plight of more than one million Azerbaijan 
displaced persons and refugees resulting from Armenian aggression and magnitude 
and severity of humanitarian problems." This resolution did not differ much from 
the previous one in principle. The mentioned document considers the actions 
perpetrated against civilian Azerbaijani population in occupied territories and as 
crimes against humanity and strongly demands immediate and unconditional 
withdrawal of the Armenian military units from Lachin and Shusha regions of 
Azerbaijan, as well as strongly urges Armenia to respect the territorial integrity and 
sovereignty of Azerbaijan. The last article of the resolution asked the UN Secretary 
General to control the strict implementation of the United Nations Security Council 
resolutions 822, 853, 874, 884. 
In 1997, one more resolution was adopted in Jakarta (Indonesia), at the 
following conference of OIC Foreign Ministers. In comparison to the previous 
ones, this resolution was of a more concrete character. First, the resolution's title 
was chosen properly: "On the aggression of the Republic of Armenia against the 
Republic of Azerbaijan." Let us remember that the previous resolutions were titled 
                                                          
1 "The aggression of Armenia to Azerbaijan and international organizations". Baku, 1998, p.98. 
 
75 
 
simply like: "On the conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan". The title of the 
resolution adopted in Jakarta expressed the fact of Armenia's aggression against 
Azerbaijan in a concrete and open form. This document condemned the aggressive 
policy of Armenia and demanded immediate, unconditional and complete 
withdrawal of Armenian forces from all occupied Azerbaijani territories. The 
document expressed concern over the severity of the humanitarian problems 
concerning the existence of one million displaced persons and refugees in the 
territory of Azerbaijan, and requested the international community to render the 
urgent financial assistance for the settlement of this problem emerging in the 
republic. 
In the periods thereafter, OIC adhered to its principle position at meetings 
of different levels, summits, as well as conferences of foreign ministers and stated 
the fact that Armenia has occupied Azerbaijan territories. In 2004, new articles 
have been added to the OIC resolution at the suggestion of Azerbaijan concerning 
the Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. 
 
EUROPEAN UNION 
 
The history of the cooperation between the European Union and Azerbaijan 
begins from 1993. Relations between this international organization and our 
country were built exactly that year in February. On April 7, 1993 the EU made a 
statement concerning the Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. In that 
statement, the Community and its member states expressed their concern over the 
deepening of the conflict and their sadness over the expansion of the operation in 
the Kalbajar and Fizuli regions. However, this statement did not express any 
concrete attitude regarding the fact that Armenia has occupied territories of our 
republic, and did not state any idea about the true reasons of the conflict. The EU 
was trying to approach the issue from a more neutral position and not confess 
whom the aggressor is. 
In September of that year, new operations of the Armenian occupational 
forces in the border region forced the organization to issue one more statement. 
This document condemned the military attacks against Azerbaijan and expressed 
concern over the greatly increased number of refugees. The EU supported the 
efforts of the CSCE Minsk group in the direction of the achievement of peace in 
the region, and called the parties concerned to create favorable conditions for the 
realization of this process. The organization required parties concerned to respect 
the UN resolutions and marked the necessity of the withdrawal of troops from the 
Kalbajar, Aghdam, Fizuli and Jabrayil regions. In addition, the statement required 
76 
 
Armenia not to render assistance to the local Armenian forces, which have attacked 
the Azerbaijan territories. 
However, this document contained many defective points because it was the 
Armenian army, and not the local Armenian forces carrying out military operations 
in Azerbaijan. 
"The Community and its member states fully support the efforts being made 
by the Minsk group within the framework of the CSCE to consolidate the 
provisions on ceasefire. (On August 31, 1993 an agreement reached between 
authoritative bodies of Nagorno-Karabakh and the Azerbaijan government 
regarding this). They urge the parties concerned to embark on any form of 
additional dialogue, which would make it possible to implement the timetable on 
which there was agreement in principal by all parties. The Community and its 
member States also hope to see local Armenian forces in Nagorno-Karabakh fully 
respect United Nations Security Council Resolutions 822 and 853, and withdraw 
from the regions of Kalbajar, Agdam, Fizuli and Jabrail. The Community and its 
member States have no evidence that Azerbaijan would be capable of initiating 
major attacks from these regions. 
The Community and its member States call on the Government of the 
Republic of Armenia to use its decisive influence over the Armenians of Nagorno-
Karabakh to see that they comply with Security Council Resolutions 822 and 853 
and the proposals of the CSCE Minsk Group. The Community and its member 
States call upon Armenia to ensure that the local Armenian forces carrying out 
offensives - in Azerbaijan territory are not given the material means of further 
extending such offensives", says the document. 
One can see that the document contains no exact information about the 
conflict's essence. At the same time, the EU did not show who the aggressive was. 
In general, the European Union's position proved once more it is not 
interested in the conflict and did not display a serious trend to express its decisive 
position concerning this process because, settlement of the conflict is not included 
in the EU's activity strategy. At the same time, it should be taken into account that 
initially the organization displayed very little interest in the Southern Caucasus and 
the process going on here in general. Since the EU has been the means of a pure 
economic union, it always tries to demonstrate a careful position regarding political 
issues, as well as conflicts.
1
 
Despite this, one of the main events expressing the EU's position 
concerning the Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict took place in 
                                                          
1 Azerbaijan" newspaper, June 23, 2004. 
 
77 
 
2003. For the settlement of the conflict, the organization suggested the return of 5 
occupied regions of Azerbaijan instead of the opening of communication lines. 
This proposal was the object of discussions for a long time and maintains its 
topicality as well today. The EU's intention both to develop relations with the 
region and to take an active part in the settlement of the Armenia-Azerbaijan, 
Nagorno-Karabakh conflict has become quite a serious matter. This once more 
displays that the peace process has been viewed in a wider plane, and the problem 
worries the international community. 
In 2004, the meeting of the Azerbaijan President Ilham Aliyev with the 
chairman of the European Committee Roman Prodi, during our president's official 
visit to Belgium, conducted discussions on the possibility of expanding the 
cooperation between our country and the EU, as well as this organization's 
stimulation of the settlement of the Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh 
conflict. 
The general result of the meeting was that the EU is interested in achieving 
peace between Armenia and Azerbaijan, taking into account all the principles of 
international law, and is ready to take concrete steps for this. The meeting of the 
Azerbaijan President with the General Secretary of the Council of the European 
Union Khavier Solana mentioned this issue comprehensively as well. 
All of these events show once more that despite separate states adopting 
different documents, resolutions, and statements' concerning the aggressive policy 
of Armenia against Azerbaijan, the aggressive state does not yet retreat from its 
positions. This can be assessed because of the unwillingness of the international 
community to punish the aggressor the way it deserves. There is only one way of 
settling the Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict and this is to achieve 
as well this country's observance of the principles of international law, which have 
been accepted by everybody. 
 
2. NEGOTIATIONS PROCESS ON THE SETTLEMENT OF THE 
CONFLICT AND OSCE'S MEDIATION MISSION 
 
The Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict has been one of the 
main issues which the OSCE has kept in the focus of its attention since 1992. This 
organization has undertaken the mission of mediation in the conflict's settlement 
process and has taken many significant steps for achieving certain progress in this 
direction. However, so far the OSCE has failed to achieve concrete results for the 
settlement of the conflict. 
On March 24, 1992, the CSCE Council of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs 
discussed the situation which had emerged in the Nagorno-Karabakh region. It 
78 
 
adopted a decision to summon the Peace Conference on Nagorno-Karabakh, basing 
it on the guarantee of the Committee of High-Ranking Persons, in order to provide 
a peaceful settlement of the conflict. It was intended that the Conference would be 
attended by representatives of the USA, Turkey, France, Germany, Italy, Czech-
Slovakia, Byelorussia, Sweden, Azerbaijan and Armenia. 
In May 1992, the CSCE Committee of High-Ranking Persons adopted a 
decision defining the organization of the conference and the conditions of the 
meeting, as well as the powers of the chairman. The Minsk group was created for 
holding the Minsk Conference which will be involved in conflict-settlement, and 
finally a final document was to be adopted in the capital of Byelorussia. This time 
the Armenian party put forward a proposal demanding the participation of the 
Nagorno-Karabakh Armenians at the conference as an individual party, but the 
Azerbaijan party did not agree with this, stating the possibility that the Nagorno-
Karabakh Armenians could join the conference only within the Azerbaijan 
delegation. 
In May 1992, a meeting of the CSCE Committee of High-Ranking Persons 
took place in Helsinki, and here representatives of Azerbaijan, Turkey and 
Armenia made their statements.  Though  Azerbaijan  required punishment of the 
aggressor and the cessation of Armenia's aggressive operations, the position of the 
opposite party displayed that it was not going to take such a step. 
In May, the Armenians expanded their military operations and invaded 
Shusha and Lachin as well. 
On June 1, 1992, the first stage of the negotiations process started in Rome 
with mediation by the Minsk group. This meeting-taking place with the 
participation of representatives of the USA, Turkey, France, Germany, Italy, Czech 
Republic, Slovakia, Byelorussia, Sweden, Azerbaijan and Armenia-aimed at 
preparation for the Minsk Conference scheduled in late June.
1
 The Armenian side 
insisted on including the Nagorno-Karabakh Armenians in the meeting as well. In 
such a case, the Azerbaijan side put forward a proposal demanding the 
participation of the Azeri community of the Nagorno-Karabakh at the meeting as 
well. After that, representatives of the separatist regime in Nagorno-Karabakh 
refused to come to Rome. They stated that they wanted to take part in the 
negotiations as an independent party, and this once more displayed that Armenians 
are not ready for peace. However, despite this, the meeting took place, and the 
adopted documents reflected articles concerning the withdrawal of the troops from 
                                                          
1  "Respublika" newspaper, August 30, 2000. 
 
79 
 
Lachin and Shusha, and the provision for the return of the refugees to their native 
lands. 
On June 15, the second stage of the negotiations started in Rome. At that 
meeting, the Armenians put forward the requirement that Turkey should be 
removed from the negotiations. At the same time, they proposed that provisions 
concerning the military operations conducted by Azerbaijan in Goranboy and 
Aghdere should be added to the documents as well. This proposal confronted 
protest from the Azerbaijan side, and the negotiations did not achieve anything. 
The meeting adopted an appeal to both sides to stop the gunfire within a period of 
60 days. Armenia did not obey this appeal as well. 
In August, the chairman of the Minsk Conference Mario Rafaelli paid a 
visit to the region with a proposal about armistice. The proposal was presented to 
both sides, and Azerbaijan stated that it would accept the proposals. In accordance 
with that proposal, the sides were to agree immediately to stop the gunfire and after 
that, the first group of observers was to be placed on the front line. 
On August 27, representatives of Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan and Armenia 
made a joint statement. They stated that they approve the proposal of the CSCE 
Minsk Conference. On September 3, Yerevan signed the protocol. This agreement 
called on the implementation of the provisions of the proposal about a ceasefire. 
In September, negotiations between Azerbaijan and Armenia concerning the 
regulation of the conflict started in Almaty. However, no result was achieved here 
as well. Armenia rejected the draft statement prepared jointly by Azerbaijan and 
Kazakhstan. 
After that, John Mareska, who was representing the USA in the CSCE 
Minsk group made a new proposal putting forward the idea of restoring the 
negotiations for the Minsk Conference to start with participation of the USA, 
Turkey, Russia, Azerbaijan and Armenia. In accordance with this proposal, 
representatives of the five mentioned countries were to gather in Geneva and start 
negotiations in order to achieve a certain result. After that, certain initial 
agreements became possible. That is, some principles concerning the Minsk 
Conference were defined, the agreement was achieved about a ceasefire in 
December and January, and it was decided to send observers to the front area. 
However, despite all these, it was impossible to continue the progress toward the 
aimed-at achievement of peace due to an expansion of operations by Armenia. 
In 1993, a next meeting took place with the participation of the member 
state of the Minsk group regarding the settlement of the conflict. Here the sides 
coordinated the dispatch of observers lo the front area. Though the negotiations 
passed in a very strained way, the agreement was signed between Armenia and 
Azerbaijan. The meeting adopt 
80 
 
ed the decision that the Minsk group would conduct a meeting in April in 
order to sign the agreement on the periods of ceasefire, the start of work by the 
CSCE observers, as well as on the documents of peace negotiations. The 
agreement signed by the sides was to be discussed at the CSCE CHRP meeting and 
confirmed. However, none of these meant at all that a general agreement has yet 
been achieved between the sides concerning the conflict because the agreement on 
the ceasefire and the opening of the Minsk Conference still remained has not been 
reached. 
Following this meeting, there appeared great hopes that the regulation 
process would receive a progressive character. However, in April, occupation of 
the Kalbajar region of Azerbaijan by the armed forces of Armenia brought to 
naught the hopes arisen for achievement of peace. Azerbaijan again turned to the 
world states and international organizations and asked them to assess the 
aggressive policy of Armenia. 
In late April 1993, a CSCE CHRP meeting took place in Prague and 
discussed the occupation of the Kalbajar region. In spite of the fact that a draft 
document condemning the aggressive actions of Armenia and demanding 
withdrawal of the military forces from Kalbajar was worked out, it was not 
adopted; in the CSCE all the documents were adopted through consensus, but 
Armenia did not vote for the document. At this time, the UN Security Council had 
already adopted Resolution 822 expressing its attitude toward the issue. 
In June, the next meeting of the members of the Minsk group was held. 
During this meeting, one more draft document on the settlement of the Armenia-
Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict was prepared. The document intended to 
implement the UN Security Council's Resolution 822. In addition, members of the 
Minsk group adopted a plan named "Timetable of the Urgent Steps" and presented 
it to the sides.
1
 During the meeting, members and the chairman of the Minsk group 
made an appeal about unconditional acceptance of that plan. The "Timetable of the 
Urgent Steps" was to be signed shortly (by June 11) by the Armenian and 
Azerbaijan sides. It demanded as well the withdrawal of the Armenian armed 
forces from the territory of Kalbajar from June 15. Five days were given for 
withdrawal of the troops. At the end of June members of the Minsk group were to 
start consultations and prepare a plan on placement of the observation missions and 
the opening of the Minsk Conference. Azerbaijan immediately stated its agreement 
with this schedule. Armenia once again displayed its non-constructive position and 
asked that the fulfillment period of the schedule be delayed for one month. They 
explained that this proposal with ostensibly the "Timetable of the Urgent Steps" 
                                                          
1 "President 93-97", Baku, 1998. 
81 
 
would cause concern in Nagorno-Karabakh. In fact, the Armenians wanted to 
impede the constructive advance of the negotiations by this pretext and thus, create 
an artificial stimulus for expansion of the military operations. Some time after the 
negotiations, occupation of the Aghdam and Aghdere regions of Azerbaijan by 
Armenia proved this once more. 
On August 9, 1993, the CSCE Minsk group began consultations with the 
sides to the conflict and discussed the "Timetable of the Urgent Steps" once again. 
After the rejections of Armenia to some plans intended in the document, a new 
version of the document was compiled. This was presented as the specified version 
of the "Timetable of the Urgent Steps". In fact, the new version was built in full 
accordance with Armenia's claims and proposals. That is, it meant location of 
CSCE observers in the territory of Azerbaijan, and showed that a distance of only 
10 kilometers would be kept under control. Azerbaijan expressed its decisive 
rejection to this document, and brought to the attention of the Minsk group 
members that it would not accept it. 
Following that, Armenia made use of the facts that CSCE did not apply any 
real mechanisms for the settlement of the conflict and that the international 
community remained indifferent, and they invaded the Gubadli, Jabrayil and Fizuli 
regions of Azerbaijan as well. 
In September, members of the CSCE Minsk group met in Paris, and here 
again a new version of the "Timetable of the Urgent Steps" was presented to the 
sides. However, this project also did not take into account Azerbaijan's proposals. 
It put forward conditions for withdrawal of the Armenian armed forces from the 
occupied territories of Azerbaijan and this violated the significant principles of 
international law. The Azerbaijan side stated that it was impossible to accept such a 
document and resolutely rejected signing it. The UN Security Council discussed 
the document and stated its approval of the document and that it is possible to 
regulate the conflict in the region based on this plan. This was clearly reflected in 
the UN Security Council's Resolution 874. 
In October, during the visit of the CSCE chairman Margarita af Uglas to the 
conflict area, Armenia occupied the Zangilan region as well. This expressed clearly 
that Armenia does not care at all about the response of international organizations, 
and it is indifferent to the adopted decisions and resolutions. 
In November 1993, the Vienna meeting of the CSCE member states adopted 
a statement regarding the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. The document assessed the 
continuation of the military operations, the fact of occupation of new territories as 
a step contradicting the principles of international law, and marked the necessity of 
the withdrawal of the occupying forces from the Horadiz and Zangilan regions. 
The statement reflected summoning the CSCE Minsk Conference, and the 
82 
 
withdrawal of the military forces from the territories occupied before that, as well 
as a ceasefire. At this meeting, the "Renewed Timetable of the Urgent Steps" was 
again presented to the sides of the conflict. Nevertheless, this document differed 
not much from the "Paris Timetable" that Azerbaijan had not accepted. The 
"Timetable of the Urgent Steps" presented the separatist regime in Nagorno-
Karabakh as an independent side and did not demand withdrawal of the occupying 
forces from Shusha and Lachin. Therefore, Azerbaijan did not agree to accept this 
plan. 
Since 1994, Russia started to play a more active role in the settlement of the 
conflict. On February 8, the draft agreement "About putting an end to the armed 
conflict and elimination of its effects" prepared by Russia was presented to the 
sides. 
This document contained some positive and negative features. The positive 
feature was that the draft document indicated unconditional implementation of the 
UN Resolutions. In addition, Russia proposed that the legal status of Nagorno-
Karabakh was defined in the form agreed later. At the initial stage, the gunfire 
needed to cease and the Armenian troops were to be withdrawn from the occupied 
territories. This meant that Armenia releases the other occupied regions in not 
belonging to the Nagorno-Karabakh region of Azerbaijan, and only after that the 
status of the Nagorno-Karabakh was to be brought to the discussion. Naturally, 
such a situation was in favor of Azerbaijan, at least from the point of view that it 
created a condition for non-military return of a part of the occupied territories. 
However, the document did not mention anything about Shusha and Lachin. Russia 
proposed to determine Lachin's destiny at the same time with the creation of a safe 
road between Armenia and Nagorno-Karabakh under international control, which 
on the one hand did not seem real at that time, and on the other hand, Russia meant 
that the forces to control the corridor were exactly Russian soldiers. The draft also 
indicated the separatist regime in the Nagorno-Karabakh as an independent side. 
The plan proposed by Russia was not admitted. 
In April, during the meeting of the CSCE Minsk group in Prague a new plan 
"About Measures for Strengthening the Trust" was put forward. Some parts of this 
plan coincided with the proposals of Russia. The plan indicated that Azerbaijan 
should undertake the liability of opening all the communication lines with Armenia 
during the course of the negotiations process. 
In May 1994, one more meeting took place in the city of Bishkek regarding 
settlement of the conflict at the initiative of the CIS Inter-parliamentary Assembly. 
A final document was adopted as well here, but Azerbaijan did not sign that 
document because it provided the Armenian community in Nagorno-Karabakh 
83 
 
with the authority to sign the document as an independent side and did not provide 
such a right for the Azeri community. 
Finally, after long negotiations and discussions, on May 12, 1994, the 
ceasefire treaty was signed between Azerbaijan and Armenia. Let us remember that 
it retained the first serious and important step towards peace between the sides to 
the conflict since the start of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. 
The negotiation process kept on as well after the achievement of ceasefire. 
The CSCE fulfilled its mediation mission at the negotiations as before and called 
for the achievement of an agreement that would lead to standing peace between the 
sides. True, some objective and subjective defects appeared in this process; in 
many cases, the factor of double standards displayed itself, unfair points were 
reflected in the CSCE documents and proposals. Nevertheless, with all of these, it 
should be noted that CSCE has been the only international organization, which was 
intensively engaged in the conflict's settlement and demonstrated true activity for 
the accomplishment of real results. The efforts of the Minsk group must be pointed 
out particularly in this aspect. Though the activity of this organization has not 
finished in a real peace yet, it should be confessed that the CSCE's activity has 
played a matchless role in keeping the Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh 
conflict in the focus of attention of the international community. 
Let us note that controversies between CSCE and Russia appeared in the 
course of the negotiations process and sometimes this factor rendered its negative 
affect on the achievement of peace. CSCE, which was representing directly the 
interests of West and trying to look a bit more neutral in comparison to Russia, did 
not want positions of Moscow to strengthen in the Southern Caucasus. In addition, 
naturally, Russia had a completely different position and tried to put forward a 
settlement model that would correspond to its own interests. At the time when 
certain compromises were achieved in the course of the negotiations, 
intensification of the Armenian operations in the front line appeared, due precisely 
to these controversies. 
In July 1994, the draft "Big Political Agreement" prepared by Russia was 
presented for discussion at the meeting of the CSCE Minsk group in Vienna. This 
draft was to be presented to the sides after some proposals and additions of CSCE. 
After long discussions, it appeared that CSCE and Russia had failed to reach a 
common position on the draft. Let us note that here it was intended to coordinate 
the "Timetable of the Urgent Steps" proposed by the Minsk group with the draft 
put forward by Russia. The main difference between the documents was that 
Russia intended to control fully the regulation process. 
The CSCE supported multilateral mediation. Russia, as before, backed the 
idea that the peaceful forces would be the Russian army, while the CSCE - the 
84 
 
multinational forces. Finally, in October 1994, the CSCE adopted a resolution 
demanded that the peaceful forces must contain multinational forces.
1
 Russia 
accepted this with a serious protest. Thus, the proposal on dispatch of multinational 
forces to the conflict region was presented to the sides' discussion by the decision 
of the CSCE Minsk group. Armenia did not agree with this proposal. 
In December 1994, the next summit of member states to CSCE took place 
in Budapest. The documents adopted here contained a special provision regarding 
the Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. The Budapest summit made 
a decision about renaming the CSCE as OSCE from January 1995.
2
 
In February 1995, the ad hoc representative of the USA for Nagorno-
Karabakh Joseph Pressel visited the conflict region. However, this visit of his met 
with a serious dissatisfaction in Azerbaijan. That is, by calling Azerbaijan to 
compromise, to withdraw its claims J.Pressel showed that in fact he backed the 
positions of Armenia. This, naturally, was not a position that would help to settle 
the conflict; on the contrary, it was a position that delayed the peace process. 
In 1995, negotiations again started in Moscow at the initiative of Russia. It 
was intended that the separatist regime in Nagorno-Karabakh would as well take 
part in these negotiations as an independent side. In this case, Azerbaijan suggested 
participation of the Azeri community of Nagorno-Karabakh in the process. In the 
course of the negotiations, Armenia made a new proposal that the peace agreement 
was to be signed following the dispatch of the peaceful forces to the conflict 
region. Armenians were against the idea that Turkish forces were as well among 
the peaceful forces, wanted the issue of the release of Shusha and Lachin to be 
considered after determination of the Nagorno-Karabakh status, and required that 
Lachin be also under the control of Armenian troops. The Azerbaijan side did not 
accept any of these proposals. 
In 1995, the next meeting of the OSCE Minsk group was held in 
Stockholm. The statement adopted here expressed OSCE Minsk group's approval 
of the maintenance of the ceasefire regime, called on the parties concerned to avoid 
restarting military operations, demanded eliminating unconditionally of the 
consequences of the conflict, and recommended the continuation of the negotiation 
process. 
In May the same year, Armenia stated that it had stopped the negotiations 
concerning the settlement of the Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, 
as part of the Minsk process, on the eve of the negotiations in Moscow. This 
                                                          
1 "Azerbaijan" newspaper, June 21, 2004. 
2  www.ocse.ru 
 
85 
 
showed that the negotiations process had failed. The negotiations of the OSCE 
Minsk group taking place some time after that in Helsinki and Budapest remained 
ineffective, too. 
Thereafter the Western countries started to display a more active position in 
order to achieve real results in the negotiations. The fact that the representatives of 
the USA, Turkey and Germany to the OSCE Minsk group were provided with the 
status of ad hoc plenipotentiary ambassadors, was the direct evidence of this. 
In September 1995, the next stage of the negotiations took place in Moscow 
and here Azerbaijan succeeded in making some progress. That is, Armenia agreed 
to consider releasing Shusha and Lachin before determination the status of the 
Nagorno-Karabakh. Let us note that first of all, this was the result of Russia's 
pressures because, following the known statement of J.Pressel, Russia decided to 
make this maneuver in order to gain control over the negotiations process. With 
this Moscow wanted to demonstrate it's more constructive and efficient activity. 
However, Armenia again refused to undertake a liability concerning release of 
Lachin and Shusha. Armenians expressed their protest against the dispatch of the 
OSCE peaceful forces to Lachin, and they also stated the impossibility of giving 
Shusha back to Azerbaijan. 
In December 1995, the meeting of the OSCE Foreign Ministers was held in 
Budapest and here again the failure to reach a common position around the same 
issues led to no progress in the peace process. 
In January 1996, the meeting of the OSCE Minsk group in Moscow was 
ineffective as well. The points causing arguments did not differ from the previous 
ones. 
In June negotiations were again conducted in Moscow. This time also 
Armenia did not agree to release Shusha and Lachin. They made a pretext that the 
economic and military power of Azerbaijan has increased, and expressed their fear 
of this. Interestingly, the thoughts of the co-chairmen coincided with the pretexts of 
Armenia in this issue. Therefore, the Moscow negotiations did not produce any 
progress. 
Further, in 1996 at the Lisbon summit, a serious struggle was observed for 
co-chairmanship of the OSCE Minsk group. That is, at that time, Russia and 
Finland were the co-chairmen of the Minsk group and their positions mostly 
coincided. 
After tense discussions, the co-chairmanship of Finland was replaced with 
France. Nevertheless, this did not serve either to strengthen Azerbaijan's positions 
in the negotiations. For this reason, co-chairmanship of the USA was put to agenda 
at the initiative of the Azerbaijan 
86 
 
President Heydar Aliyev. Although Armenia and Russia opposed this 
seriously, in February 1997, Deputy State Secretary of USA Stroub Tellbott was 
appointed the cochairman of the OSCE Minsk group. 
In April, the next meeting of the Minsk group was held for the first time in 
Moscow following the Lisbon summit. However, this meeting failed as well to 
adopt any concrete decision for the non-constructive position of Armenia. After 
that, the co-chairmen intensified their activity even more and began working out a 
new draft concerning settlement of the Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh 
conflict. 
In June 1997, the co-chairmen prepared their first proposal regarding the 
conflict's settlement - the draft document titled as "The Universal Agreement on 
settlement of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict"
1
 - and presented it to the sides. The 
proposal comprised of two agreements included in one package. The first 
agreement intended the cessation of the armed conflict, the second, determination 
of the status of Nagorno-Karabakh.
2 
It was recommended to withdraw the armed 
forces in two stages. 
At the first stage, the forces around the current point of contact to the east 
and south from Nagorno-Karabakh were to retreat for some kilometers towards the 
agreed lines. During this, the recommendations of the OSCE's Committee of High-
Ranking Persons were to be duly considered in order to create an opportunity for 
initial location of the front group of the multinational forces in the militarily 
reasoned buffer zone, the separation of the sides along this line, and the 
maintenance of safety at the second stage withdrawal of forces. 
At the second stage, the Armenian forces were to be taken to the interior of 
the Republic of Armenia, the Nagorno-Karabakh forces were to be returned to the 
borders of the Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Region determined as in 1988, and 
Azerbaijan forces were to direct to the lines agreed based on the Committee of 
High-Ranking Persons. 
 The second agreement called "status" showed the recognition of the 
territorial integrity and inviolability of borders of Azerbaijan and Armenia as the 
main principle. In accordance with this document, Nagorno-Karabakh is an integral 
part of Azerbaijan, and its self-determination is possible only after it is formalized 
in the agreement between the government bodies of Azerbaijan Republic and 
Nagorno-Karabakh, approved by the Minsk Conference, and incorporated in the 
Constitutions of Azerbaijan and Nagorno-Karabakh. 
                                                          
1 "Respublika" newspaper, February 21, 2001. 
2 "Respublika" newspaper, February 21, 2001. 
 
87 
 
In case this agreement was reached, Nagorno-Karabakh and Nakhichevan 
could have the right of maintaining free and smooth transport and communication 
contacts with Armenia and Azerbaijan. In addition, the administrative borders of 
Nagorno-Karabakh were to be defined based on the former Nagorno-Karabakh 
Autonomous Region. The draft agreement indicated as well the possibility of a 
Nagorno-Karabakh Constitution. However, that constitution was to incorporate the 
official agreement on the form of self-determination based on this document 
between the governmental bodies of Nagorno-Karabakh and Azerbaijan. The 
document also reflected the possibility of the legislative body of Nagorno-
Karabakh, as well as its own National Guard. 
Despite its several defects, the Azerbaijan side stated that it accepts the 
proposal. The point was that notwithstanding that it was called the draft agreement, 
this document did not reflect the accurate settlement mechanisms of the conflict, 
but the approximate directions of the negotiations process, and that's why 
Azerbaijan side did not refuse to accept the draft as the basis. On the other hand, 
supposedly, Azerbaijan had forecasted that Armenia would not agree with this 
draft, and in further course of the process, it proved this forecast. The Armenian 
government and the heads of the separatist regime settled in Nagorno-Karabakh 
refuted this proposal. Azerbaijan needed this much as another fact displaying the 
unwillingness of the opposite side to dialogue. 
The same year in September, the co-chairmen came to the region with a 
new package of proposals. The new draft agreement "On the cessation of the 
armed conflict in Nagorno-Karabakh" intending the conflict's "stage-by-stage 
settlement" was much more admissible for Azerbaijan than the previous one. On 
October 1, official Baku stated the possibility of accepting this proposal as the 
basis for starting negotiations.
1
 Let us note that this package of proposals known as 
the plan of "stage-by-stage settlement" intended two-stage settlement of the 
conflict. The first stage reflected cessation of the conflict and articles on 
elimination of its consequences, while the second stage intended determination of 
the Nagorno-Karabakh status within Azerbaijan before the OSCE Minsk 
Conference. 
The preferable feature of the "stage-by-stage settlement" plan was that it 
indicated occupation of six out of the seven other occupied adjacent regions of 
Azerbaijan. These regions were Kalbajar, Aghdam, Fizuli, Jabrayil, Gubadli and 
Zangilan. The fortune of the Lachin region was to be settled in the further stage. 
On the other hand, another preference of the draft agreement was that it pointed out 
                                                          
1 "Khalg newspaper", February 26. 2001. 
 
88 
 
the possibility of applying sanctions against the sides not implementing the 
appropriate provisions. 
Despite President L. Ter-Petrosyan's efforts, this proposal did not pass as 
well. On December 2, 1997 the co-chairmen presented a new version of that draft 
intending participation of the separatist regime in Nagorno-Karabakh as a side in 
the negotiations. However, this was inadmissible for Azerbaijan side and met acute 
protest from official Baku. The head of our state H.Aliyev expressed decisively 
that he is not going to agree with this format. 
A little after that, in February 1998, L.Ter-Petrosyan could no longer stand 
the internal and external threats, and had to resign. However, his idea that "If it 
keeps on like this, in a few years we can lose not only Nagorno-Karabakh, but also 
Armenia together with it" had already shaken the community seriously. The 
"common state" proposal put forward by the co-chairmen in November 1998, did 
not satisfy Azerbaijan at all. The draft marked that the sides would sign the 
agreement on the status of Nagorno-Karabakh, and that agreement would ratify 
that Nagorno-Karabakh is a union of state and territory in the form of a republic. It 
indicated that Nagorno-Karabakh would create a common state with Azerbaijan 
within its borders known in the international world. Azerbaijan and Nagorno-
Karabakh would sign an agreement on the determination of the limits of realization 
of authorities between the respective bodies of government and their mutual 
commissioning, and this document would be in force as the law of a constitution. 
The draft showed as well that Azerbaijan and Nagorno-Karabakh would 
create a joint committee to include representatives of the Presidents, Prime 
Ministers, and chairmen of the parliaments in order to define the policy and 
activity concerning the joint authority. 
In addition, in accordance with the draft, representations of Nagorno-
Karabakh and Azerbaijan were to be established in Baku and Stepanakert 
appropriately in order to keep in contact and coordinate joint events; this actually 
expressed the condition of recognizing Nagorno-Karabakh as an independent stale. 
The document openly stated that Nagorno-Karabakh would have the right to keep 
direct contact with foreign countries in the fields of economy, trade, science, 
culture, sports with the condition that it has the appropriate representation abroad. 
The political parties and public organizations will have the right to establish links 
with the political parties and public organizations of foreign states. The draft 
contained even such a provision that Nagorno-Karabakh will take part in 
realization of the foreign policy of Azerbaijan regarding its own interests, and such 
kind of decisions will be adopted with agreement of the two sides. 
The third proposal of the co-chairmen marked as well the possibility of the 
Nagorno-Karabakh government to have its own representatives at Azerbaijan 
89 
 
embassies or consulates to foreign states, in which it has interests. This draft 
provided as well the separatist regime in Nagorno-Karabakh with the right to send 
its own experts within Azerbaijan delegations to take part in international 
negotiations regarding its own interests. Naturally, the Azerbaijan side could not 
accept such a proposal that intended providing Nagorno-Karabakh with authorities 
of an independent state. Therefore, the president Heydar Aliyev expressed his 
resolute protest against this, and the draft document was not adopted. 
Further, at different times, the co-chairmen visited the region and meetings 
of the OSCE Minsk group were held. However, the proposal of "common state" 
remains the last draft presented to the sides. None of these proposals have been 
realized for the non-constructive position of Armenia. While the international 
community's opportunities to affect the aggressor and provide release of 
Azerbaijan territories from occupation are not so restricted. 
Since April 1999, direct dialogue of the presidents started at the initiative of 
the USA; the OSCE Minsk group has repeatedly stated its approval of this format 
and the necessity of continuance of the dialogue by the heads of states. In fact, 
after the last proposal and start of the presidents' direct dialogue, the OSCE Minsk 
group has begun fulfilling actually not the mission of mediation, but that of 
observation. However, the presidents' dialogue also failed to lead to any concrete 
progress in the settlement of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. 
The mood of war increased in Azerbaijan, since the achievement of a 
compromise between the sides already looked impossible. Undoubtedly, the 
successful results of the economic reforms carried out in the country played a big 
role in this, too. On the other hand, Azerbaijan succeeded to blow significant 
strikes on Armenia's positions on the international plane, and it achieved great 
accomplishments in forming an objective idea in the international community 
about the true reasons and essence of the conflict. All of these affected 
psychologically the population of Azerbaijan and increased its desire to get back 
the territories at any cost. 
Since the beginning of 2001, re-activation of the negotiations process was 
observed. The format kept unchanged, and the international community is trying 
for the settlement of the conflict within a framework of the direct meetings of the 
presidents. 
In January 2001, the next stage of negotiations between the heads of 
Azerbaijan and Armenia started in France at the initiative of Jack Chirac. The Paris 
negotiations were already the 14th meeting of the presidents. Though the meeting 
conducted serious discussions on the settlement of the conflict, no concrete result 
was achieved. Nevertheless, both the presidents of Azerbaijan and Armenia and the 
president of France Jack Chirac made a statement expressing the necessity of 
90 
 
continuing the dialogue, and stressed that the efforts for achieving a compromise 
between the sides will keep on as well in the future. 
In March, the chairman of the OSCE Mircha Juane visited the region. The 
OSCE chairman made a statement indicating that all the opportunities will be used 
for further continuance of the dialogue between the sides, that there is a favorable 
condition for settlement of the conflict, and that he is expecting a real result of the 
presidents' direct meetings. Since this visit coincided with a stage when the 
negotiations were activated, this created a hope for serious steps to be taken soon 
for achievement of peace. 
On March 3, the next meeting of the presidents was held in France at the 
initiative of the president Jack Chirac, created an impression that the day of the 
signature of the peace treaty is close.
1
 Since the presidents also preferred optimistic 
tunes in their statements, the possibility of a progress in the settlement of the 
Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict seemed real. Nevertheless, it 
should be noted that the only common position of the presidents meant the 
principles of continuing the negotiations and increasing activity in this direction. 
On March 12, Heydar Aliyev left for Turkey, and here peace issues were 
comprehensively discussed. The joint statement signed by the presidents 
mentioned as well the Karabakh issue, and this time again Turkey stated that, it 
will defend Azerbaijan's interests up to the last point. The President Ahmad Nejdet 
Sezer stressed his readiness to render all the necessary assistance to the President 
Heydar Aliyev. 
On March 14, the state secretary of the USA C.Powell invited the presidents 
to the USA in order to start the next stage of negotiations. C.Powell was also to 
take part at this meeting together with the co-chairmen, and it was expected that 
the negotiations taking place in Key West would be a significant step in the 
conflict's regulation, and even the principles of the peace agreement to be signed 
would be defined here. 
The Key West negotiations started on April 3 with the participation of the 
president Heydar Aliyev and R.Kocharyan, the USA State Secretary Colin Powell, 
OSCE co-chairmen Keri Cavano, Jan Jack Gaydar, Nikolay Gribkov, and the first 
deputy foreign minister of Russia V.Trubnikov. 
The negotiations finished on April 6, and the co-chairmen stated that they 
are working on a new proposal. They would present it to the presidents at the 
meeting to take place in Geneva in June, However, later this meeting was 
postponed. 
                                                          
1 "Azerbaijan" newspaper, March 5, 2001. 
 
91 
 
The negotiations passed in a very strained way. The attention of the entire 
world was already directed to the USA. There were many who predicted that this 
meeting would gain agreement on many issues. Nevertheless, the optimistic 
expectations did not prove themselves, although both the co-chairmen and 
presidents remarked that there was progress towards peace. 
During this meeting, the president Heydar Aliyev strongly criticized the 
OSCE co-chairmen in his statement and stressed their passive activity, C.Powell 
confirmed that this is an objective statement and there is a need for a more active 
work for the settlement of the conflict. 
On April 9, Azerbaijan President Heydar Aliyev met with the USA 
President George W. Bush.
1
 Extensive exchange of opinions was conducted 
regarding the conflict. The president G.W. Bush stressed that he was informed 
about the results of the Key West negotiations and backs its continuance. He said 
that America will as well further make due efforts for the achievement of a 
compromise between the sides. 
Actually, the Key West negotiations also failed to cause peace. Though 
some chances appeared for progress of the negotiations, they failed to keep on and 
thus, one more effort finished ineffectively. 
After the terror acts of September 11, 2001, which shook the whole world, 
the principal position demonstrated by Azerbaijan played a significant role in the 
change of the attitude towards our country. Comprehension that international 
terrorism has become a global threat at the beginning of the XX century, instigated 
creation of a new configuration on the political position of the world, and at this 
stage Azerbaijan became one of the most reliable partners of the USA on this issue. 
The President Heydar Aliyev demonstrated that Azerbaijan would always support 
America in the fight against international terrorism, which on the one hand 
strengthened the trust of Washington in our country, and on the other hand, created 
a ground for declamation of Armenia's terrorist activity by the world community. 
On October 24, 2001 the USA Senate ratified the draft of the senator Sam 
Brownback about the invalidation of the 907th Amendment. In January 2002, the 
president G.W. Bush issued a decree on vitiation of the 907th Amendment to the 
"Freedom Support Act".
2
 Invalidation of the 907th Amendment is characterized as 
the beginning of a new stage in Azerbaijan-USA relations. This prohibition had 
been imposing restriction on the direct assistance of the USA to Azerbaijan since 
1992 and its consequences did not include only economic factors. The Armenian 
                                                          
1 "Khalg newspaper", April 11, 2001. 
2 "Azerbaijan" newspaper, January 18, 2002. 
 
92 
 
political circles and Armenian lobby used this fact as a means of propaganda 
against our country. 
On April 30, 2002, a summit of the heads of Azerbaijan, Turkey and 
Georgia was held in Trabzon. The presidents' summit discussed the fight against 
international terrorism and safety of the pipelines. The "Agreement between the 
Azerbaijan Republic, Georgia and Turkey on the struggle against terrorism, 
organized crime and other heavy crimes" was signed at the end of the negotiations. 
This agreement greatly affected the strengthening of Azerbaijan's positions in the 
region and Armenia's isolated position. In fact, the above-mentioned agreement 
meant official confirmation of the development of the three states' geopolitical and 
economic positions on the same plane and after that, each of the three states 
undertook the liability to have the same position in all the important issues. 
Armenia was the only country in the Southern Caucasus that was left outside such 
a significant agreement. 
Though no serious activity was observed in the further negotiations process, 
the presidents' direct dialogue kept on maintaining its topicality. On August 15, 
2002 the presidents met in Sederek and the negotiations lasted for 4 hours. At last, 
both the presidents made statements expressing their will to continue the 
negotiations. 
In summer 2002, the 49th session of the UN General Assembly was held. 
Azerbaijan President Heydar Aliyev attended this session as well. In his speech he 
allocated an extensive place for the issues linked with the Armenia-Azerbaijan, 
Nagorno-Karabakh conflict and expressed his anxiety of non-implementation of 
the UN resolutions. During the session Azerbaijan Foreign Minister sent a letter to 
the UN General Secretary Coffee Annan and stated that Armenia neglects the UN 
resolutions and this country violates the principle of inviolability of Azerbaijan's 
territorial integrity. C.Annan emphasized once again his recognition of 
Azerbaijan's territorial integrity in the letter he sent to the Azerbaijan Foreign 
Minister. 
The negotiations process did not pass very actively until late 2003. One of 
the major reasons of this was linked with the presidential elections to take place in 
Azerbaijan and Armenia. Following the elections, the negotiations again started 
activating. 
In December 2003, Azerbaijan President Ilham Aliyev and the Armenian 
President R.Kocharyan met for the first time.
1
 The meeting was mainly of 
acquaintance character and one of its main results was that both sides stated their 
                                                          
1 "Respublika" newspaper, December 29, 2003. 
 
93 
 
readiness to continue the negotiations and to try for a more intensive character of 
the process. 
The meeting of Azerbaijan and Armenian presidents which was held in 
Warsaw on April 28 was as well of great importance for some important points. 
First, both the presidents stated that the opportunities for continuance of the 
negotiations have not run out and the activity in this direction will keep on. 
On the other hand, the meeting decided to continue the intensive direct 
negotiations of the foreign ministers. Let us note that some significant changes 
occurred during the period between the two meetings of the presidents and this 
gives a chance to utter some remarks about the current content of the negotiations. 
The case is that, during this period the USA started to be represented by a new co-
chairman of the OSCE Minsk group. This is appreciated as the display of the 
USA's intention to play a more active role in the conflict's settlement, as the 
Azerbaijan President said once. 
Another important consideration should not be ignored, which is that very 
radical differences have emerged between the situation of Armenia at the time 
when the first meeting with the Armenian President took place and its current state. 
The country is suffering a serious political crises and R.Kocharyan is unable to 
stand vigorously against the opposition. By the way, even the representative from 
Armenia, himself, has assessed the situation in Armenia as a treachery in one of his 
statements on the eve of the meeting. 
Foreign Minister of Armenia V.Oskanyan stated as well that the tension in 
the country seriously damages the positions of the president Kocharyan on the eve 
of the negotiations and above all, it is the national interests of the Armenian state 
that suffers from this. Presently, the European Council intends to discuss the 
situation in Armenia and evidently, no good opinion is going to be expressed about 
the mentioned country in these discussions. 
The situation in Azerbaijan is much different. Socio-political stability and 
economic development reigns in the republic. Citing a single fact suffices in 
proving this point: that on the average, 10 million dollars worth of investments is 
being circulated throughout Azerbaijan per day. Consequently, many things have 
happened in the period between the first and the second meetings of the presidents, 
which proves once again that President Ilham Aliyev's motto of "We do not hurry" 
rests on very precise forecasts. Finally, it should also be considered that this 
process, which is in favor of Azerbaijan, is not very slow; on the contrary, the 
situation is rapidly evolving with each passing day. 
 
 
 
94 
 
3. THE EUROPEAN COUNCIL RECOGNIZES 
THE FACT THAT ARMENIA HAS OCCUPIED 
AZERBAIJAN TERRITORIES 
 
The history of relations between the European Council [EC] and Azerbaijan 
stems from 1992. At that point in history, our newly independent republic was 
trying to set reliable cooperation links with international organizations of the world 
and we were making certain steps in this direction. In 1992, Azerbaijan delivered 
an official appeal to the European Council with the request to provide it with the 
status of "especially invited guest".
1
 However, this appeal strayed from the EC's 
attention for a long time. Certainly, one of the reasons for this could be attributed 
to the inexperienced foreign policy of the leadership in Azerbaijan at that time. Of 
course, the international community's preference for double standards also played a 
large role, but it is worth noting that the then leadership of the republic was not 
taking concrete and resolute measures to break the "ice". All of these factors 
clearly influenced the settlement process of the Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-
Karabakh conflict. The European Council provided unfair and biased analyses in 
the first documents it adopted concerning the conflict and did not try to explain the 
true essence of the problem. 
In February 1992, the European Council Parliamentary Assembly's 
Committee for Relations with the Non-EC European countries adopted the first 
statement concerning the Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. The 
document expressed anxiety over the worsening situation in the Nagorno-Karabakh 
territory and advised both sides to stop firing and eliminate the conflict peacefully. 
This document reflected a request to place United Nation [UN] forces in the 
conflict area with Armenia. 
On March 12 of the same year, the Committee of Ministers of the European 
Council also made a statement on the conflict. This document neither assessed the 
problem objectively, nor reflected its essence. This EC Committee of Ministers 
tried to demonstrate a neutral stance as much as possible. The document was 
resolutely against forceful settlement of the conflict and demanded obedience to 
the principle of inviolability of all the borders. However, the document also 
reflected the possibility of changing the borders peacefully if this was based on 
mutual agreement. 
In April 1993, the EC Committee of Ministers adopted one more statement 
concerning the Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. In this statement, 
                                                          
1 "International organizations of Europe". Baku, 1999, p.74. 
 
95 
 
the EC Committee of Ministers supported the UN's requirements concerning 
restoration of peace in the region and stopping military operations. Although the 
EC Committee of Ministers expressed its anxiety over the strengthening of military 
operations in Kalbajar, it did not surface the fact that the Armenian invaders had by 
then already occupied the region. One of the most interesting points was that the 
document adopted by the EC Committee of Ministers did not mention Armenia at 
all, though it was the country which had undertaken invasive operations. 
One more event confirming the unfair position of the European Council in 
the Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict took place in January 1994. 
While delivering the initiative of scheduling a meeting in Strasbourg concerning 
settlement of the conflict, the EC Committee for Relations with the Non-EC 
European countries invited representatives of the separatist regime in Nagorno-
Karabakh to negotiations as well. This led to annulment of the meeting when the 
Azerbaijan side stated that it would not join the negotiations if it were to take place 
on such a format. Six month later, in July 1994, negotiations concerning the 
Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict did take place in Strasbourg at 
the initiative of the European Council. Azerbaijan took part in these negotiations 
taking into account the necessity of relations with the EC. One of the meeting's 
outcomes was that it decided to send a delegation to the region headed by David 
Atkinson, chairman of the EC's Committee for Relations with Non-EC European 
countries. 
On November 14, the delegation visited Azerbaijan. A few days prior to 
that visit on November 10, the European Council Parliamentary Assembly had 
adopted its first resolution on the Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. 
This resolution entitled "On the conflict in Nagorno-Karabakh" did not 
provide a fair assessment to the problem and distorted its essence. The resolution 
expressed confidence over the perceived armistice achieved on May 12 and 
expressed great hopes for a forthcoming peace treaty. Although, the document 
showed the fact that more than 20,000 people had died and one million people had 
become refugees, it did not reflect the fact that the refugees were Azerbaijanis and 
that they left their own lands due to the aggressive policies of Armenia. The 
resolution even contained a clause that the EC cheered the Armenia and Azerbaijan 
Defense Ministers, as well as the Nagorno-Karabakh army commander's liability to 
obey the armistice. This clause paradoxically, confirmed participation of Armenia 
in the conflict, while at the same time confirmed the separatist regime in Nagorno-
Karabakh as an individual and presumably independent side. 
On June 28 1996, Azerbaijan received the status of "especially invited 
guest" to the European Council. This has already been characterized as the 
beginning of a new stage in the development of relations with the EC. The status of 
96 
 
"especially invited guest" stirred a great hope that Azerbaijan would soon be 
accepted to full-fledged membership within the EC. 
In April 1997, the EC adopted one more resolution concerning the Armenia-
Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. The resolution "On the Conflicts in the 
Caucasus" stressed the necessity of EC's assistance in settlement of the conflicts in 
Abkhazia and Nagorno-Karabakh. This document showed that the efforts targeted 
at the settlement of the regional conflicts could play a significant role in the 
acceptance of Azerbaijan, Georgia and Armenia to membership in the EC. 
Furthermore, it expressed the possibility of solving the conflicts based on the 
principle of inviolability of borders and guaranteed safety for the regional peoples 
backed by multinational peaceful forces, provision of autonomy status to Abkhazia 
and Nagorno-Karabakh, as well as return of all refugees and internally displaced 
persons. The document's clause dedicated to the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict 
reflected release of the occupied territories and peaceful regulation of the conflict 
as a major recommendation of the European Council. However, one of the 
resolution's negative points was that it emphasized the necessity that Azerbaijan, 
Armenia and Nagorno-Karabakh should conduct direct three-way negotiations. 
This again meant that the separatist regime in Nagorno-Karabakh put in place by 
the army of Armenia was acknowledged as an independent party to the 
negotiations. This clause therefore had no validity. 
On June 28, 2000, the EC adopted a decision to accept Azerbaijan as a full-
fledged member of the organization. On January 17, 2001, the EC Committee of 
Ministers made a similar step by providing this decision with legal force. That year 
on January 25, the ceremony of Azerbaijan's acceptance to the European Council 
took place and thus, began a new stage in the history of our country's relations with 
Europe.
1
 
Due to the initiative and diplomatic activity of President Ilham Aliyev, the 
head of the delegation representing Azerbaijan at the EC, documents reflecting 
truths about the Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict began to spread 
from the very first session. Azeri deputies established good relations with members 
of the EC from different countries, provided detailed information about the 
problems faced by our country, its accomplishments, as well as occupation of 20% 
of our territories by the Armenian armed forces and about the refugee and IDP 
state of over one million people. 
On January 2001, at the session where Azerbaijan and Armenia were 
accepted as full-fledged members to the EC, a deputy from England (George 
                                                          
1 "Azerbaijan" newspaper, January 27, 2001. 
 
97 
 
Taylor) spoke about the atrocities Armenia had committed in Nagorno-Karabakh, 
Azerbaijan. He stated that human rights have been savagely violated here and that 
Armenians had perpetrated aggressive policies against Azerbaijan. George Taylor 
drew attention to the difficult living conditions of the refugees and internally 
displaced persons and expressed the necessity of the EC to take serious steps to 
recognize these atrocities. He said that Armenians were engaged in the devastation 
of the invaded territories and had destroyed many monuments of culture, service 
buildings, schools and hospitals. It was clearly expressed that "the genocide 
committed by Armenians against Azerbaijanis in Nagorno-Karabakh should be 
assessed politically." Though ideas and points of Taylor were confronted by 
serious protests from Armenians, they reflected objective truths. This was the first 
surprise Armenians faced in the EC's Parliament. 
The Azerbaijan delegation also managed to expose the occupation policy of 
Armenians to the international world as well. Due to the activity of the Azerbaijan 
delegation, the official information of the 108th session of the EC Committee of 
Ministers clearly reported the aggressive policy of Armenia. The resulting 
document clearly noted that the European Council backed the territorial integrity, 
sovereignty and inviolability of borders of all countries. Armenia wanted the right 
of a nation's self-determination to also be included in this document. However, 
nobody at the meeting supported the Armenian proposal and the official 
information was adopted as it was. Only Armenia out of the 43 states was against 
that document. 
This was the first serious mistake committed by the Armenian deputies. 
Non-support of the territorial integrity actually meant protest against the norms of 
the international law, which had been accepted unanimously. A little later, the 
Azerbaijan delegation made use of this urgent point and presented an inquiry to the 
EC concerning the fact that Armenia did not recognize Azerbaijan's territorial 
integrity. 
On April 24, 2001, the Azerbaijani delegation took an active part in the 
discussions on the "Struggle of Europe Against Economic and Transnational 
Organized Crime" at the EC PA session in Strasbourg.
1 
The head of our delegation 
Mr. Ilham Aliyev, delivered a speech at the meeting and mentioned the issues 
upsetting our country: "Azerbaijan is particularly anxious of this issue. Because 
one of the organized crime centers in Europe is exactly in our territory. The so-
called region The Republic of Nagorno-Karabakh is not controlled either by the 
                                                          
1 "Khalg newspaper", April 27, 2001. 
 
98 
 
governmental bodies of Azerbaijan, nor by any other international organization 
responsible for the struggle against this crime." 
It was noted that the occupation of 20 percent of Azerbaijan's territory by 
Armenian armed forces had not only left one million Azeri refugees homeless, but 
had also destructed many of our cities, villages, monuments of culture and graves 
of our ancestors. In a word, infrastructure in the territory occupied by the 
Armenian invaders was almost fully destroyed, but also a very favorable condition 
has occurred in the territory occupied by the Armenians for the advancement of 
organized crime". Further, Mr. Ilham Aliyev cited four main facts displaying 
heaviness of the situation occurring in Azerbaijan: 
1. The so-called territory "The Nagorno-Karabakh Republic" is used for 
growing and transportation of narcotic plants. This fact has been reflected in the 
USA State Department's report on the strategy of international control over 
narcotic substances dated March 2001. The executives and opium dealers engaged 
in this trade of narcotics feel very safe and comfortable. The notorious leaders of 
the "Nagorno-Karabakh Republic" back them. Those leaders use the money gained 
from sale of narcotics to maintain the occupied territory of Azerbaijan and pay for 
terrorist groups. 
2. It is a well known fact that former heads of Russia had allowed their 
own appropriate structures to illegally convey weapons to Armenia at cost of one 
billion dollars. Most of those weapons were placed in Nagorno-Karabakh and other 
occupied territories of Azerbaijan. The puzzling question is this: Where did 
Armenia and Nagorno-Karabakh unearth adequate get funds to buy these 
weapons? Everybody, who is aware of the situation in this region, knows that the 
economic situation in Armenia is very bad. Armenia lives mainly on the income of 
foreign aid. Hundreds of thousands of people have left Armenia because of the 
constant economic decline. The answer is clear: Either they bought those weapons 
free of charge (which is hardly possible) or they bought them with money gained 
from the sale of narcotic substances. 
3. The illegal economic activity existing in Nagorno-Karabakh has made 
this fictitious "republic" notorious in the "wash-up" of "dirty" money. 
4. Armenians train the armed units in the territory of Nagorno-Karabakh 
and these units are completely out of control of international conventions on the 
fight against terrorism".
1
 
After bringing this information to the attention of the meeting, the head of 
the Azerbaijan delegation requested all the European structures to take serious 
                                                          
1 www. assembly. ru 
 
99 
 
practical measures for the Armenian aggressors to leave our lands and to put an 
end to violation of the human rights of one million Azeri refugees and the use of 
our territories for criminal activity. 
During the session, our delegation prepared and spread among the deputies 
a special draft document concerning the presence of Azeri hostages and captives in 
Armenia and Nagorno-Karabakh. This document showed that 4959 persons have 
been vanished due to occupation of our territories; 1092 of them were released in 
1992-2001, and 176 persons are deceased. 
The document pointed out that 783 captives were kept in Armenia and the 
occupied territory of Azerbaijan; 18 of them were children, 43 were women, and 
56 were older men. The draft expressed that although Armenia denies this fact, it is 
as a matter of fact that the captives are in slavery constantly outraged and tortured. 
They do not get any normal food and necessary medical care. Many deputies from 
Hungary, Russia, Luxemburg, Spain, Turkey, Netherlands, Latvia, Lithuania, 
Sweden, the Ukraine and other countries, signed the document and the draft was 
spread among the parliamentary delegations of the states taking part at the EC 
session. 
On the eve of this session, the French parliament and Senate made a 
decision to recognize the historical belief about an "Armenian genocide". The 
Armenian deputies at the European Council Parliamentary Assembly tried to make 
use of this opportunity by preparing a document about "the genocide of the 
miserable Armenian nation by the Ottoman Empire". Only a few deputies signed 
this document after their conducted propaganda. 
In reply, the Azerbaijan delegation prepared a statement about the atrocities 
committed by Armenians against our nation since the beginning of the last century 
up to date and about their occupation of 20 percent of our territories. This 
statement was then distributed to the countries and members of the European 
Council. 
The statement expressed that Armenians committed massive massacres 
against Azerbaijanis in 1905-1907 and in March 1918 purged Azerbaijanis from 
Baku, Shamakhi, Guba, Karabakh, Zangazur, Nakhichevan, Lankaran and other 
regions in order to achieve "The Greater Armenia". 
In 1988, following the break-up of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, 
hundreds of thousands of Azerbaijanis were once again deported from their 
historical territories. On February 26, 1992, the Khojali population was completely 
annihilated by the Armenians and the city was reduced to ruins. Due to these 
activities and this information, the several deputies who had signed the document 
of the Armenians withdrew their signatures. 
100 
 
The summer session of 2001 also retained memories of intense and efficient 
activity by the Azeri delegation. A statement prepared by the Azerbaijan Milli 
Mejlis delegation at the European Council Parliament Assembly, addressed by the 
deputy Gultakin Hajiveva to the Committee of Ministers and entitled "Armenia 
must Recognize Territorial Integrity of Azerbaijan" was distributed to all EC 
deputies as an official document. The document noted that at the 108th session of 
the European Council Committee of Ministers taking place on May 10-11, the 
Foreign Minister of Armenia, Vardan Oskanyan, declared that Armenia would not 
recognize the territorial integrity of Azerbaijan until the Nagorno-Karabakh 
conflict was settled. Taking this into account, the Azeri delegation requested that 
the European Council Committee of Ministers consider the full-fledged 
membership of Azerbaijan and Armenia to the European Council and have the 
official recognition of our country's territorial integrity confirmed by the United 
Nations, OSCE, the European Council and all the states of the world. After all, the 
non-recognition of one state-member of the European Council (i.e., Armenia) of 
the territorial integrity of another state-member of the European Council (i.e., 
Azerbaijan) through the occupation of 20 percent of Azerbaijan territories by 
Armenia and massive violation of human rights is a violation of the principles of 
the EC. Therefore, Azerbaijan made a plea to the Republic of Armenia to respect 
the principles of international law; namely, the principle of territorial integrity and 
sovereignty of states and withdraw immediately Armenian armed forces from 
Azerbaijan territory. 
Two more important documents prepared by the Azerbaijan delegation were 
distributed among the EC PA deputies as official documents on June 27, 2001. 
Eighteen deputies first signed a document on seizure and destruction of 
Azerbaijani cultural heritage by Armenians. The document pointed out that one of 
the tragic conseguences of Armenian aggression towards the Republic of 
Azerbaijan besides the occupation of 20 percent of the territory is the destruction 
and seizure of Azerbaijani national and cultural heritage by Armenians. 
A second document distributed by the delegation dealt with destruction of 
the ecological balance by Armenia's invasion of the lands of Azerbaijan. Sixteen 
deputies signed this document. 
In September 2001, chairperson of the EC Parliamentary Assembly Russell 
Johnston arrived in Baku. He held several significant meetings during his visit and 
expressed his judgments on the illegal "elections" the separatist regime held in 
Nagorno-Karabakh. He stated that the EC does not recognize these elections and 
that Nagorno-Karabakh is an integral part of Azerbaijan. In his speeches, the EC 
chairman repeatedly confirmed the fact that Azerbaijan territories had been 
occupied by Armenia. 
101 
 
In September 2001, at the EC autumn session, Azerbaijan presented two 
additional documents. The first document was related with the discussion of the 
Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict at the EC. The compiled draft 
reflected occupation of Azerbaijan territories, the living conditions of over one 
million of people as refugees and internally displaced persons, the policies of 
Armenia that were causing danger for regional peace and stability and other 
important facts. Fifty deputies representing about 30 countries at the EC signed this 
document prepared by the Azerbaijan delegation. The draft noted that Nagorno-
Karabakh, which is an integral part of Azerbaijan had been occupied by Armenia. 
This document was distributed by the Azerbaijan delegation and was aptly entitled 
as "Education Rights of the Refugees and internally displaced persons in 
Azerbaijan in the context for the EC." This document was added to the 
organization's official documents. 
A second document prepared by the Azerbaijan delegation was entitled the 
"Education Rights of the Refugees and internally displaced persons in Azerbaijan 
in the Context of Further Development of Education in Europe." The document 
provided a wider network of information about the situation arising out of the 
deportation of hundred of thousands of Azerbaijanis from their native land due to 
the Armenian aggression. Azeri deputies noted the rude violence to thousands of 
children's rights for education by Armenia. This was expressed as a necessary 
focus for the EC. This is clearly a major point of interest for international attention. 
This document caused considerable resonance and was remembered as an 
important measure in disclosure of the results of Armenia's invasive policy to the 
international community. 
This time again, the Armenian deputies confronted the unexpected step of 
the Azerbaijan delegation and had to pay major attention to denial of the facts 
reflected in the document. Let us note that the activity of our delegation headed by 
Mr. Ilham Aliyev always served to an objective purpose by putting Armenians in a 
deadlock and by showing the uncontestable facts and faults of the Armenians. At 
every session Azeri deputies presented new documents and this caused big 
resonance at the EC and led to a growing negative and worsening attitude towards 
Armenia. 
The Azerbaijan delegation had sent an inquiry concerning Armenia, which 
was against the principle of inviolability of the territorial integrity at the 108th 
session of the EC Committee of Ministers. The inquiry noted that non-recognition 
of Azerbaijan's territorial integrity by Armenia did not correspond either to EC 
principles or to the principles of international law. The Azerbaijan delegation 
wanted to know the official position of the EC relative to this issue. A discussion 
took place based on the inquiry and the Committee of Ministers declared officially 
102 
 
that it admits the principle of inviolability of Azerbaijan's territorial integrity and 
invited Armenia to sign this document as well. Consequently, Armenia changed its 
position on the issue and had to sign the document. 
The EC session taking place on September 25, 2001 revolved around 
discussions about international terrorism. The deputies representing different 
countries delivered speeches, declaimed expansion of terrorism, and expressed 
their anxiety that it has become a common misfortune of humankind. The 
Armenian deputy Ovanesyan, delivered a speech at the meeting and said that 
ostensibly Armenia does not support any act of terror and fights against terrorism. 
He stated ridiculous ideas claiming that Azerbaijan ostensibly runs a terrorist 
policy against the Armenian population of Nagorno-Karabakh and that the famous 
terrorist Bin Laden has a telephone contact within Baku. The head of the 
Azerbaijan delegation, deputy of Milli Mejlis Ilham Aliyev, presented a speech at 
the proceedings of the EC and clearly showed that these slanders of the Armenian 
reps had no basis in fact: "I must say to you with all the responsibility that this is a 
completely groundless lie. This baseless claim has not been confirmed by anybody 
and turning to all of my colleagues, I want to ask them not to use the higher 
rostrum of the European Council to spread slanders for their own political aims." 
We all suffered a great shock for the terror acts committed against the United 
States of America. On behalf of the Azerbaijan delegation, I would like to express 
my frank condolence to the government of the United States and American people 
for the acts of terror, which caused death and wounding to thousands of innocent 
people. I would like to express as well our full support to the United States, on 
behalf of the Azerbaijani government, in finding out the people who have 
committed this terrible crime and in raising a trial against them. The acts of terror 
committed against the United States show clearly how fragile is the world we all 
live in. Nobody can feel safe. Therefore, the international community should unite 
in all parts of the world against all the forms of terrorism", stressed Mr. Ilham 
Aliyev. 
Our delegation, headed by Mr. Aliyev, also called attention to the acts of 
terror committed by Armenia against Azerbaijan and said that Azerbaijan had 
suffered much from the terrorism. "Since the start of the Armenian aggression, the 
Armenian terrorist groups have committed 32 acts of terror against Azerbaijan. 
Two thousands people were wounded due to these acts of terror. The acts of terror 
against Azerbaijan people were committed in trains, buses, ships and underground 
trains. The terrorist acts committed by the Armenian terrorists against the 
Azerbaijan people are one of the major elements of the scale aggression of the 
Armenian armed forces against Azerbaijan. Tens of thousands of Azerbaijanis 
were killed, one million people became refugees, 20 percent of Azerbaijan 
103 
 
territories were occupied by Armenia due to this terrorism. The Armenian terrorist 
organization ASALA played a very active role in the terror and genocide policy of 
Armenia against Azerbaijan in the recent 13 years. Presently the territories of the 
fictitious Nagorno-Karabakh Republic, as well as the other occupied regions of 
Azerbaijan are fully uncontrolled territories. The Armenian officials have created 
camps for training of not only the Armenian terrorists, but also terrorists from other 
countries in these territories, which are reigned by lawlessness. The territory of 
Nagorno-Karabakh is used for transportation of narcotic substances and plenty of 
money gained from production and conveyance of narcotic substances is spent for 
terrorist purposes". 
On April 2002, the Azerbaijan delegation took an active part in the spring 
session of the EC and managed to distribute significant documents concerning 
several issues. One of the documents was entitled "On the Nuclear Technologies 
and Nuclear Wastes in the Occupied Territories of the Azerbaijan Republic". The 
document contained facts about burial of nuclear wastes in the territories occupied 
by Armenia and maintenance of nuclear technologies here. The document was 
signed by 80 deputies and 30 states and was added to the list of EC's official 
documents.
1
 Though the members of the Armenian delegation tried to deny the 
facts reflected in the document, they failed to present convincing arguments. 
Armenia had already fallen into an isolated state in the Assembly since the Azeri 
deputies had succeeded in building active cooperation relations with the EC's 
Assembly's membership and the persons representing Armenia failed to take 
adequate measures against the steps of the Azerbaijan delegation. Armenia simply 
failed in the face of the factual evidence presented by the Azerbaijan delegations. 
One more document "About Observation of International Principles and 
Rules in the States of the EC" was signed by more than 40 deputies representing 20 
countries. This document noted, that the invasive activity of Armenia causes 
problems for regional safety as well as discords to the international legal norms 
accepted by all the member states of the EC. 
On June 2002, at the EC PA summer session the Azerbaijan delegation 
succeeded in achieving progress on many related issues. Most importantly, they 
made successful strides at informing the members of the organization about the 
Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. Before the beginning of the 
session and during the session, the delegation conducted many high-level meetings 
and discussions with authoritative persons of the organization about the problems 
faced by our country. One such meeting was held with the new chairman of the EC 
                                                          
1 "Respublika" newspaper, April 30, 2002 
 
104 
 
Parliamentary Assembly Peter Shieder. Here negotiations about the Armenia-
Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict and its painful results were conducted and 
the Azerbaijani delegation requested that the EC chairman should keep this issue in 
the focus of attention, The deputies representing our country provided extensive 
information about the intolerable state of the refugees and internally displaced 
persons and expressed the necessity for increasing humanitarian aid from 
international organizations to them. 
The delegation's meeting with the EC's General Secretary Walter 
Shwimmer also kept these issues in the focus of attention. One of the main 
purposes of the Azerbaijani deputies was to maintain the Armenia-Azerbaijan, 
Nagorno-Karabakh conflict in the focus of attention and to carry out appropriate 
propaganda in order to eliminate double standards in relation to Azerbaijan. 
Already shortly after the beginning of the session, it became apparent that a certain 
amount of success had been achieved. 
On June 27, 2002 chairman of the EC Committee for Migration, Refugees 
& Demography Rut-Gabi Vermot-Mangold delivered a report about "The state of 
refugees in Armenia, Georgia and Azerbaijan." In his speech, he noted that 
Azerbaijan had got over 900,000; Armenia -150,000 refugees and 20 percent of 
Azerbaijan territories had been occupied. It is worth noting that R.Vermot-
Mangold did not illustrate the number of Azeri refugees and internally displaced 
persons precisely. For the reason that the official statistics mentions more than one 
million refugees and internally displaced persons. Nevertheless, this speech created 
a reasonably objective idea about the true effects of the Armenia-Azerbaijan, 
Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. The pronouncement of the truth by a European deputy 
created greater hope for objectiveness of the facts. Mr. Vermot-Mangold stated that 
tens of thousands of Mehseti Turks had settled in Azerbaijan as well. The deputy 
noted the difficult living conditions of the refugees and stressed the necessity that 
all international organizations should render them humanitarian aid. The head of 
the Azerbaijan delegation, Mr. Ilham Aliyev, delivered a profoundly important 
speech at this session and drew attention to the very difficult living and health 
conditions of the refugees and pointed out that every eighth person in Azerbaijan is 
now a refugee. He emphasized that the international community should not ignore 
the aggressive policy of Armenia against Azerbaijan and expressed a concrete 
attitude to the issue. Mr. Ilham Aliyev said that the Azerbaijani state takes care of 
the refugees and internally displaced persons from (a) Armenia, (b) our occupied 
territories, as well as from (c) Uzbekistan and stressed nevertheless the continuing 
need for assistance from the world community to help improve their social 
conditions. Mr. Ilham Aliyev emphasized once again the necessity that a fair 
attitude towards the Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict needs to be 
105 
 
expressed, he stated: "How long is Europe going to keep closing its eyes to the fact 
that one member of the European Council, Armenia, keeps 20 percent of the 
territories of another member, Azerbaijan, under occupation?" This speech of the 
Azerbaijan delegation caused a big resonance at the session and put forward the 
notion that the time had come to express an objective attitude toward the problem. 
This performance persuaded the EC deputies to realize the organization's fair and 
appropriate position in relation to the conflict's results. Probably due to this, the 
session appointed Terry Davis as the EC reporter on Nagorno-Karabakh. Let us 
note that after acceptance of Azerbaijan and Armenia to the EC membership, 
Armenians always rejected the appointment of EC reporters on the Nagorno-
Karabakh conflict and tried to prevent realization of this idea. However, the 
principal position of the Azerbaijan delegation and the successive diplomatic 
struggle under the leadership of Mr. Ilham Aliyev caused cooperation an the 
passing of this proposal by the EC membership. 
In September 2002, the autumn session discussed implementation of the 
liabilities undertaken by Azerbaijan and Armenia before the EC. At the urgent 
request of Azerbaijan, amendments were made toward resolution of Armenia's 
occupation of Azerbaijani territories, the fact that refugees and internally displaced 
persons had been driven out of their native lands, and the true reasons of the 
Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. These issues were also reflected 
in a resolution about Azerbaijan. Though Armenians actively resisted, they failed 
to achieve elimination of the amendments and attachments to the text of the 
resolution suggested by Azerbaijan. 
On January 27, 2003 the head of the Azerbaijan delegation Mr. Ilham 
Aliyev was elected to the distinguished posts of the EC deputy chairman and a 
member of the bureau
1
 of the Parliamentary Assembly. This was a very significant 
event confirming that the relations of our country with the EC had been developing 
at quite a high level and that there was great trust placed upon our delegation. Mr. 
Aliyev's election as deputy chairman and as a member of the bureau of such an 
important international organization as the EC was a very important accomplish-
ment that can not be denied. The fact that a citizen of Azerbaijan holds one of the 
main positions of the EC Assembly and directing its activity must be characterized 
as a display of great trust to our country. It should suffice simply to remember the 
problems we confronted in the most different fields of foreign policy ten years 
earlier in order to truly appreciate the fact that this event has no analogue in the 
history of our diplomacy. This grandiose event confirms that Mr. Ilham Aliyev is 
                                                          
1 "Azerbaijan" newspaper, January 29, 2003. 
 
106 
 
renowned as an authoritative political figure in the international world and that his 
activity is attentively observed by the most powerful states of the world. 
Let us note that rather serious arguments stood behind this trust displayed to 
Mr. Ilham Aliyev. Following acceptance to the European Council as a full-fledged 
member, Azerbaijan managed to make the principal steps necessary for taking 
problems linked with own national interests to the limelight of the international 
community. The activeness the Azerbaijani delegation displayed at the EC sessions 
provided the successful development of this process. Mr. Ilham Aliyev managed to 
demonstrate that he is a leader of high qualities by targeting the activity of the 
delegation to effective protection of our national interests and international 
exposure of Armenia's invasive policy. It was exactly for his particular political 
far-sightedness that Armenians met new "surprises" of Azerbaijani deputies at 
almost every meeting of the organization and in its separate committees. 
Starting his activity as the EC deputy chairman and member of the bureau 
Mr. Ilham Aliyev made his first step by conveying the results of Armenia's 
aggressive policy to the international community. At the spring session of the 
Parliamentary Assembly, Mr. Ilham Aliyev mentioned the facts sounded by the 
deputy Ali Abbasov in his report "The State of Culture in the South Caucasus." 
This report was about the destruction of plenty of Azerbaijan's cultural monuments 
due to the aggressive policy of Armenia and confirmed with convincing arguments 
that the statistical figures reflected in this document rested on truths. Consequently, 
a proposal of the Armenian deputies to withdraw their fact, of occupation from the 
document was rejected. Nevertheless, Armenians main point of anxiety didn't stem 
solely from the discussion of this issue; the fact that the head of the Azerbaijan 
delegation, Mr. Ilham Aliyev, was authorized to lead the session annoyed them 
even more. Due to the validity of these claims, Armenians were not backed and 
they also encountered failure at the next session of this international organization. 
That following session at the EC bureau discussed the Armenia-Azerbaijan, 
Nagorno-Karabakh conflict as well. These discussions resolutely declaimed the 
fact that Armenia ran aggressive policy against Azerbaijan and stated that this was 
contradictory of all international legal norms. The EC confirmed in fact that 
Armenia was indeed an invasive state and that it was occupying Azerbaijan 
territories. 
At the summer session of 2003, the Azerbaijan delegation continued to 
display a visible presence and activeness. The session ran discussions on an issue 
that was linked directly with problems that our country has faced: "Positive 
Experience of Autonomous Regions in Europe". By proposal of the EC deputy 
chairman and head of the Azerbaijan delegation, Mr. Ilham Aliyev, a provision 
was added to the document about the fact that an autonomous region has no right 
107 
 
to violate territorial integrity. It should be again noted that the Armenians resisted 
this proposal adamantly and brought forth many arguments in attempting to 
convince the EC deputies that there was no need to include such a provision to the 
document. However, Mr. Ilham Aliyev's determined and rational speeches 
prevented the Armenians' proposal to pass. Subsequently, the sentence "grant of 
autonomy should be based on the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the state 
itself was added to the document. This was actually a very important measure that 
put a wall before the claims of the Nagorno-Karabakh separatist regime for 
independence. Presence of such a provision in the EC's document showed that the 
independence claims of the Nagorno-Karabakh power had no legal basis. 
In a short period, Azerbaijani representatives managed to declare the facts 
about the Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict to the world 
community from the center of Europe. The acts of genocide committed by 
Armenians against Azerbaijanis, destruction of cultural monuments in the occupied 
territories, the state of maintenance of the military captives and hostages, the 
ecological state of the lands invaded by Armenians, the problems that arose in the 
education of the refugee and IDP children, the very difficulty social conditions of 
the IDPs and tens of other related painful facts provided the whole of Europe and 
the world with an opportunity to see objectively and precisely the essence of the 
regional events. This opportunity was created by the patriotic and successful 
activity of the delegation headed by Mr. Ilham Aliyev. 
During the period when Mr. Ilham Aliyev headed our delegation, around 30 
documents embracing the Azerbaijan truths were prepared for the EC and spread as 
the organization's official documents.
1
 One of the essential principals of the many-
branched activity of Azerbaijan's delegation at the EC was to inform the 
international community of the true reasons of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict and 
the results gave ground to say that all the clauses of that principle had been 
realized. The advantageous conclusion of the strained struggle for appointment of 
the organization's special reporter on the conflict can be assessed as a particular 
noteworthy event. The successful activity of Mr. Ilham Aliyev at the EC led to 
maintenance of our delegation's active participation in all the structures, 
committees and commissions of the organization. All of these activities were of 
great importance in realizing the processes of the isolation of Armenians from the 
international world. 
Certainly, all the highlighted points of this essay express various details of 
the Azerbaijani delegation's successful activity at the EC. Mr. Ilham Aliyev and his 
team of Azerbaijani deputies and their guardianship of our national interests 
                                                          
1 "Azerbaijan in the road of democratic development". Baku, 2004, p. 148. 
108 
 
provided delivery of Azerbaijan truths to the world community. Undoubtedly, the 
successes achieved by President Ilham Aliyev in our country's politics and in this 
extra-ordinary success with the EC should be valued as a logical consequence of 
his intense and efficient activity for the national interests of the Azerbaijani people. 
The world, as well as his fellow countrymen, respects him as a diplomatic 
politician, but most importantly as an effective leader. Mr. Ilham Aliyev, in his 
country of Azerbaijan, is acknowledged not only as a reliable defender of national 
interests, but also as a leader who is capable of coordinating our collective 
activities to the complex realities of the modern world. 
 
Ill PART 
 
DOCUMENTS ADOPTED BY INTERNATIONAL 
ORGANIZATIONS 
 
UN  
 
United Nations Security Council resolution 822 
 
30 April 1993 
 
The Security Council, 
Recalling the statements of the President of the Security Council of 29 
January 1993 (S/25199) and of 6 April 1993 (S/25539) concerning the Nagorno-
Karabakh conflict, 
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General dated 14 April 1993 
(S/25600), 
Expressing its serious concern at the deterioration of the relations between 
the Republic of Armenia and the Republic of Azerbaijan, 
Noting with alarm the escalation in armed hostilities and, in particular, the 
latest invasion of the Kalbajar district of the Republic of Azerbaijan by local 
Armenian forces, 
Concerned that this situation endangers peace and security in the region, 
Expressing grave concern at the displacement of a large number of civilians 
and the humanitarian emergency in the region, in particular in the Kalbajar district, 
Reaffirming the respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States 
in the region, 
Reaffirming also the inviolability of international borders and the 
inadmissibility of the use of force for the acquisition of territory, 
109 
 
Expressing its support for the peace process being pursued within the 
framework of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe and deeply 
concerned at the disruptive effect that the escalation in armed hostilities can have 
on that process, 
1. Demands the immediate cessation of all hostilities and hostile acts with 
a view to establishing a durable cease-fire, as well as immediate withdrawal of all 
occupying forces from the Kalbajar district and other recently occupied areas of 
Azerbaijan; 
2. Urges the parties concerned immediately to resume negotiations for the 
resolution of the conflict within the framework of the peace process of the Minsk 
Group of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe and refrain from 
any action that will obstruct a peaceful solution of the problem; 
3. Calls for unimpeded access for international humanitarian relief efforts 
in the region, in particular in all areas affected by the conflict in order to alleviate 
the suffering of the civilian population and reaffirms that all parties are bound to 
comply with the principles and rules of international humanitarian law; 
4. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Chairman-in-
Office of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe as well as the 
Chairman of the Minsk Group of the Conference to assess the situation in the 
region, in particular in the Kalbajar district of Azerbaijan, and to submit a further 
report to the Council; 
5. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter. 
 
United Nations Security Council resolution 853 
 
29 July 1993 
 
The Security Council, 
Reaffirming its resolution 822 (1993) of 30 April 1993, 
Having considered the report issued on 27 July 1993 by the Chairman of the 
Minsk Group of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) 
(S/26184), 
Expressing its serious concern at the deterioration of relations between the 
Republic of Armenia and the Azerbaijani Republic and at the tensions between 
them, 
Welcoming acceptance by the parties concerned of the timetable of urgent 
steps to implement its resolution 822 (1993), 
Noting with alarm the escalation in armed hostilities and, in particular, the 
seizure of the district of Agdam in the Azerbaijani Republic, 
110 
 
Concerned that this situation continues to endanger peace and security in 
the region, 
Expressing once again its grave concern at the displacement of large 
numbers of civilians in the Azerbaijani Republic and at the serious humanitarian 
emergency in the region, 
Reaffirming the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Azerbaijani 
Republic and of all other States in the region, 
Reaffirming also the inviolability of international borders and the 
inadmissibility of the use of force for the acquisition of territory, 
1.  Condemns the seizure of the district of Agdam and of all other recently 
occupied areas of Azerbaijan Republic; 
2. Further condemns all hostile actions in the region, in particular attacks 
on civilians and bombardments of inhabited areas; 
3. Demands the immediate cessation of all hostilities and the immediate, 
complete and unconditional withdrawal of the occupying forces involved from the 
district of Agdam and all other recently occupied areas of the Azerbaijan Republic; 
4.  Calls on the parties concerned to reach and maintain durable cease-fire 
arrangements; 
5. Reiterates in the context of paragraphs 3 and 4 above its earlier calls for 
the restoration of economic, transport and energy links in the region; 
6. Endorses the continuing efforts by the Minsk Group of the CSCE to 
achieve a peaceful solution to the conflict, including efforts to implement 
resolution 822 (1993), and expresses its grave concern at the disruptive effect that 
the escalation of armed hostilities has had on these efforts; 
7. Welcomes the preparations for a CSCE monitor mission with a timetable 
for its deployment, as well as consideration within the CSCE of the proposal for a 
CSCE presence in the region; 
8. Urges the parties concerned to refrain from any action that will obstruct a 
peaceful solution to the conflict, and to pursue negotiations within the Minsk 
Group of the CSCE, as well as through direct contacts between them, towards a 
final settlement; 
9. Urges the Government of the Republic of Armenia to continue to exert its 
influence to achieve compliance by the Armenians of the Nagorno-Karabakh 
region of Azerbaijani Republic with its resolution 822 (1993) and the present 
resolution, and the acceptance by this party of the proposals of the Minsk Group of 
the CSCE; 
10. Urges States to refrain from the supply of any weapons and munitions 
which might lead to an intensification of the conflict or the continued occupation 
of territory; 
111 
 
11. Calls once again for unimpeded access for international humanitarian 
relief efforts in the region, in particular in all areas affected by the conflict, in order 
to alleviate the increased suffering of the civilian population and reaffirms that all 
parties are bound to comply with the principles and rules of international 
humanitarian law; 
12. Requests the Secretary-General and relevant international agencies to 
provide urgent humanitarian assistance to the affected civilian population and to 
assist displaced persons to return to their homes; 
13. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Chairman-in-
Office of the CSCE as well as the Chairman of the Minsk Group, to continue to 
report to the Council on the situation; 
14. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter. 
 
United Nations Security Council resolution 874 
 
14 October 1993 
 
The Security Council, 
Reaffirming its resolutions 822 (1993) of 30 April 1993 and 853 (1993) of 
29 July 1993, and recalling the statement read by the President of the Council, on 
behalf of the Council, on 18 August 1993 (S/26326), 
Having considered the letter dated 1 October 1993 from the Chairman of the 
Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) Minsk Conference on 
Nagorno-Karabakh addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/26522), 
Expressing its serious concern that a continuation of the conflict in and 
around the Nagorno-Karabakh region of the Azerbaijani Republic, and of the 
tensions between the Republic of Armenia and the Azerbaijani Republic, would 
endanger peace and security in the region, 
Taking note of the high-level meetings which took place in Moscow on 8 
October 1993 and expressing the hope that they will contribute to the improvement 
of the situation and the peaceful settlement of the conflict, 
Reaffirming the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Azerbaijani 
Republic and of all other States in the region, 
Reaffirming also the inviolability of international borders and the 
inadmissibility of the use of force for the acquisition of territory, 
Expressing once again its grave concern at the human suffering the conflict 
has caused and at the serious humanitarian emergency in the region and expressing 
in particular its grave concern at the displacement of large numbers of civilians in 
the Azerbaijani Republic, 
112 
 
1. Calls upon the parties concerned to make effective and permanent the 
cease-fire established as a result of the direct contacts undertaken with the 
assistance of the Government of the Russian Federation in support of the CSCE 
Minsk Group; 
2. Reiterates again its full support for the peace process being pursued 
within the framework of the CSCE, and for the tireless efforts of the 
CSCE Minsk Group; 
3. Welcomes and commends to the parties the "Adjusted timetable of urgent 
steps to implement Security Council resolutions 822 (1993) and 853 (1993)" set 
out on 28 September 1993 at the meeting of the CSCE Minsk Group and submitted 
to the parties concerned by the Chairman of the Group with the full support of nine 
other members of the Group, and calls on the parties to accept it; 
4. Expresses the conviction that all other pending questions arising from the 
conflict and not directly addressed in the "Adjusted timetable" should be settled 
expeditiously through peaceful negotiations in the context of the CSCE Minsk 
process; 
5. Calls for the immediate implementation of the reciprocal and urgent steps 
provided for in the CSCE Minsk Group's "Adjusted timetable", including the 
withdrawal of forces from recently occupied territories and the removal of all 
obstacles to communications and transportation; 
6. Calls also for an early convening of the CSCE Minsk Conference for the 
purpose of arriving at a negotiated settlement to the conflict as provided for in the 
timetable, in conformity with the 24 March 1992 mandate of the CSCE Council of 
Ministers; 
7. Requests the Secretary-General to respond favourably to an invitation to 
send a representative to attend the CSCE Minsk Conference and to provide all 
possible assistance for the substantive negotiations that will follow the opening of 
the Conference; 
8. Supports the monitoring mission developed by the CSCE; 
9. Calls on all parties to refrain from all violations of international 
humanitarian law and renews its call in resolutions 822 (1993) and 853 (1993) for 
unimpeded access for international humanitarian relief efforts in all areas affected 
by the conflict; 
10. Urges all States in the region to refrain from any hostile acts and from 
any interference or intervention which would lead to the widening of the conflict 
and undermine peace and security in the region; 
11. Requests the Secretary-General and relevant international agencies to 
provide urgent humanitarian assistance to the affected civilian population and to 
113 
 
assist refugees and displaced persons to return to their homes in security and 
dignity; 
12. Requests also the Secretary-General, the Chairman-in-Office of the 
CSCE and the Chairman of the CSCE Minsk Conference to continue to report to 
the Council on the progress of the Minsk process and on all aspects of the situation 
on the ground, and on present and future cooperation between the CSCE and the 
United Nations in this regard; 
13. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter. 
 
United Nations Security Council resolution 884 
 
12 November 1993 
 
The Security Council, 
Reaffirming its resolutions 822 (1993) of 30 April 1993, 853 (1993) of 29 
July 1993 and 874 (1993) of 14 October 1993, 
Reaffirming its full support for the peace process being pursued within the 
framework of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE), and 
for the tireless efforts of the CSCE Minsk Group, 
Taking note of the letter dated 9 November 1993 from the Chairman-in-
Office of the Minsk Conference on Nagorno-Karabakh addressed to the President 
of the Security Council and its enclosures (S/26718, annex), 
Expressing its serious concern that a continuation of the conflict in and 
around the Nagorno-Karabakh region of the Azerbaijani Republic, and of the 
tensions between the Republic of Armenia and the Azerbaijani Republic, would 
endanger peace and security in the region, 
Noting with alarm the escalation in armed hostilities as consequence of the 
violations of the cease-fire and excesses in the use of force in response to those 
violations, in particular the occupation of the Zangilan district and the city of 
Goradiz in the Azerbaijani Republic, 
Reaffirming the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Azerbaijani 
Republic and of all other States in the region, 
Reaffirming also the inviolability of international borders and the 
inadmissibility of the use of force for the acquisition of territory, 
Expressing grave concern at the latest displacement of a large number of 
civilians and the humanitarian emergency in the Zangilan district and the city of 
Goradiz and on Azerbaijan's southern frontier, 
1. Condemns the recent violations of the cease-fire established between the 
parties, which resulted in a resumption of hostilities, and particularly condemns the 
114 
 
occupation of the Zangilan district and the city of Goradiz, attacks on civilians and 
bombardments of the territory of the Azerbaijani Republic; 
2. Calls upon the Government of Armenia to use its influence to achieve 
compliance by the Armenians of the Nagorno-Karabakh region of the Azerbaijani 
Republic with resolutions 822 (1993), 853 (1993) and 874 (1993), and to ensure 
that the forces involved are not provided with the means to extend their military 
campaign further; 
3. Welcomes the Declaration of 4 November 1993 of the nine members of 
the CSCE Minsk Group (S/26718) and commends the proposals contained therein 
for unilateral cease-fire declarations; 
4. Demands from the parties concerned the immediate cessation of armed 
hostilities and hostile acts, the unilateral withdrawal of occupying forces from the 
Zangilan district and the city of Horadiz, and the with drawal of occupying forces 
from other recently occupied areas of the Azerbaijani Republic in accordance with 
the "Adjusted timetable of urgent steps to implement Security Council resolutions 
822 (1993) and 853 (1993)" (S/26522, appendix) as amended by the CSCE Minsk 
Group meeting in Vienna of 2 to 8 November 1993; 
5. Strongly urges the parties concerned to resume promptly and to make 
effective and permanent the cease-fire established as a result of the direct contacts 
undertaken with the assistance of the Government of the Russian Federation in 
support of the CSCE Minsk Group, and to continue to seek a negotiated settlement 
of the conflict within the context of the CSCE Minsk process and the "Adjusted 
timetable" as amended by the CSCE Minsk Group meeting in Vienna of 2 to 8 
November 1993; 
6. Urges again all States in the region to refrain from any hostile acts and 
from any interference or intervention, which would lead to the widening of the 
conflict and undermine peace and security in the region; 
7. Requests the Secretary-General and relevant international agencies to 
provide urgent humanitarian assistance to the affected civilian population, 
including that in the Zangilan district and the city of Horadiz and on Azerbaijan's 
southern frontier, and to assist refugees and displaced persons to return to their 
homes in security and dignity; 
8. Reiterates its request that the Secretary-General, the Chairman-in-Office 
of the CSCE and the Chairman of the CSCE Minsk Conference continue to report 
to the Council on the progress of the Minsk process and on all aspects of the 
situation on the ground, in particular on the implementation of its relevant 
resolutions, and on present and future cooperation between the CSCE and the 
United Nations in this regard; 
9. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter. 
115 
 
 
Note by the president of the Security Council 
 
12 May 1992 
 
Following consultations among members of the Security Council, the 
President of the Council made the following statement, on behalf of the Council, at 
its 3027nd meeting, on 12 May 1992, in connection with the Council's 
consideration of the item entitled: "The situation relating to Nagorno-Karabakh". 
The Members of the Security Council are deeply concerned by recent 
reports on the deterioration of the situation relating to Nagorno-Karabakh and by 
violations of cease-fire agreements which have caused heavy losses of human life 
and widespread material damage, and by their consequences for the countries of 
the region. 
The Members of the Security Council commend and support the efforts 
undertaken within the framework of the Conference on Security and Cooperation 
in Europe (CSCE), as well as other efforts aimed at assisting the parties in arriving 
at a peaceful settlement and at providing humanitarian assistance. 
They welcome the urgent dispatch by the Secretary-General of a mission to 
the region for fact-finding and to study ways and means to speedily assist the 
efforts undertaken within the framework of the CSCE to help the parties to reach a 
peaceful settlement. This mission will also include a technical element to look into 
ways the international community could provide prompt humanitarian assistance. 
The Members of the Security Council call upon all concerned to take all 
steps necessary to bring the violence to an end, to facilitate the work of the 
Secretary General's mission and to ensure the safety of its personnel. They recall 
the statements made on their behalf by the President of the Council on 29 January 
(S/23496) and 14 February 1992 (S/23597) on the admission respectively of 
Armenia and Azerbaijan to the United Nations, in particular the reference to the 
Charter principles relating to the peaceful settlement of disputes and non-use of 
force. 
 
Note by the president of the Security Council 
 
26 August 1992 
 
Following consultations among members of the Security Council/ the 
President of the Council made the following statement, on behalf of the Council, in 
connection with the item entitled: "The situation relating to Nagorno-Karabakh". 
116 
 
The members of the Security Council are deeply concerned by recent 
reports on the deterioration of the situation relating to Nagorno-Karabakh with 
heavy losses of human life and widespread material damage. 
The members of the Council strongly appeal to all parties and others 
concerned for an immediate cease-fire and support the efforts of the Minsk 
Conference on the question of Nagorno-Karabakh within the framework of the 
CSCE as well as the preparatory negotiations held in Rome. They urge all parties 
and others concerned to cooperate closely with the CSCE and to participate 
positively in the negotiations with a view to reaching a peaceful settlement of their 
disputes as early as possible. They have noted that the Secretary-General 
dispatched fact-finding missions to the region and was ready to send observers to 
the above CSCE negotiations. The members of the Council will consider further 
the role of the United Nations in Nagorno-Karabakh at an appropriate time in the 
light of the development of the situation in the area. 
 
Note by the president of the Security Council 
 
27 October 1992 
 
Following consultations with the members of the Security Council/ the 
President of the Council made the following statement, on behalf of the Council, at 
its 3127th meeting, held on 27 October 1992, in connection with the Council's 
consideration of the item entitled "The situation relating to Nagorno-Karabakh": 
The Security Council is deeply concerned by the grave situation which 
continues to prevail in Nagorno-Karabakh and surrounding districts/ and also by 
the resulting loss of human life and destruction of property/ despite the cease-fire 
agreement concluded at Sochi on 21 September 1992. 
The Security Council reaffirms the terms of its statement of 26 August 1992 
(S/24493) on the situation concerning Nagorno-Karabakh, and in particular its 
support for the efforts of the Minsk Conference on the Nagorno-Karabakh question 
within the framework of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe 
(CSCE). It strongly urges all the parties and others concerned to implement the 
cease-fire forthwith and to lift all blockades. It requests that the Minsk Conference 
be convened immediately and that political negotiations be undertaken in 
accordance with the President's rules of procedure. It urges all the parties and 
others concerned to cooperate closely with the CSCE and to participate positively 
in the Conference in order to reach an overall settlement of their disputes as soon 
as possible. 
117 
 
The Security Council welcomes the intention of the Secretary-General to 
send a representative to the region to evaluate the contribution which the United 
Nations might make in supporting the efforts of the CSCE and in providing 
humanitarian assistance. 
 
Note by the president of the Security Council 
 
29 January 1993 
 
After consultations held on 29 January 1993, the President of the Security 
Council made the following statement to the media on behalf of the members of 
the Council: 
The members of the Security Council express their deep concern at the 
devastating effect of interruptions in the supply of goods and materials, in 
particular energy supplies, to Armenia and to the Nakhichevan region of 
Azerbaijan. They note with serious concern that these interruptions, combined with 
an unusually harsh winter, have brought the economy and infrastructure of the 
region to near collapse and created a real threat of starvation. 
The members of the Council urge all countries in a position to help to 
facilitate the provision of fuel and humanitarian assistance and call on governments 
in, the region, with a view to preventing a further deterioration of the humanitarian 
situation, to allow humanitarian supplies to flow freely, in particular fuel to 
Armenia and to the Nakhichevan region of Azerbaijan. 
The members of the Council reaffirm their full support for the CSCE 
efforts, designed to bring the parties together and achieve peace in the region. They 
call upon the parties to agree to an immediate ceasefire, and an early resumption of 
talks within the CSCE framework. 
The members of the Security Council will keep the matter under 
consideration. 
 
Note by the president of the Security Council 
 
6 April 1993 
 
Following consultations with the members of the Security Council, the 
President of the Council made the following statement, on behalf of the Council, at 
its 3194th meeting, on 6 April 1993, in connection with the Council's consideration 
of the item entitled "The situation relating to Nagorno-Karabakh": 
118 
 
The Security Council expresses its serious concern at the deterioration of 
relations between the Republic of Armenia and the Republic of Azerbaijan, and at 
the escalation of hostile acts in the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, especially the 
invasion of the Kalbajar district of the Republic of Azerbaijan by local Armenian 
forces. The Council demands the immediate cessation of all such hostilities, which 
endanger peace and security of the region, and the withdrawal of these forces. 
In this context, the Security Council, reaffirming the sovereignty and 
territorial integrity of all States of the region and the inviolability of their borders, 
expresses its support for the CSCE peace process. It expresses the hope that the 
recent preliminary agreement reached by the Minsk Group will be expeditiously 
followed by agreements on a ceasefire, a timetable for the deployment of the 
monitors, a draft political declaration and the convening, as soon as possible, of the 
Minsk Conference. 
The Security Council urges the parties involved to take all necessary steps 
to advance the CSCE peace process and refrain from any action that will obstruct a 
peaceful solution to the problem. 
The Council also calls for unimpeded access to international humanitarian 
relief efforts in the region and in particular in all areas affected by the conflict in 
order to alleviate the suffering of the civilian population. 
The Security Council requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with 
the CSCE, to ascertain facts, as appropriate, and to submit urgently a report to the 
council containing an assessment of the situation on the ground. 
The Council will remain seized of the matter. 
 
Note by the president of the Security Council 
 
18 August 1993 
 
Following consultations with the members of the Security Council, the 
President of the Council made the following statement, on behalf of the Council, at 
its 3264th meeting, on 18 August 1993, in connection with the Council's 
consideration of the item entitled "The situation relating to Nagorno-Karabakh"; 
The Security Council expresses its serious concern at the deterioration of 
relations between the Republic of Armenia and the Azerbaijani Republic and at the 
tensions between them. The Council calls upon the Government of the Republic of 
Armenia to use its influence to achieve compliance by the Armenians of the 
Nagorno-Karabakh region of the Azerbaijani Republic with its resolutions 822 
(1993) and 853 (1993). 
119 
 
The Council also expresses its deep concern at the recent intensification of 
fighting in the area of Fizuli. The Council condemns the attack on the Fizuli region 
from the Nagorno-Karabakh region of the Azerbaijani Republic, just as it has 
previously condemned the invasion and seizure of the districts of Kalbajar and 
Agdam of the Azerbaijani Republic. The Council demands a stop to all attacks and 
an immediate cessation of the hostilities and bombardments, which endanger peace 
and security in the region, and an immediate, complete and unconditional 
withdrawal of occupying forces from the area of Fizuli, and from the districts of 
Kalbajar and Agdam and other recently occupied areas of the Azerbaijani 
Republic. The Council calls upon the Government of the Republic of Armenia to 
use its unique influence to this end. 
The Council reaffirms the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the 
Azerbaijani Republic and of all other States in the region and the inviolability of 
their borders, and expresses its grave concern at the effect these hostilities have had 
on the efforts of the Minsk Group of the Conference on Security and Cooperation 
in Europe (CSCE) to achieve a peaceful solution to the conflict. The Council 
stresses its full support of the CSCE peace process, and notes particularly the 
opportunity that the current round of Minsk Group talks has afforded the parties to 
the conflict to present their views directly. In this context, the Council calls upon 
all of the parties to respond positively and within the agreed time-frame to the 13 
August adjusted version of the Minsk Group's 'Timetable of urgent steps to 
implement United Nations Security Council resolutions 822 (1993) and 853 
(1993)' and to refrain from any actions that would obstruct a peaceful solution. The 
Council welcomes the intention of the CSCE to send a mission to the region to 
report on all aspects of the situation. 
In light of this most recent escalation of the conflict, the Council strongly 
reaffirms its call in resolution 853 (1993) for States to refrain from supplying any 
weapons and munitions which might lead to an intensification of the conflict or the 
continued occupation of territory of the Azerbaijani Republic. The Council calls 
upon the Government of the Republic of Armenia to ensure that the forces 
involved are not provided with the means to extend their military campaign still 
further. 
The Council also renews its calls in resolutions 822 (1993) and 853 (1993) 
for unimpeded access for international humanitarian relief efforts in the region, in 
all areas affected by the conflict, in order to alleviate the continually increasing 
suffering of the civilian population. The Council reminds the parties that they are 
bound by and must adhere to the principles and rules of international humanitarian 
law. 
120 
 
The Security Council will remain actively seized of the matter and will be 
ready to consider appropriate steps to ensure that all parties fully respect and 
comply with its resolutions. 
 
Note by the president of the Security Council 
 
26 April 1995 
 
At the 3525th meeting of the Security Council, held on 26 April 1995, in 
connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation 
relating to Nagorno-Karabakh", the President of the Security Council made the 
following statement on behalf of the Council: 
The Security Council has considered the reports (S/1995/249 and 
S/1995/321) of the Co-Chairmen of the OSCE Minsk Conference on Nagorno-
Karabakh presented in accordance with paragraph 8 of its resolution 884 (1993). It 
expresses its satisfaction that the cease-fire in the region agreed upon on 12 May 
1994 through the mediation of the Russian Federation in cooperation with the 
OSCE Minsk Group has been holding for almost a year. 
At the same time, the Council reiterates the concern it has previously 
expressed at the conflict in and around the Nagorno-Karabakh region of the 
Azerbaijani Republic and at the tensions between the Republic of Armenia and the 
Azerbaijani Republic. In particular, it expresses its concern at recent violent 
incidents and emphasizes the importance of using the mechanism of direct contacts 
for the settlement of incidents as agreed upon on 6 February 1995. It strongly urges 
the parties to the conflict to take all necessary measures to prevent such incidents 
in future. 
The Council reaffirms all its relevant resolutions, inter alia, on the 
principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States in the region. It also 
reaffirms the inviolability of international borders and the inadmissibility of the use 
of force for the acquisition of territory. 
The Council reiterates its full support for the efforts of the Co-Chairmen of 
the Minsk Conference to assist in conducting speedy negotiations for the 
conclusion of a political agreement on the cessation of the armed conflict, the 
implementation of which will eliminate major consequences of the conflict for all 
parties, inter alia, ensuring withdrawal of forces, and permit the convening of the 
Minsk Conference. The Council stresses that the parties to the conflict themselves 
bear the main responsibility for reaching a peaceful settlement. It stresses the 
urgency of concluding a political agreement on the cessation of the armed conflict 
on the basis of the relevant principles of the Charter of the United Nations and of 
121 
 
the OSCE. It strongly urges those parties to constructively conduct negotiations 
without preconditions or procedural obstacles and to refrain from any actions that 
may undermine the peace process. It emphasizes that the achievement of such an 
agreement is a prerequisite for the deployment of a multinational OSCE peace-
keeping force. 
The Council welcomes the decision of the Budapest summit of the CSCE of 
6 December 1994 on the 'Intensification of CSCE action in relation to the 
Nagorno-Karabakh conflict' (S/1995/249, appendix). It confirms its readiness to 
provide continuing political support, inter alia, through an appropriate resolution 
regarding the possible deployment of a multinational OSCE peace-keeping force 
following agreement among the parties for cessation of the armed conflict. The 
United Nations also stands ready to provide technical advice and expertise. 
The Council underlines the urgency of the implementation by the parties of 
confidence-building measures, as agreed upon within the Minsk Group on 15 April 
1994, in particular in the humanitarian field, including the release of all prisoners 
of war and civilian detainees by the first anniversary of the cease-fire. It calls upon 
the parties to prevent suffering of the civilian populations affected by the armed 
conflict. 
The Council reiterates its request that the Secretary-General, the Chairman-
in-Office of the OSCE and the Co-Chairmen of the OSCE Minsk Conference 
continues to report to the Council on the progress of the Minsk process and on the 
situation on the ground, in particular, on the implementation of its relevant 
resolutions and on present and future cooperation between the OSCE and the 
United Nations in this regard. 
The Council will keep the matter under consideration. 
 
OSCE 
 
Intensification of CSCE action in relation to the Nagorno-Karabakh 
conflict 
 
Budapest, 21 December 1994 
 
1. Deploring the continuation of the conflict and the human tragedy 
involved, the participating States welcomed the confirmation by the parties to the 
conflict of the cease-fire agreed on 12 May 1994 through the mediation of the 
Russian Federation in co-operation with the CSCE Minsk Group. They confirmed 
their commitment to the relevant resolutions of the United Nations Security 
Council and welcomed the political support given by the Security Council to the 
122 
 
CSCE's efforts towards a peaceful settlement of the conflict. To this end they 
called on the parties to the conflict to enter into intensified substantive talks, 
including direct contacts. In this context, they pledged to redouble the efforts and 
assistance by the CSCE. They strongly endorsed the mediation efforts of the CSCE 
Minsk Group and expressed appreciation for the crucial contribution of the Russian 
Federation and the efforts by other individual members of the Minsk Group. They 
agreed to harmonize these into a single co-coordinated effort within the framework 
of the CSCE. 
2. To this end, they have directed the Chairman-in-Office, in consultation 
with the participating States and acting as soon as possible, to name co-chairmen of 
the Minsk Conference to ensure a common and agreed basis for negotiations and to 
realize full co-ordination in all mediation and negotiation activities. The co-
chairmen, guided in all of their negotiating efforts by CSCE principles and an 
agreed mandate, will jointly chair meetings of the Minsk Group and jointly report 
to the Chairman-in-Office. They will regularly brief the Permanent Council on the 
progress of their work. 
3. As a first step in this effort, they directed the co-chairmen of the Minsk 
Conference to take immediate steps to promote, with the support and co-operation 
of the Russian Federation and other individual members of the Minsk Group, the 
continuation of the existing cease-fire and, drawing upon the progress already 
achieved in previous mediation activities, to conduct speedy negotiations for the 
conclusion of a political agreement on the cessation of the armed conflict, the 
implementation of which will eliminate major consequences of the conflict for all 
parties and permit the convening of the Minsk Conference. They further requested 
the co-chairmen of the Minsk Conference to continue working with the parties 
towards further implementation of confidence-building measures, particularly in 
the humanitarian field. They underlined the need for participating States to take 
action, both individually and within relevant international organizations, to provide 
humanitarian assistance to the people of the region with special emphasis on 
alleviating the plight of refugees. 
4. They agreed that, in line with the view of the parties to the conflict, the 
conclusion of the agreement mentioned above would also make it 
possible to deploy multinational peacekeeping forces as an essential element for 
the implementation of the agreement itself. They declared their political will to 
provide, with an appropriate resolution from the United Nations Security Council, 
a multinational CSCE peacekeeping force following agreement among the parties 
for cessation of the armed conflict. They requested the Chairman-in-Office to 
develop as soon as possible a plan for the establishment, composition and 
operations of such a force, organized on the basis of Chapter III of the Helsinki 
123 
 
Document 1992 and in a manner fully consistent with the Charter of the United 
Nations. To this end the Chairman-in-Office will be assisted by the co-chairmen of 
the Minsk Conference and by the Minsk Group, and be supported by the Secretary 
General; after appropriate consultations he will also establish a Committee of 
High-Ranking Persons in Vienna to make recommendations on, inter alia, the size 
and characteristics of the force, command and control, logistics, allocation of units 
and resources, rules of engagement and arrangements with contributing States. He 
will seek the support of the United Nations on the basis of the stated United 
Nations readiness to provide technical advice and expertise. He will also seek 
continuing political support from the United Nations Security Council for the 
possible deployment of a CSCE peacekeeping force. 
5. On the basis of such preparatory work and the relevant provisions of 
Chapter III of the Helsinki Document 1992, and following agreement and a formal 
request by the parties to the Chairman-in-Office through the co-chairmen of the 
Minsk Conference, the Permanent Council will take a decision on the 
establishment of the CSCE peacekeeping operation. 
 
AMENDMENTS TO OSCE LISBON SUMMIT DOCUMENTS 
 
Statement of the OSCE chairman-in-office 
 
Lisbon, December 3, 1996 
 
You all know that no progress has been achieved in the last two years to 
resolve the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict and the issue of the territorial integrity of 
the Republic of Azerbaijan. I regret that the efforts of the Co-Chairmen of the 
Minsk Conference to reconcile the views of the parties on the principles for a 
settlement have been unsuccessful. 
Three principles which should form part of the settlement of the Nagorno-
Karabakh conflict were recommended by the Co-Chairmen of the Minsk Group. 
These principles are supported by all member States of the Minsk Group. They are: 
- territorial integrity of the Republic of Armenia and the Azerbaijan 
Republic; 
- legal status of Nagorno-Karabakh defined in an agreement based on self-
determination which confers on Nagorno-Karabakh the highest degree of self-rule 
within Azerbaijan; 
- guaranteed security for Nagorno-Karabakh and its whole population, 
including mutual obligations to ensure compliance by all the Parties with the 
provisions of the settlement. 
124 
 
I regret that one participating State could not accept this. These principles 
have the support of all other participating States. 
This statement will be included in the Lisbon Summit documents. 
 
EUROPEAN UNION 
 
European Union statement on Nagorno-Karabakh 
 
Brussels, 3 September 1993 
 
The Community and its member states condemn the recent offensives by 
local Armenian forces in Nagorno-Karabakh, which are making deeper and deeper 
incursions into Azerbaijani territory. They note with regret that such actions are 
extending the area of armed conflict to encompass more and more of Azerbaijani 
territory and are creating a very serious refugee problem in Azerbaijan and one 
already involving neighboring countries, with a concomitant increased' threat to 
regional security. 
The Community and its member States reaffirm their support for the 
territorial integrity and sovereignty of the States in the region. 
The Community and its member States fully support the efforts being made 
by the Minsk Group within the framework of the CSCE to consolidate the 
provisional ceasefire decided on 31 August 1993 between the Nagorno-Karabakh 
Authorities and the Azerbaijan Government. They urge both parties to embark on 
any form of additional dialogue which would make it possible to implement the 
timetable on which there was agreement in principle by all parties at the end of 
June, 
The Community and its member States also hope to see local Armenian 
forces in Nagorno-Karabakh fully respect United Nations Security Council 
Resolutions 822 and 853, and withdraw from the regions of Kalbajar, Agdam, 
Fizuli and Jabrail. The Community and its member States have no evidence that 
Azerbaijan would be capable of initiating major attacks from these regions. 
The Community and its member States call on the Government of the 
Republic of Armenia to use its decisive influence over the Armenians of Nagorno-
Karabakh to see that they comply with Security Council Resolutions 822 and 853 
and the proposals of the CSCE Minsk Group. The Community and its member 
States call upon Armenia to ensure that the local Armenian forces carrying out 
offensives-in Azerbaijan territory are not given the material means of further 
extending such offensives. 
 
125 
 
European Union statement on Nagorno-Karabakh 
 
Brussels, 9 November 1993 
 
The European Union condemns the breach of the ceasefire agreement 
reached on 24 October 1993 in the region of Nagorno-Karabakh and calls upon all 
forces to withdraw from the recently occupied territories. The European Union 
reiterates the importance it attaches to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of 
the Republic of Azerbaijan, in accordance with the principles of the CSCE. 
The European Union is particularly concerned at the fate of tens of 
thousands of civilians who are fleeing the fighting. Receiving and protecting these 
refugees must be a priority for the international community. Moreover, the 
presence of these refugees increases the risk of the conflict becoming an 
international one and threatens the stability of the whole region. 
The European Union will continue its humanitarian aid to the affected 
population and would call upon all States in the region to facilitate the convoying 
of the aid. 
The European Union reaffirms its total support for the efforts undertaken by 
the CSCE Minsk Group in order to find a lasting political solution to the conflict in 
Nagorno-Karabakh, it prevails upon the parties to the conflict to restore the 
ceasefire broken on 24 October 1993. 
 
COUNCIL OF EUROPE 
 
European Council Parliamentary Assembly 
resolution 1047 on Nagorno-Karabakh 
 
Strasburg, November 10, 1994 
 
1. The Assembly notes with satisfaction that the ceasefire in Nagorno-
Karabakh, which came into force on 12 May 1994, has been relatively well 
complied with and hopes that it will be followed up as soon as possible by a peace 
agreement between the warring parties. 
2. This conflict, which broke out in 1988, has already resulted in almost 20 
000 deaths and more than one million refugees. 
3. The Assembly notes with satisfaction the efforts of the CSCE's Minsk 
Group, the Government of the Russian Federation, the United Nations Security 
Council, the Inter parliamentary Assembly of the CIS and its own Committee on 
126 
 
Relations with European Non-Member Countries to encourage the warring parties 
to sign a peace agreement.  
4. It welcomes the agreement signed on 26 July 1994 by the Ministers of 
Defense of Armenia and Azerbaijan and the commander of the army of Nagorno-
Karabakh, in which they affirm their commitment to observe the ceasefire and their 
eagerness to accelerate the signing of a political agreement, and calls urgently on 
all the warring parties to refrain from any hostile act which might jeopardize the 
fragile ceasefire that has been in force since 12 May 1994. 
5. It declares its readiness to help promote the conclusion of a peace 
agreement to the best of its abilities, particularly by encouraging dialogue between 
parliamentarians from the parties concerned. 
6. Finally, it calls on the warring parties to organize the return home of 
refugees on an urgent basis and to respect minority rights as advocated in its 
Recommendation 1201, and urgently calls on Azerbaijan and Turkey to 
immediately end the blockade of their means of communication with Armenia. 
 
European Council Parliamentary Assembly 
resolution 1119 on Transcaucasian conflicts 
 
Strasburg, April 22, 1997 
 
1. The Assembly considers that maintaining the cease-fires, in force in the 
Transcaucasian conflicts, particularly in Abkhazia and Nagorno-Karabakh since 
May 1994, should help to bring about political stabilization in the zones of tension. 
2. Following the various hearings held by its Committee on Relations with 
European Non-Member Countries, it hopes that rapid, decisive progress towards a 
political settlement of these conflicts will be made. 
3. The three Transcaucasian countries - Armenia, Azerbaijan and Georgia - 
all hold special guest status and have applied for full member ship of the Council 
of Europe. The Assembly considers that a genuine political will by all the parties to 
settle these conflicts would help to speed up the accession procedures. 
4. The Assembly appeals to all parties directly or indirectly involved in 
these conflicts to participate constructively in the mediation work conducted on the 
ground, particularly by the United Nations, the Commonwealth of Independent 
States (CIS) and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe 
(OSCE). 
5. Even though these two conflicts are different in nature, the Assembly 
stresses that their political settlement must be negotiated by all parties involved, 
127 
 
drawing in particular on the following principles, which are based upon the 1975 
Helsinki Final Act and the 1990 Paris Charter: 
I. inviolability of borders; 
II. guaranteed security for all peoples in the areas concerned, particularly 
through multinational peacekeeping forces; 
III. extensive autonomy status for Abkhazia and Nagorno-Karabakh to be 
negotiated by all the parties concerned; 
IV. right of return of refugees and displaced persons and their reintegration 
respecting human rights. 
6. The Assembly considers that in the Transcaucasian countries, the Council 
of Europe should make a genuine contribution to establishing the rule of law, 
pluralist democracy, the protection of human rights and the creation of a social 
market economy. 
A. In connection with Abkhazia, 
7. The Assembly is interested to note certain signs of rapprochement 
between the positions of Tbilisi and Sukhumi and hopes that a negotiated political 
settlement will soon be reached on the basis of the above-mentioned principles. 
8. It hopes that the efforts of the parties concerned and also of the United 
Nations, the OSCE and the Russian Federation, will soon lead to an institutional 
balance acceptable to both Tbilisi and Sukhumi, so that the refugees can return 
under optimum security conditions and the populations of the region can return to 
peace and economic prosperity. 
B. With regard to Nagorno-Karabakh, 
9. The Assembly welcomes the continued dialogue between Armenian and 
Azeri parliamentarians, particularly as part of the seminar on the conflicts in 
Transcaucasia organized by its Committee on Relations with European Non-
Member Countries in Strasbourg on 26 January 1997, and welcomes in this 
connection the resumption of the activities of the OSCE Minsk Group on Nagorno-
Karabakh, which it encourages to continue negotiations with a view to securing an 
early settlement of the conflict. 
10. It appeals to all parties to the conflict to intensify direct negotiations 
with a view to achieving a political settlement to the conflict guaranteeing 
restitution of occupied territories and the return of refugees and displaced persons, 
satisfactory alternative status for Nagorno-Karabakh as well as its security. 
11. Finally, it expresses the wish that in the long run the three 
Transcaucasian countries - Armenia, Azerbaijan and Georgia – envisage the 
creating of a community of Transcaucasian states and the setting up of a joint 
parliamentary assembly. 
 
128 
 
Prisoners of war and hostages held in 
Armenia and Nagorno-Karabakh 
 
Strasburg, 25 April 2001 
 
1. As a result of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict started in 1988, which 
later led to the military aggression of Armenia against Azerbaijan, approximately 
20 percent of the territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan was occupied. 
2. According to the information given on 10 April 2001 as a consequence 
of this occupation 4 959 persons have been vanished, 1 092 persons out of this 
number were released (from 1992 to 2001) and according to the same information 
from the International Red Cross Committee, 176 persons are deceased. 
3. But what is more important at present is that there are 783 captives, 
including 18 children, 43 women and 56 older men on the territory of Armenia and 
occupied Azerbaijani lands. Nevertheless, the Armenian side rejects this fact. 
4. It is more than 6 months that the International Red Cross Committee, 
according to its own information, is not able to visit those captives. 
5. It is already three months since Azerbaijan and Armenia became full 
members of the Council of Europe, and the presence of this amount of captives 
who do not have even any basic human rights on the territory of the country that is 
a member of the Council of Europe is unacceptable. 
6. According to the stories of the witnesses who were released from 
captivity, all the captives are in slavery, constantly outraged and tortured. They do 
not get any normal food and necessary medical care. 
7. The Assembly calls on the Committee of Ministers to ensure 
implementation of the European Convention on Human Rights on the territory of 
its member state, Armenia and the occupied lands of Azerbaijan by using all the 
means at its disposal. 
8. The Assembly calls on the Committee on Legal Affairs and Human 
Rights to appoint a reporter on the issue of finding a solution to this problem as 
soon as possible; 
 
Recognition of the genocide perpetrated 
against the Azeri population by the Armenians 
 
Strasburg, 26 April 2001 
 
129 
 
Genocide became an integral part of the Azeri history starting from the 
partition of the Azeri lands with the treaties of Gulustan in 1813 and Turkmenchay 
in 1828. 
The Armenians carried out massacres against the Azerbaijanis in 1905-1907 
in order to achieve "the Greater Armenia". 
In March 1918, the Armenians purged the Azerbaijanis from Baku, 
Shamakhy, Guba, Karabakh, Zangazur, Nakhichevan, Lankaran and other regions 
of Azerbaijan. 
With the help of the Soviet regime, Armenia annexed Zangazur and other 
Azeri lands in 1920. 
The Communist regime deported the Azeri population from their historical 
lands in Armenia to Azerbaijan from 1948-1953. 
From the beginning of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict in 1988, hundreds of 
thousands of Azerbaijanis were deported from their historical lands. 
On 26 February 1992, Armenians massacred the whole population of 
Khojali and fully destroyed the city. 
Armenian separatism in Nagorno-Karabakh and the ongoing Armenian 
occupation of 20 percent of the Azeri territory has resulted in thousands of deaths 
and more than a million refugees. 
The undersigned, members of the Assembly, appeal to all the members of 
the Parliamentary Assembly to take the necessary steps to recognize the genocide 
perpetrated by the Armenians against the Azeri population from the beginning of 
the 19th Century. 
 
Armenia must recognize the territorial integrity of Azerbaijan.  
The address of the members of the European Parliamentary  
Assembly to Committee of Ministers' 
 
Strasburg, 26 June 2001 
 
The Committee of Ministers, at their 108th Ordinary Session on 10 and 11 
May 2001, discussed the situation in the Balkans and Caucasus. During the 
meeting the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Armenia, Mr. V. 
Oscanyan, declared that Armenia does not and will not recognize the territorial 
integrity of Azerbaijan until the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict is settled. 
Taking into consideration that 
- both Azerbaijan and Armenia are full members of the Council of Europe; 
130 
 
- the territorial integrity of the Republic of Azerbaijan is recognized by all 
the international organizations, including the UN, the OSCE, the Council of 
Europe and by all the world states; 
- one member state of the Council of Europe, Armenia, does not recognize 
the territorial integrity of another member state, Azerbaijan; 
-Armenia has occupied 20% of the territory of Azerbaijan, and that this has 
led to mass violation of human rights. 
To ask the Committee of Ministers to invite the Republic of Armenia 
-to respect such principles of International Law as territorial integrity and 
sovereignty of states and to recognize the territorial integrity of Azerbaijan; 
-to secure immediate withdrawal of the Armenian military forces from the 
occupied Azerbaijani lands. 
 
Seizure and destruction of Azerbaijani cultural heritage 
 
Strasburg, 27 June 2001 
 
One of the tragic consequences of Armenian aggression towards the 
Republic of Azerbaijan besides the occupation of 20 percent of the territory of the 
country is the destruction and seizure of Azerbaijani national and cultural heritage. 
In spite of many appeals by international organizations, Armenia has not made any 
constructive steps towards providing security for the cultural wealth of Azerbaijan 
left in the occupied regions. 
500 historical architectural and more than 100 archeological monuments, 22 
museums, 4 art galleries, 927 libraries, 85 musical schools, 4 state theatres remain 
on the occupied territories of Azerbaijan. 
As a result of military actions, the Museums of Historical and Regional 
Studies in Kalbajar and Lachin, the Museums of History of Shusha and Karabakh, 
the Stone Monuments Museums in Zangilan as well as many others were 
plundered and destroyed. 
The occupations caused the leveling to the ground of unique monuments of 
the Bronze Epoch - Khojali Barrow Field with about 100 barrows. 
The Assembly is deeply alarmed by the transformation of the Azykh Cave, 
a precious monument, which is one of the oldest places of human civilization, into 
an ammunition dump. 
The number of cases of misappropriation of Azerbaijani works of art and 
literature by Armenians verified by the Copyright Protection Agency of the 
Republic of Azerbaijan cause serious concern to the Azerbaijani people. 
131 
 
Taking into account that the cultural heritage created in the course of many 
centuries does not belong only to a separate nation or a country but also is a 
constituent part of world culture, the Parliamentary Assembly appeals to the 
Committee of Ministers to take the necessary steps to promote stopping the 
destruction and misappropriation of the Azerbaijani cultural heritage. 
 
Ecological situation in the Republic of Azerbaijan  
(Mountainous Karabakh, Shusha, Lachin, Gubatli,  
Zangilan, Kalbajar, Agdam, Fizuli, Jabrail) 
 
Strasburg, 27 June 2001 
 
Considering the global importance of ecological problems in the present 
world, the Council of Europe is greatly alarmed by the ecological situation, which 
has emerged in the territories of the Republic of Azerbaijan (mountainous 
Karabakh, Shusha, Lachin, Gubatli, Zangilan, Kalbajar, Agdam, Fizuli, Jabrail). 
There are two national reserves (Karabakh and Basitchay) and four 
temporary reserves (Lachin, Gubatli, pre-Araz and Damalti) in the above-
mentioned Azeri territories. These national reserves with their unique natural 
landscapes, fauna and flora are absolutely not controlled by Azerbaijan and 
according to the available information are systematically plundered. 
The total area of woods in the above-mentioned territories was 264.000 
hectares. At present all the precious species of trees in the said area have been 
felled and animals have completely disappeared. As a result, the vital biological 
relations among the natural complexes have been violated and an ecological crisis 
has emerged. 
The chemical analyses of the water in the river Araz, the biggest branch of 
the river Kur, the most vital water artery of Azerbaijan, show that the level of 
pollution of water exceeds the admissible norm for many times. Taking into 
account that the main branches of the river Araz (Okhchuchay, Razdan, Arpachay) 
run through the territory of Armenia, and bearing in mind the fact that the Republic 
of Armenia has not ratified the "Convention on the Protection and Usage of 
Transborder Water Arteries and International Lakes" (Helsinki 2000), the 
Assembly expresses its great concern about the situation which has emerged. 
Taking into consideration the high seismicity of the whole Caucasian region 
(earthquakes in Spitak in 1988, in Baku in 2000), the presence of the atomic power 
station in the Republic of Armenia is a potential source of danger for life not only 
in the Caucasian region, but also in the whole of Eastern Europe and the Middle 
East. 
132 
 
Taking as a guide the provision ratified by the Republic of Azerbaijan in the 
February of 2001 to the Basel Convention on Controlling the Trans-border 
Transportation of Dangerous Wastes, as well as taking into consideration the fact 
that the above-mentioned Azeri territories are completely uncontrolled, the 
Assembly expresses its alarm and fear on the possible dumping of nuclear wastes 
of the Armenian atomic power station in the Azerbaijani territories. 
Taking into account the above, the Assembly calls on the Committee of 
Ministers to take the necessary steps to prevent the expected ecological catastrophe 
in this unique part of the European continent, which is under occupation. 
 
European Council Parliamentary Assembly Committee of Ministers' 
resolution 
 
Strasburg, 24 September 2001 
 
The members accept written question N° 396 by Mrs. Hajiyeva: 
1. The Committee of Ministers noted with interest Written Question N° 
396 by Mrs. Hajiyeva on the recognition of the territorial integrity of Azerbaijan by 
Armenia. 
2. Mrs. Hajiyeva refers to the Committee of Ministers' 108th Session of 10 
and 11 May 2001. At this meeting, the Committee of Ministers did indeed examine 
the situation in the Balkans and the Caucasus. At the close of the Session, at which 
all its members were represented, the Committee of Ministers adopted a 
Communique, paragraph 2 of which states: 
3. "The Ministers reaffirmed their support for the respect for inter-
nationally recognized borders, sovereignty and territorial integrity of states 
throughout Europe, as well as for the other principles of international law set out in 
the United Nations Charter, the CSCE Helsinki Final Act and other relevant texts." 
4. In adopting this sentence: 
"One delegation said that it accepted this sentence on the understanding that 
there was no hierarchy between the principles of international law referred to, 
whether these are explicitly mentioned or not. That delegation made a statement in 
this respect, which is reproduced in the minutes of the meeting." 
5. It follows that the Committee of Ministers, has explicitly reaffirmed its 
support for the respect of all internationally recognized borders, sovereignty and 
territorial integrity of all members of the Council of Europe, whilst equally 
acknowledging the value of other principles of international law. The right to self-
determination of peoples and the other principles contained in the Helsinki final act 
will be equally and unreservedly applied, each of them being interpreted taking 
133 
 
into account the others. Thus the right to self-determination should be respected, in 
conformity with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations 
and with norms of international law, including those relating to territorial integrity 
of states. 
Consequently, this right may only be exercised following peaceful 
negotiations. Use of force for the purpose of acquiring territory is unacceptable and 
any resultant acquisition cannot be recognized as lawful. 
6. The Committee of Ministers refers to paragraph 12 of the Communique 
of the 108th Session quoted above. In addition, at its 761
st
 meeting (18 July 2001, 
item 2.6) in the context of examination of the GT-SUIVLAGO's report, it had 
again "urged the authorities of both countries to take active steps to find a peaceful 
solution to the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict". In this regard, the Committee of 
Ministers refers to the Group's report, which had been transmitted to the 
Parliamentary Assembly. 
7. The Committee of Ministers appeals to the two member states 
concerned to find a compromise according to the principles mentioned in 
paragraph 5 above and to avoid any statement in favour of a military solution or 
likely to strengthen enmity and hatred, in disregard of the commitments entered 
into by both countries when joining the Council of Europe. The Committee of 
Ministers is in fact convinced that a peaceful solution to this conflict is a matter of 
fundamental importance and great urgency, because the implementation of this 
joint commitment by the two countries may have a positive effect on the honoring 
of all their other commitments. Poverty and hatred are not fertile ground for 
democracy and respect for human rights, and peace is essential not only for the 
stability of the region and its economic development, but also for the establishment 
and consolidation of democracy in these countries. 
 
Network of terrorist organizations supported by Armenia  
on the occupied territories of the Republic of Azerbaijan 
 
Strasburg, 24 June 2002 
 
The 20 per cent of territory in the Republic of Azerbaijan occupied by 
Armenia, where the norms of international law are no longer respected, have 
become isolated from the European continent and represent a serious zone of 
insecurity for the world community. 
The financial sources of the terrorist groups that are located on the occupied 
territories are the sale of drugs, nuclear projects as well as arms trafficking. The 
report of the US State Department of March 2000 about the creation of the 
134 
 
necessary conditions for the cultivation and production of narcotics in the 
Nagorno-Karabakh region as well as the adoption of the decision in May 2002 by 
the US State Department on the application of sanctions against Armenian 
organizations that are engaged in the implementation of illegal nuclear projects in 
the occupied territories very much proves the need to pay particular attention to the 
terrorist network that manages these criminal activities under the protection of the 
Armenian government. 
The non-control of the occupied territories creates fertile ground not only 
for "Asala" and "Haydud" - Armenian terrorist organizations - but also encourages 
foreign terrorist organizations that have the facilities to set up training camps and 
carry out the relevant activities. 
In the occupied Kalbajar district the Lebanese "Organization of returning 
heroes" (leader: O. Ter-Grigorian - Armenian of Beirut origin), in the Lachin 
district the Kurdish PKK organisation (leader: J. Shamoyan) and the "Knights of 
Vartan" terrorist organization (leader: A.Babachanyan), in the Zangilan district the 
military wing "Ziyeddin Al-Gissan" of the Lebanese group "Hamas", in Khankendi 
the Greek "Organization of national revival" terrorist group (leader: E.Galustyan) 
are all very active in their actions. 
The awarding of the title of national hero of the Karabakh war by the 
Armenian President to international terrorists such as US citizen Monte 
Melkonyan, Iranian citizen Vazgen Sisliyan and Syrian citizen Varujan Garbijyan 
famous for their terrorist acts in the 1970-80's in France, and taking them under the 
protection of the government provides irrefutable proof of the support for terrorism 
at state level in Armenia. 
Stressing that the "lawless area" in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan 
presents a danger for the whole of Europe, the Assembly calls on member states to 
increase their efforts to find a solution to the problem. 
The Assembly underlines the urgent need to set up a monitoring group in 
order to examine thoroughly the current situation in the occupied Nagorno-
Karabakh region and seven adjacent districts of Azerbaijan. 
The Assembly recommends that the Committee of Ministers take the 
necessary steps so that Armenia, which uses the occupied international non-control 
zone to set up terrorist groups and networks, cultivate and transit narcotics, 
implement secret nuclear projects, immediately stops its activities which are 
contrary to the norms of international law and the Statute of the Council of Europe. 
 
 
 
 
135 
 
European Council Parliamentary Assembly 
Resolution 1416 (2004)
1
 on the conflict over the  
Nagorno-Karabakh region dealt with the 
OSCE Minsk Conference 
 
Strasburg, January 25, 2005 
 
1. The Parliamentary Assembly regrets that, more than a decade after the 
armed hostilities started, the conflict over the Nagorno-Karabakh region remains 
unsolved. Hundreds of thousands of people are still displaced and live in miserable 
conditions. Considerable parts of the territory of Azerbaijan are still occupied by 
Armenian forces and separatists forces are still in control of the Nagorno-Karabakh 
region. 
2. The Assembly expresses its concern that the military action, and the 
widespread ethnic hostilities which preceded it, led to large-scale ethnic expulsion 
and the creation of mono-ethnic areas which resemble the terrible concept of ethnic 
cleansing. The Assembly reaffirms that independence and secession of a regional 
territory from a state may only be achieved through a lawful and peaceful process 
based on democratic support by the inhabitants of such territory and not in the 
wake of an armed conflict leading to the occupation of foreign territory by a 
member state constitutes a grave violation of that state's obligations as a member of 
the Council of Europe and reaffirms the right of displaced persons from the area of 
conflict to return to their homes safely and with dignity. 
3. The assembly recalls Resolutions 822 (1993), 853 (1993), 874 (1993) 
and 884 (1993) of the United Nations security Council and urges the parties 
concerned to comply with them, in particular by refraining from any armed 
hostilities and by withdrawing military forces from any occupied territories. The 
Assembly also aligns itself with the demand expressed in Resolution 853 (1993) of 
the United Nations Security Council and thus urges all member stats to refrain 
from the supply of any weapons and munitions which might lead to an 
intensification of the conflict or the continued occupation of territory. 
4. The Assembly recalls that both Armenia and Azerbaijan committed 
themselves upon their accession to the Council of Europe in January 
2001 to use only peaceful means for settling the conflict, by refraining from any 
threat of using force against their neighbours. At the same time, Armenia 
                                                          
1 [1] Assembly debate on 25 January 2005 (2nd Sitting) (see Doc. 10364, report of the Political Affairs 
Committee, reporter: Mr. Atkinson). Text adopted by the Assembly on 25 January 2005 (2nd Sitting). 
 
136 
 
committed itself to use its considerable influence over Nagorno-Karabakh to foster 
a solution to the conflict. The Assembly urges both Governments to comply with 
these commitments and refrain from using armed forces against each other as well 
as from propagating military action. 
5. The Assembly recalls that the Council of Ministers of the Conference for 
Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) agreed in Helsinki in March 1992 to 
hold a conference in Minsk in order to provide for a forum for negotiations for a 
peaceful settlement of the conflict. Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, the former 
Czech and Slovak Federal Republic, France, Germany, Italy, the Russian 
Federation, Sweden, Turkey and the United States of America agreed at that time 
to participate in this Conference. The Assembly calls on these states to step up 
their efforts to achieve the peaceful resolution of the conflict and invites their 
national delegations to the Assembly to report annually to the Assembly on the 
action of their government in this respect. For this purpose, the Assembly asks its 
Bureau to create an Ad hoc Committee with inter alia the heads of these national 
delegations. 
6. The Assembly pays tribute to the tireless efforts of the Co-Chairs of the 
Minsk Group and the Personal Representative of the OSCE Chairman-in-Office, in 
particular for having achieved a cease-fire in May 1994 and having monitored the 
observance of this cease-fire since then. The Assembly calls on the OSCE Minsk 
Group Co-Chairs to take immediate steps to conduct speedy negotiations for the 
conclusion of a political agreement on the cessation of the armed conflict, the 
implementation of which will eliminate major consequences of the conflict for all 
parties and permit the convening of the Minsk Conference. The Assembly calls on 
Armenia and Azerbaijan to make use of the OSCE Minsk Process and actively 
submit to each other via the Minsk Group their constructive proposals for the 
peaceful settlement of the conflict in accordance with the relevant norms and 
principles of international law. 
7. The Assembly recalls that Armenia and Azerbaijan are signatory parties 
to the Charter of the United Nations and, in accordance with Article 93, paragraph 
1 of the Charter, ipso facto parties to the Statute of the International Court of 
Justice. Therefore, the Assembly suggests that if the negotiations under the 
auspices of the Co-Chairs of the Minsk Group fail, Armenia and Azerbaijan should 
consider using the International Court of Justice in accordance with Article 36, 
paragraph 1 of the Court's Statute, 
8. The Assembly calls on Armenia and Azerbaijan to foster political 
reconciliation among themselves by stepping up bilateral inter-parliamentary co-
operation within the Assembly as well as in other forums such as the meetings of 
the Speakers of the Parliaments of the Caucasian Four. It recommends that both 
137 
 
delegations should meet during each part-session of the Assembly to review 
progress on such reconciliation. 
9. The Assembly calls on the Government of Azerbaijan to establish 
contacts without preconditions with the political representatives of both 
communities from the Nagorno-Karabakh region regarding the future status of the 
region. It is prepared to provide facilities for such contacts in Strasburg, recalling 
that it did so in the form of a hearing on previous occasions with Armenian 
participation. 
10. Recalling its Recommendation 1570 (2002) on the situation of refugees 
and displaced persons in Armenia, Azerbaijan and Georgia, the Assembly calls on 
all member and observer states to provide humanitarian aid and assistance to the 
hundreds of thousands of people displaced as a consequence of the armed 
hostilities and the expulsion of ethnic Armenians from Azerbaijan and ethnic 
Azerbaijanis from Armenia. 
11. The Assembly condemns any expression of hatred portrayed in the 
media of Armenia and Azerbaijan. The Assembly calls on Armenia and Azerbaijan 
to foster reconciliation, confidence-building and mutual understanding among their 
peoples through schools, universities and the media. Without such reconciliation, 
hatred and mistrust will prevent stability in the region and may lead to new 
violence. Any sustainable settlement must be preceded by and embedded in such 
reconciliation processes. 
12. The Assembly calls on the Secretary General of the Council of Europe 
to draw up an action plan for specific support to Armenia and Azerbaijan targeted 
at mutual reconciliation processes and to take this resolution into account in 
deciding on action concerning Armenia and Azerbaijan. 
13. The Assembly calls on the Congress of Local and Regional Authorities 
of the Council of Europe to assist locally elected representatives of Armenia and 
Azerbaijan in establishing mutual contacts and inter-regional co-operation. 
14. The Assembly resolves to analyse the conflict settlement mechanisms 
existing within the Council of Europe, in particular the European Convention for 
the Peaceful Settlement of Disputes, in order to provide its member states with 
better mechanisms for the peaceful settlement of bilateral conflicts as well as 
internal disputes involving local or regional territorial communities or authorities 
which may endanger human rights, stability and peace, 
15. The Assembly resolves to continue monitoring on a regular basis the 
peaceful resolution of this conflict and decides to revert to considering this issue at 
its first-session in 2006. 
 
 
138 
 
European Council Parliamentary Assembly 
The conflict over the Nagorno-Karabakh region  
dealt with by the OSCE Minsk Conference 
Recommendation 1690 (2005)
1
 
 
Strasburg, January 25, 2005 
 
1. The Parliamentary Assembly refers to its Resolution 1416 (2005) on the 
conflict dealt with by the OSCE Minsk Conference and recommends that the 
Committee of Ministers: 
I. urge the parties concerned to comply with the United Nations Security 
Council Resolutions 822 (1993), 853 (1993), 874 (1993) and 884 (1993), in 
particular by refraining from any armed hostilities and by withdrawing military 
forces from all occupied territories of Azerbaijan; 
II. monitor the compliance by Armenia and Azerbaijan with the United 
Nations Security Council Resolutions and the decisions of the 
OSCE Council of Ministers on this conflict and to report to the Assembly on the 
outcomes of this monitoring; 
III. report to the Assembly on the efforts undertaken by member states for 
the peaceful settlement of the conflict in accordance with the Resolutions of the 
United Nations Security Council including whether member states refrain from the 
supply of any weapons and munitions which might lead to an intensification of the 
conflict or the continued occupation of territory in violation of Resolution 853 
(1993) of the United Nations Security Council; 
IV. recalling its Recommendations 1251 (1994) on the conflict in Nagorno-
Karabakh, place experts at the disposal of Armenia and Azerbaijan who could help 
draw up a political status for Nagorno-Karabakh, if they so wish; 
V. allocate resources for an action plan of specific confidence-building 
measures for Armenia and Azerbaijan; 
VI. allocate resources for specific training programs for teachers and 
journalists from both countries aimed at better mutual understanding, tolerance and 
reconciliation; 
VII. allocate resources for specific action by the European Commission 
against Racism and Intolerance concerning both countries, in particular with regard 
to educational institutions and the public media; 
                                                          
1 Assembly debate on 25 January 2005 (2nd Sitting) (sec Doc. 10364, report of the Political Affairs 
Committee, reporter: Mr. Atkinson). Text adopted by the Assembly on 25 January 2005 (2nd Sitting). 
139 
 
VIII. instruct its competent steering committee to analyze how far the 
European Convention for the Peaceful Settlement of Disputes reflects the current 
requirements of conflict settlement among member states of the Council of Europe 
and where it should be revised in order to provide an adequate instrument for the 
peaceful settlement of disputes between the member states of the Council of 
Europe; 
IX. take Resolution 1416 (2005) into account when deciding on action 
concerning both countries; 
X. forward Resolution 1416 (2005) and this Recommendation to the 
governments of member states with a view to supporting them nationally, 
bilaterally and internationally. 
 
  
 
THE ORGANIZATION OF ISLAMIC CONFERENCE 
 
Conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan 
 
Karachi, 25 - 29 April 1993 
 
The Twenty-First Islamic Conference of Foreign Ministers held in Karachi, 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan 
Proceeding from the principles and objectives of the Charter of the 
Organization of the Islamic Conference; 
Gravely concerned over the serious escalation of the conflict between 
Armenia and Azerbaijan over the Karabakh issue; 
Strongly condemning the recent Armenian offensive against Azerbaijan and 
the occupation of Azerbaijan territory; 
Deeply distressed by the magnitude and severity of humanitarian problems 
resulting from Armenian aggression against the Republic of Azerbaijan; 
Recalling the principled position taken by the Fifth Extraordinary Session of 
the Islamic Conference of Foreign Ministers, held in Istanbul in June 1992 on this 
issue; 
Also recalling the relevant paragraphs of the Final Communique adopted by 
the OIC Coordination Meeting of the Foreign Ministers at the United Nations, New 
York, on 23 September, 1992; 
Noting the efforts made by the neighboring countries and regional states 
notably the Islamic Republic of Iran and the Republic of Turkey to promote a 
peaceful settlement of the Karabakh issue; 
140 
 
Conscious of the threat posed to international peace and security by this 
latest Armenian aggression; 
Aware of the disruptive effect that this new military offensive can have on 
the peace process being pursued within the framework of the CSCE; 
Noting with appreciation the Report of the Secretary General on this subject 
(Document No.ICFM/21-93/PIL/D.6/ Rev.I); 
Strongly condemns the Armenian aggression against the Republic of 
Azerbaijan. 
Demands the immediate withdrawal of Armenian forces from all occupied 
Azerbaijan territories and strongly urges Armenia to respect the sovereignty and 
territorial integrity of the Republic of Azerbaijan. 
Calls for a just and peaceful settlement of the Karabakh issue on the basis of 
respect for the principles of territorial integrity of states and inviolability of 
internationally recognized frontiers. 
Urges both Armenia and Azerbaijan to engage constructively in the ongoing 
CSCE peace process and refrain from any action that will make it more difficult to 
reach a peaceful solution. 
Reaffirms its total solidarity and support for the efforts being made by the 
Government and people of Azerbaijan to defend their country. 
Calls for enabling the forcibly displaced persons to return to their homes in 
safety, honour and dignity. 
Requests the Member States, the Islamic Development Bank and other 
Islamic institutions to provide urgent financial and humanitarian assistance to the 
Republic of Azerbaijan. 
Requests also the UN Secretary General and the President of the Security 
Council to use their full authority for the adoption of the Security Council 
Resolution condemning the Armenian aggression and demanding immediate 
withdrawal of Armenian military formations from all occupied Azerbaijan 
territories. 
Requests further the Secretary General to follow up the implementation of 
this Resolution and to submit a Report thereon to the Twenty-Second Islamic 
Conference of Foreign Ministers. 
 
On the conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan 
 
Casablanca, 13-15 December 1994 
 
The Seventh Islamic Summit Conference, held in Casablanca, Kingdom of 
Morocco, from 11 to 13 December, 1994) 
141 
 
Proceeding from the principles and objectives of the Charter of the 
Organization of the Islamic Conference; 
Gravely concerned over the serious escalation of aggression by the Republic 
of Armenia against the Azerbaijan Republic which has resulted in the occupation 
of more than 20% of Azerbaijan territory; 
Deeply distressed over the plight of more than one million Azerbaijan 
displaced persons and refugees resulting from Armenian aggression and magnitude 
and severity of humanitarian problems; 
Recalling the principled position taken on this issue by the Fifth and 
Seventh Extraordinary Sessions of the Islamic Conference of Foreign Ministers, 
held in Istanbul in June 1992, and Islamabad in September, 1994 respectively; 
Also recalling the relevant paragraphs of the Final Communique adopted by 
the OIC Coordination Meeting of the Foreign Ministers at the United Nations, New 
York, on 23 September 1992 and 3 October 1994; 
Noting the efforts made by the neighboring countries and regional states, 
notably the Islamic Republic of Iran and the Republic of Turkey to promote a 
peaceful settlement of the conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan; 
Conscious of the threat posed to international peace and security by the 
Armenian aggression; 
Urging strict adherence to the Charter of the UN and full implementation of 
Security Council resolutions; 
Noting the destructive influence of the policy of aggression of the Republic 
of Armenia on the peace process in the CSCE framework; 
1. Strongly condemns the aggression of the Republic of Armenia against the 
Azerbaijan Republic; 
2. Considers the actions perpetrated against civilian Azerbaijani population 
in occupied Azerbaijan territory as crimes against humanity; 
3. Strongly demands the strict implementation of the United Nations 
Security Council resolutions 822, 853, 874 and 884, immediate unconditional and 
complete withdrawal of Armenian forces from all occupied Azerbaijani territories 
including Lachin and Shusha regions and strongly urges Armenia to respect the 
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Azerbaijan Republic. 
4. Calls on the Security Council to recognize the existence of aggression 
against the Azerbaijan Republic; take the necessary steps under Chapter VII of the 
Charter of the United Nations to ensure compliance with its resolutions; condemn 
and reverse aggression against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the 
Azerbaijan Republic and decides to take coordinated action to this end at the 
United Nations. 
5. Reaffirms that, acquisition of land by use of force cannot be recognized. 
142 
 
6. Calls for a just and peaceful settlement of the conflict between Armenia 
and Azerbaijan on the basis of respect for the principles of territorial integrity of 
states and inviolability of internationally recognized frontiers. 
7. Urges both Armenia and Azerbaijan and all states member of the Minsk 
Group to engage constructively in the ongoing CSCE peace process and refrain 
from any action that will make it more difficult to reach a peaceful solution. 
8. Reaffirms its total solidarity and support for the efforts being made by 
the Government and people of Azerbaijan to defend their country. 
9. Calls for enabling the displaced persons and refugees to return to their 
homes in safety, honour and dignity. 
10. Expresses its concern over the severity of humanitarian problems con-
cerning the existence of more than one million displaced persons and refugees in 
the territory of the Azerbaijan Republic and requests the member states, the Islamic 
Development Bank and the other Islamic Institutions to render urgent financial and 
humanitarian assistance to the Azerbaijan Republic. 
11. Requests the Secretary General to follow up the implementation of this 
Resolution and to submit a Report to the Twenty-third Islamic Conference of 
Foreign Ministers. 
 
On the aggression of the Republic of Armenia against  
the Republic of Azerbaijan 
 
Jakarta, 9-11 December 1997 
 
The Eighth Session of the Islamic Summit Conference (Session of Dignity, 
Dialogue, Participation), held in Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, from 9 to 11 
December, 1997. 
Proceeding from the principles and objectives of the Charter of the 
Organization of the Islamic Conference; 
Gravely concerned over the aggression by the Republic of Armenia against 
the Republic of Azerbaijan which has resulted in the occupation of more than 20% 
of Azeri territory; 
Deeply distressed over the plight of more than one million Azeri displaced 
persons and refugees resulting from Armenian aggression and magnitude and 
severity of humanitarian problems; 
Reaffirming all previous relevant resolutions and, in particular, the 
resolution on this matter, adopted by the Seventh Islamic Summit Conference, held 
in Casablanca, Kingdom of Morocco, from 13 to 14 December 1994; 
143 
 
Conscious of the threat posed to international peace and security by the 
Armenian aggression; 
Urging strict adherence to the Charter of the UN and full implementation of 
Security Council resolutions; 
Welcoming all diplomatic and other efforts for the settlement of the 
conflict; 
Reaffirming all Member States respect for the sovereignty, territorial 
integrity and political independence of the Republic of Azerbaijan; 
Reaffirming also that acquisition of land by use of force cannot be 
recognized. 
Noting also the destructive influence of the policy of aggression of the 
Republic of Armenia on the peace process in the OSCE framework; 
1. Strongly condemns the aggression of the Republic of Armenia against 
the Republic of Azerbaijan. 
2. Considers the actions perpetrated against civilian Azerbaijan population 
in occupied Azerbaijan territory as crimes against humanity. 
3. Strongly condemns looting and destruction of the archaeological, 
cultural and religious monuments on the occupied territories of Azerbaijan. 
4. Strongly demands the strict implementation of the United Nations 
Security Council resolutions 822, 853, 874 and 884, immediate, unconditional and 
complete withdrawal of Armenian forces from all occupied Azerbaijan territories 
inter alia Lachin and Shusha regions and strongly urges Armenia to respect the 
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Azerbaijan. 
5. Expresses its concern that Armenia has not yet implemented demands 
contained in the UN Security Council resolutions. 
6. Calls on the Security Council to recognize the existence of aggression 
against the Republic of Azerbaijan; take the necessary steps under Chapter VII of 
the Charter of the United Nations to ensure compliance with its resolutions; 
condemn and reverse aggression against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of 
the Republic of Azerbaijan and decides to take coordinated action to this end at the 
United Nations. 
7. Urges all States to refrain from providing any supplies of military arms 
and equipment to Armenia, which can encourage the aggressor to escalate the 
conflict and to continue the occupation of the Azerbaijani territories. The territory 
of Member States should not be used for transit of such supplies. 
8. Calls upon Member States, as well as other members of the international 
community, to use such effective political and economic measures as required in 
order to put an end to Armenian aggression and to occupation of the Azerbaijani 
territories. 
144 
 
9. Calls for a just and peaceful settlement of the conflict between Armenia 
and Azerbaijan on the basis of respect for the principles of territorial integrity of 
states and inviolability of internationally recognized frontiers. 
10. Urges both Armenia and Azerbaijan and all states member of the Minsk 
Group to engage constructively in the ongoing OSCE peace process and refrain 
from any action that will make it more difficult to reach a peaceful solution. 
11. Reaffirms its total solidarity and support for the efforts being made by 
the Government and people of Azerbaijan to defend their country. 
12. Calls for enabling the displaced persons and refugees to return to their 
homes in safety, honour and dignity. 
13. Expresses its appreciation to all Member States which have made 
humanitarian assistance to the refugees and displaced persons and urges all the 
others to extend their contributions to these people. 
14. Expresses its concern over the severity of humanitarian problems 
concerning the existence of more than one million displaced persons and refugees 
in the territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan and requests Member States, the 
Islamic Development Bank and the other Islamic Institutions to render urgent 
financial and humanitarian assistance to the Republic of Azerbaijan. 
15. Considers, that Azerbaijan has the right for appropriate compensation 
with regard to damages it suffered, and puts the responsibility for the adequate 
compensation of these damages on Armenia. 
16. Appreciates the efforts of the Secretary General to convey to the OSCE 
Chairman-in-Office the position of Member States on this matter. 
17. Requests the Secretary General to follow up the implementation of this 
Resolution and submit a report to the Ninth Session of the Islamic Summit 
Conference. 
 
IV PART 
 
OSCE PROPOSALS 
 
CHAIRMANSHIP OF OSCE MINSK GROUP 
 
Comprehensive pact on the  
Nagorno-Karabakh conflict settlement 
 
Preamble 
 
145 
 
The parties resolve to settle the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict amicably 
understanding the importance of peace and cooperation in the region for the 
purpose of the people's progress and prosperity. The below interpreted regulations 
will provide the joint economic development of the Caucasus, normal and 
beneficial life of the people of the region under conditions of democratic 
institutions, improve the well-being, and cherish the hope for the future. The 
cooperation conducted in accordance with the present pact will result in the normal 
ratio in commerce, transport and communication fields all over the region and will 
strengthen the effort for an opportunity for people to reconstruct cities and villages 
with the support of international organizations, provide the necessary stability for 
the fair raising of international investment in the region, and clear the way for 
mutually beneficial commerce which will achieve the natural progress of Caucasus 
region for all people. The peace and cooperation between people will release their 
huge potential for the well-being of their neighbors and world people. 
Therefore, parties agreed to achieve the determination of armed conflict and 
conduct the measures interpreted in I Pact on restoring the normal relations and 
come to terms with II Pact on final status of Nagorno-Karabakh true to regulations 
of UN Charter, main principles and resolutions of OSCE, generally recognized 
regulations of international law, signifying the consent to assist in implementation 
of resolutions number 822, 853, 874 and 884 of UN Security Council. 
I Pact - cessation of armed conflict  
Parties agree on: 
I. Refrain from using the, armed forces for conflict resolutions between 
them and also for conflicts concerning the implementation of present pact. 
II. Withdrawal of armed forces in two stages: 
At the first stage, forces by the line of contact towards the East and South 
from Nagorno-Karabakh will retreat for some kilometers towards the lines 
conformed on I appendix, at this time, recommendations of Committee of High-
Ranking Persons should be taken into account to provide the primary allocation of 
front troop of multinational forces of OSCE in the buffer zone based on military 
considerations and separation the parties by this line and provision safety at the 
second stage of withdrawal of forces. 
At the second stage forces will be withdrawn according to schedule 
conformed on I appendix by following order: 
A. The forces of Armenia are carried away inside the borderline of 
Armenian Republic. 
B. The forces of Nagorno-Karabakh are carried away inside the borderline 
of Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Region (NKAR) determined as in 1988 (with 
following exceptions intended in VIII and IX points). 
146 
 
C. The forces of Azerbaijan are carried away towards the lines conformed 
on I appendix on the basis of recommendations of Committee of High-Ranking 
Persons. 
D. On condition of limpidity and report fulfillment, the heavy armament 
will be carried away to places conformed on I appendix on the basis of 
recommendations of Committee of High-Ranking Persons. 
E. On completion of withdrawal of armed forces, the buffer zone will be 
determined along the borderline of NKAR as in 1988 and the North part 
of Armenia-Azerbaijan borderline as showed on the map in I appendix. 
III. The territories became free after the withdrawal of armed forces form a 
separate zone. The security control in this zone will be provided by defense peace 
forces of OSCE jointly with compound standing commission. None of parties can 
bring in this zone their troops without permission of defense peace forces of OSCE 
and compound standing commission in for implementation of II appendix; where 
the conformed departments on border service, mine cleaning and civil police 
functions will be intended. Parties agreed to refrain from all military flights in the 
separator zone and buffer zone. 
IV. Support to allocate the multinational defense peace forces of OSCE in 
the buffer zone to provide safety jointly with compound standing commission. The 
defense peace forces of OSCE will consist of troops appointed by OSCE, and their 
mandate will be defined by a resolution of UN Security Council and the mandate 
will come into force again by the recommendation of operative chairman of OSCE. 
V. Provide the refugees' return back to their former permanent residences in 
a separate zone. The defense peace forces of OSCE jointly with compound 
standing commission will provide the safe control of returned people, and faith in 
disarmed regime of all parties. 
VI. Railway, road-building, electricity and communication supply, 
commerce and other relationship rehabilitation measures and also, all works will be 
carried out at the same time with the withdrawal of troops. Parties, including the 
ethnic minority, provide the use of those connections by everybody and guarantee 
the intercourse of these minorities with their ethnic groups in other places of the 
region. Each party under takes to raise the blockade, provide the load and people 
transportation to all other parties without obstacles. Armenia and Azerbaijan vouch 
for the free and safe railway connection between themselves and also along the 
Baku-Horadiz-Mehri-Ordubad-Nakhichevan-Yerevan line. 
VII. Cooperate with Red Cross International Organization, UN High 
Commission on refugees' issues and all international humanitarian organizations to 
provide the return back of all apprehended persons in regard to this conflict, 
investigation of lives of missing people, and the return of all corpses. 
147 
 
VII. On following measures regarding the Lachin corridor: 
A. Azerbaijan leases the corridor to OSCE; OSCE concludes the contract 
only for the use of Nagorno-Karabakh authorities (with the following exceptions 
for transit intended in E point). 
B. OSCE provides the safe control under cooperation circumstances with 
the authorities of Nagorno-Karabakh. 
C. The borderlines of the Lachin corridor are conformed on II appendix on 
the basis of the recommendations of the Committee of High-Ranking Persons. 
D. OSCE controls the side road-building from Lachin city. On completion of 
the road-building, Lachin city will be dropped out of the Lachin corridor. It (as part 
of separate zone) will be returned back to the administrative control of Azerbaijan, 
that the former people can come back. 
E. The allocation of armed forces in the corridor is disallowed, except the 
contingent specially allowed for safety and permanent settlements. The officials, 
observers and members of defense peace forces of OSCE and also the Azerbaijan 
population going from Lachin region to Gubadly and back have rights to move in 
all directions in the case of advance notification. The territory of Lachin region out 
of the corridor is the part of separate zone. 
IX. On following measures regarding Shusha city and Shaumyan region: 
A. Parties move away their armed forces from both points except the air 
attack defense parts with limited official staff. 
B. Local authorities will provide the allocation of observers from 
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights Bureau of OSCE. 
C. Refugees can come back to their former permanent residences. Related 
local authorities will provide their safety. 
D. Returned people have all civil rights including the organization of 
political parties. They will be represented among the local population in 
accordance with their number in Baku and Stepanakert Parliaments, other elective 
councils, police, and safety forces. 
E. Compound standing commission coordinates the beneficial distribution 
of international aid between both populations on the basis of equity. 
F. The population of Shusha city and Shaumyan region will be able to use 
the roads, communications and other means connecting the left part of Azerbaijan 
and Nagorno-Karabakh. 
X. To establish the Compound Standing Commission (CSC) for providing 
control of the execution of the regulations regarding the Azerbaijan and Nagorno-
Karabakh problems of present pact. There are three chair men of CSC: one from 
Azerbaijan, one from Nagorno-Karabakh and one is the representative of 
functioning chairman of OSCE. The main duty of the chairmen from Azerbaijan 
148 
 
and Nagorno-Karabakh is the implementation of the pact; and the duty of the 
chairman from OSCE is to be an arbitrage and coordinator in the case of 
differences of opinions. There are military, economic, humanitarian and cultural 
auxiliary commissions composed of CSC. CSC and its auxiliary functions are 
intended in II appendix. 
XI. To establish the full diplomatic relations between the Republic of 
Armenia and the Republic of Azerbaijan. 
XII. To establish the Armenia-Azerbaijan Intergovernmental Commission 
(AAIC) with one chairman from both Armenia and Azerbaijan. The functioning 
chairman of OSCE is represented in this commission. 
AAIC provides the prevention of armed conflict at the borderline, coor-
dination between frontier troops and other suitable safety forces and controls the 
measures on road - building, construction of railway, connection lines, pipelines 
and rehabilitation of commercial and other relations. 
XIII. UN Security Council will be the provider of the present pact. 
XIV. The present pact will be valid until the signing of the pact on the 
comprehensive adjustment at the OSCE Minsk conference. This pact will imply the 
establishment of such permanent mechanisms instead of safety and peace defense 
mechanisms intended in the present pact. 
 
II pact: status 
Preamble: 
The status of Nagorno-Karabakh and the preservation of its main ethnic and 
cultural nature awake the interest of the international community, including 
Armenia. It can not be defined either by one-sided effect of the Azerbaijan 
Republic or Nagorno-Karabakh authorities. Status is defined due to the following 
parameters: 
I. Recognition of the territorial integrity and inviolability of borders of 
Azerbaijan and Armenia by all parties involved in conflict. 
II. Nagorno-Karabakh is the state and territorial institutional part of 
Azerbaijan, and definition of its fortune will include the following 
rights and privileges after officially registering in the pact signed between the 
Azerbaijan Republic and Nagorno-Karabakh authorities, adoption by Minsk 
Conference, incorporation in Constitutions of Azerbaijan and Nagorno-Karabakh. 
III. Nagorno-Karabakh and Nakhichevan will have transport and 
communication rights with Armenia and Azerbaijan freely and without obstacles. 
IV. The administrative borderlines of Nagorno-Karabakh are defined along 
the borderlines of former Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Region (NKAR). 
149 
 
V. Nagorno-Karabakh will have its own Constitution adopted by the nation 
of Nagorno-Karabakh in a referendum. That Constitution will incorporate the 
official pact between Nagorno-Karabakh authorities and the Azerbaijan Republic 
on the form of definition of its fortune. Azerbaijan will propose a suitable 
amendment into its own Constitution for the purpose of the incorporation of these 
pacts. Nagorno-Karabakh will have its own flag, emblem and anthem. 
VI. The Constitution and laws of Nagorno-Karabakh are in force in the 
territory of Nagorno-Karabakh. If laws, regulations and executive resolutions of 
Azerbaijan are not contrary to the Constitution and laws of Nagorno-Karabakh, 
then they are in force in the territory of the latter. 
VII. Nagorno-Karabakh establishes its own legislation, executive and 
judicial authorities independently. 
VIII. The population of Nagorno-Karabakh elects the representatives to the 
Parliament of the Azerbaijan Republic and takes part in presidential elections. 
IX. Nagorno-Karabakh will vest to communicate directly with foreign 
countries and international organizations on humanitarian issues and in economic, 
scientific, cultural, sport fields under terms of the existence of the appropriate 
representative abroad. The political parties of Nagorno-Karabakh will vest to 
communicate with political parties in other countries. 
X. The population (citizens) of Nagorno-Karabakh will have specially 
issued passports of Azerbaijan with "Nagorno-Karabakh" title on it. The population 
(citizens) of Nagorno-Karabakh will not be counted as foreigners according to laws 
of Armenia and at any time can apply to Armenia, and in case of a permanent 
application, they can become citizens of Armenia. 
XI. Nagorno-Karabakh will be a free monetary economic area. 
XII. Nagorno-Karabakh will have a National Guard and police forces. The 
population (citizens) will have rights to serve in the armed forces of Nagorno-
Karabakh. 
XIII. The armed, security and police forces of Azerbaijan Republic will 
have rights to enter into the territory of Nagorno-Karabakh only with the 
permission of Nagorno-Karabakh authorities. 
XIV. The budget of Nagorno-Karabakh consists of payments coming out 
from its reserves. The government of Nagorno-Karabakh will attract Azerbaijan 
and foreign persons and companies to invest with and support them. 
XV. Nagorno-Karabakh has an ethnic nature. Each citizen has a right to use 
its own native national language in all official and non-official situations. 
XVI. UN Security Council will provide this pact. 
 
 
150 
 
Confidence consolidation measures for 
settlement of Nagorno-Karabakh conflict 
 
The parties concerned without waiting for any pact can carry out any or all 
of following measures to demonstrate their resolve of achievement of the peaceful 
settlement of the conflict. 
- Azerbaijan and Armenia can undertake an engagement to restore the 
ceasefire regime along their borderline in Ichevan-Gazakh sector. Intended in 1992 
this regime included telephone communications and a joint guard on watch at the 
borderline; 
- Parties concerned can come to terms regarding Nagorno-Karabakh, for 
example on increasing the monitoring mission of the functioning chairman of 
OSCE for carrying out the additional observation along the borderline of Armenia -
Azerbaijan in Ijevan-Gazax sector; 
- The dialogue with support of UN High Commissar on Refugees' issues 
and Red Cross International Committee for the purpose of defining the 
humanitarian demands (either for refugees of Azerbaijan or in Nagorno-Karabakh). 
This can be carried out only with the permission of UN High Commissar on 
Refugees' Issues or Red Cross International Committee; 
- Organization of weekly open markets for both Armenians and 
Azerbaijanis in Nagorno-Karabakh region. This will be needed to establish border 
check points to pass the borderline, open roads coming to market squares and clean 
them from mines, and sign the contracts on modality of transit regimes and 
commerce regulations. 
July 18, 1997 
 
CHAIRMANSHIP OF OSCE MINSK GROUP 
 
Pact on cessation 
of Nagorno-Karabakh armed conflict 
 
Preamble 
 
The parties concerned resolving the peaceful settlement of the delayed 
Nagorno-Karabakh conflict and to establish a durable and peace ceasefire; 
confirming the importance of peace and cooperation in the region for 
progress and prosperity of their nations; 
desiring the basic foundation for joint economic development of this region, 
under the terms of democratic institutions, normal and beneficial life of the people 
151 
 
of the Caucasus under the conditions of democratic institutions, improvement of 
the well-being of the people, and cherish the hope for the future; 
understanding the effect of cooperation conducted in accordance with the 
present pact which will result in the normal ratio in commerce, transport and 
communication fields all over the region and will strengthen the effort for an 
opportunity for people to reconstruct cities and villages with support of 
international organizations, make necessary stability for the fair raising of 
international investment in the region and clear the way for mutually beneficial 
commerce which will gain the natural progress of the Caucasus region for all 
people and release their huge potential for the well-being of neighboring and 
World people; 
true to the regulations of UN Charter, main principles and resolutions of 
OSCE, generally recognized regulations of international law, signifying the 
consent to assist in implementation of resolutions number 822, 853, 874 and 884 of 
UN Security Council; 
concerning the undertaken obligations in the Budapest conference in   1994 
on strengthening the peaceful settlement efforts of conflict between the OSCE 
member governments and support to OSCE and set before the Minsk Conference 
chairmen a task on carrying on efficient negotiations and declaration on political 
readiness to give the multinational forces to OSCE for keeping peace in case of the 
adoption of a suitable resolution of the UN Security Council after a set agreement 
between parties on the prevention of armed conflict; 
and resolving to continue the peace process for the achievement of 
comprehensive adjustment defining the final status of Nagorno-Karabakh without 
delay undertake the following obligations: 
I. Parties concerned refrain from threatening to solve the conflicts by means 
of force and or solving the conflicts between them by use of 
force. They will handle all such conflicts, and also the possible conflicts regarding 
with carrying out of this pact by means of peace, first of all via 
negotiations, also within the framework of the OSCE Minsk Group negotiations. 
II. Parties concerned will withdraw their armed forces as in following points 
and described in I appendix: 
A) At the first stage, forces by the line of contact towards the East and 
South from Nagorno-Karabakh will return back for some kilometers towards the 
lines conformed on I appendix, at this time, recommendations of the Committee of 
High-Ranking Persons should be taken into account to provide the primary 
allocation of a front troop of multinational forces of OSCE in the buffer zone based 
on military considerations and separating the parties by this line and provision of 
safety at the second stage by the withdrawal of forces. 
152 
 
B) At the second stage forces will be withdrawn according to schedule 
conformed on I appendix by following order: 
1) The forces allocated out of borderline of Armenia Republic will be 
carried away inside the borderline of Armenia Republic. 
The forces of Nagorno-Karabakh will be carried away inside the borderline 
of Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Region determined as in 1988, except Lachin 
region. 
3) The forces of Azerbaijan will be carried away from the lines con-
formed on I appendix on the basis of recommendations of Committee of High-
Ranking Persons and from the territory of Armenia. 
4) On condition of limpidity and report fulfillment, the heavy armament 
will be carried away to places conformed on I appendix on the basis of the 
recommendations of Committee of High-Ranking Persons. 
III. The territories became free after withdrawal of armed forces form a 
separate zone and buffer zone conformed on II appendix: 
A. On completion of withdrawal of armed forces, the buffer zone will be 
determined along the borderline of NKAR as in 1988 and the North and South 
borders of Lachin region. There will not be dwellings in the buffer zone and with 
the exception of peace defense forces of OSCE will be completely disarmed. 
B. Separator zone will be disarmed, except the permitted forces for 
activity under the terms of cooperation with the compound standing commission, 
and also following forces confirmed in II appendix: 
1) - units of peace defense operations; 
2) - divisions for border service and mine cleaning; 
3) - armed civil police intended in II appendix with defined quantity; 
C. There will be a non-flight zone in buffer and separator zones as 
intended in II appendix. Parties are not allowed to carry on military flights under 
the control of peace defense operations of OSCE. 
D. In accordance with II point, after the withdrawal of armed forces the 
security will be provided by existing military structures of Nagorno-Karabakh in 
all those areas which are under control of authorities of Nagorno-Karabakh. 
IV. In accordance with resolutions of the OSCE Budapest Conference in 
1994, the parties invite the multinational peace defense operations of OSCE and 
support their allocation, it will operate in cooperation with the compound standing 
commission and the Armenia-Azerbaijan Interstate Committee as intended in point 
7. 
The peace defense operations controls the withdrawal of heavy armament, 
prevention of military flights, protection of a disarmed regime, and position at the 
Armenia-Azerbaijan borderline as intended in II appendix. For these purposes, 
153 
 
parties invite the UN Security Council to adopt a resolution for a primary period of 
not less than one year and in case of necessity to restore the points of that 
resolution with the recommendation of functioning OSCE chairman. The parties 
come to terms on a total duration of the multinational peace defense operations that 
it will be in minimum necessarily limited depending on the stage in the region and 
the comprehensive adjustment rate of the conflict. The parties support the 
cooperation with peace defense operations to provide the implementation of the 
present pact and prevent any disorder and or stoppage of cases of peace defense 
operations. 
V. As explained in the Annex 2, the parties shall assist in the safe and 
volunteer return of internally displaced persons to their former permanent 
residence in the separating area. In order to create hope in all parties for the 
observance of the disarmament regime in this area, Peace Defense Operations shall 
supervise safety of the returning population in cooperation with the standing mixed 
committee. The parties shall negotiate on the realization of soon, safe, and a 
volunteer return of all the persons with the exception of the persons, who moved 
after 1987 due to the conflict and tension between Armenia and Azerbaijan and 
who were covered in this agreement or all-round regulation. 
VI. In parallel with the withdrawal of forces, the parties shall implement 
instantly all the necessary measures for opening of roads, railroads, electricity and 
communication lines, restoration of trade and other relations, as well as for 
achievement of these goals as soon as possible in accordance with the table 
contained in the Annex 3 and concrete provisions. The parties, including the ethnic 
minorities, shall guarantee availability of these links for everybody and provide 
communication of these minorities with their own ethnic groups in other parts of 
the region. Each of the parties undertakes to eliminate all the blockades and 
provide unimpeded delivery of cargoes and persons to all the other parties. The 
parties guarantee free and safe railroad communication between themselves. 
VII. The parties shall cooperate fully with the International Red Cross 
Committee, UN High Commission for Refugees and other international 
organizations in order to provide the shortest and safest return of all persons 
arrested in connection with the conflict, search for the missing persons, return of 
all corpses, as well as indiscriminative transportation of humanitarian and 
rehabilitation aids to the regions suffered during the conflict through the territory 
controlled by themselves. The parties shall cooperate with OSCE Peace Defense 
Operations through the Standing Mixed Committee in realization of the measures 
aimed at strengthening of trust. 
VIII. The parties shall instantly create a Standing Mixed Committee (SMC) 
to control implementation of this agreement's provisions on the problems regarding 
154 
 
Azerbaijan and Nagorno-Karabakh. The chairman of the SMC shall be a 
representative of OSCE acting chairman; one deputy chairman shall be from 
Azerbaijan, and one from Nagorno-Karabakh. The main task of SMC is control 
over the implementation of the agreement; tasks of the chairman from OSCE 
include as well mediation at contradictions and giving sanctions to taking measures 
at emergencies like natural calamities. SMC has got military, economic, human-
itarian and cultural subsidiary committees, as well as a subsidiary committee for 
communication. SMC structure, functions and other details concerning it are 
elaborated in Annex 4. 
IX. The parties shall instantly create an Armenian-Azerbaijan 
Intergovernmental Committee (AAIC) for assisting in the prevention of border 
conflicts between Armenia and Azerbaijan, realization of relations between frontier 
troops and other respective safety forces of both the countries, as well as 
controlling over and assisting in measures linked with the opening of roads, 
railroads, communications and pipelines, as well as restoration of other links. 
AAIC shall have two cochairmen: one from Armenia and one from Azerbaijan. 
The Committee shall include a representative appointed by the OSCE acting 
chairman. AAIC's structure, functions and other details concerning it are elaborated 
in Annex 5. Azerbaijan Republic and the Republic of Armenia shall create commu-
nication bureaus in each other's capitals. 
X. Azerbaijan Republic and Republic of Armenia shall conduct bilateral and 
multilateral negotiations with the appropriate international and regional forums in 
order to increase the regional safety, as well as full observation of the treaty on 
military balance and common armed forces in Europe. 
XI. The three parties in this agreement thus put an end to the military 
aspect of the conflict and agree to continue negotiations conscious 
ly with the assistance of the Minsk Conference co-chairmen and other appropriate 
parties invited by the OSCE acting chairman in order to achieve all-round 
settlement of all other aspects of the conflict, including the political aspect 
covering the definition of the Nagorno-Karabakh status and settlement of problems 
of the Lachin, Shusha and Shaumyan regions; after the regulation is achieved 
through negotiations and signed by the above-mentioned three parties, it should be 
recognized by an international community at the Minsk Conference to be called as 
soon as possible. 
XII. Each of the parties shall respect fully the safety of the other party and 
its population. The parties shall undertake to develop good-neighborhood relations 
between their peoples through assisting in trade and normal mutual activity and 
avoid statements or actions that may break this agreement, or good-neighborhood 
relations. 
155 
 
XIII. In addition to the above-mentioned concrete provisions on protection 
of peace and withdrawal of forces, and remembering the OSCE respective 
principles and liabilities, as well as the principles and liabilities reflected in the 
Helsinki document of 1992 and Budapest document of 1994, OSCE shall realize 
control over the full implementation of all aspects of this agreement through the 
corresponding mechanisms and take appropriate measures in accordance with 
those principles and resolutions aimed at the prevention of violation of the 
agreement's conditions and obstruction of such cases. Witnesses of this agreement 
act through the OSCE Standing Council and United Nations Organization Security 
Council and assist in its full implementation. In the event this agreement is violated 
seriously, they shall advise about necessary measures among themselves, instantly 
inform the OSCE acting chairman and General Secretary of the UN Security 
Council and request the OSCE Standing Council or UN Security Council to 
consider corresponding actions in regard to this. 
XIV. The parties undertake mutual liabilities to provide observation of the 
provisions of this agreement, as well as the realization of all the liabilities arising 
from this agreement, including the guarantee of safety for Nagorno-Karabakh, its 
population, as well as the returning IDPs. 
XV. This agreement comes into force following its signature and ratification 
and stays in force together with the exceptions reminded in the XI clause on 
regulation. Modifications and additions may be made to this agreement or it may 
be stopped. 
December 2, 1997 
 
On principles of all-round settlement  
of the Nagorno-Karabakh armed conflict 
 
Armenia, Azerbaijan and Nagorno-Karabakh, which are able to solve the 
Nagorno-Karabakh conflict in accordance with standards and principles of 
international law, including the principles of territorial integrity of states and self-
determination of peoples, have reached agreement on the following issues: 
 
I. Agreement on the status of Nagorno-Karabakh 
 
The parties shall sign an agreement on the status of Nagorno-Karabakh and 
it shall consist of the following provisions: 
Nagorno-Karabakh is a state and territorial unit in the form of a republic, 
and forms a general state within the boundaries of Azerbaijan recognized in the 
international world. 
156 
 
Respective state authorities of Azerbaijan and Nagorno-Karabakh shall sign 
an agreement on the definition of the limits of realization of powers, as well as 
their mutual commissioning, and that agreement shall have the force of 
constitutional law. 
Azerbaijan and Nagorno-Karabakh shall create a joint committee to include 
representatives of the presidents, prime ministers, and heads of the parliaments in 
order to establish the politics and activity regarding the joint powers. 
Representative offices of Nagorno-Karabakh and Azerbaijan shall be 
created in Baku and Stepanakert respectively in order to keep in contact and 
coordinate the joint measures. 
Nagorno-Karabakh shall have the right to maintain direct relations with 
foreign states in the fields of economy, trade, science, culture, sport and 
humanitarian field, provided it has the appropriate representation abroad. The 
political parties and public organizations in Nagorno-Karabakh shall be entitled to 
create relations with political parties and public organizations of foreign states. 
Nagorno-Karabakh shall take part in the implementation of Azerbaijan's foreign 
policy regarding the issues linked with its interests. The decisions on such issues 
shall not be made without consent of both parties. 
The government of Nagorno-Karabakh may have their own representatives 
at Azerbaijan embassies or consulates in foreign states, where it has got its own 
specific interests, as well as send its own experts within Azerbaijan delegations to 
take part in international negotiations - if they concern interests of Nagorno-
Karabakh. 
The borders of Nagorno-Karabakh shall correspond to those of the former 
Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous District. Their possible elaboration or 
modification may be a subject of special mutual agreements between Azerbaijan 
and Nagorno-Karabakh. 
Borders between Azerbaijan and Nagorno-Karabakh shall be mutually open 
for free movement of each other's unarmed citizens. They shall not be imposed to 
customs or other duties at movement and official relations. Provision of the right of 
permanent residence shall be an authority of the respective governments. 
Azerbaijan and Nagorno-Karabakh shall not use force, nor threaten with use 
of force, for the settlement of conflicts. 
In cases of conflicts or contradictions unsolvable within the joint 
committee, the parties may ask for the advisory opinion of the OSCE acting 
chairman, and it shall be taken into account at adoption of final decision. 
The status of Nagorno-Karabakh shall include the following rights and 
privileges to be formalized in the agreement on status of Nagorno-Karabakh 
approved by the Minsk Conference. 
157 
 
1. Nagorno-Karabakh shall have own constitution adopted by the people of 
Nagorno-Karabakh by referendum. This constitution shall incorporate provisions 
of the agreement on the status of Nagorno-Karabakh. Correspondingly, Azerbaijan 
shall make amendments to its own constitution for incorporation of this agreement. 
Provisions of this agreement or of the parts of Azerbaijan and Nagorno-
Karabakh constitutions incorporating this agreement cannot be modified without 
the consent of the three parties. 
2. The Constitution and laws of Nagorno-Karabakh shall be in force in the 
territory of Nagorno-Karabakh. If Azerbaijan laws, resolutions and administrative 
decisions do not contradict the Constitution and laws of Nagorno-Karabakh, they 
shall be in force in the latter's territory. 
3. Nagorno-Karabakh shall have its own flag, emblem and anthem. 
4. Nagorno-Karabakh shall form the legislative, executive and court 
authorities independently and in accordance with its Constitution. 
5. As an identification card, Nagorno-Karabakh citizens shall have 
Azerbaijan passports specially inscribed as "Nagorno-Karabakh". Only the 
government of Nagorno-Karabakh shall have the right to give such passports. 
Nagorno-Karabakh citizens of Armenian origin can migrate to Armenia and 
be granted Armenian citizenship when moving there for permanent residence in 
accordance with the laws of that country. 
6. The Nagorno-Karabakh population has the right to elect its own 
representatives to the Azerbaijan parliament and take part in presidential elections 
in Azerbaijan. 
7. Nagorno-Karabakh shall be a free economic area. It shall have the right 
to issue its own monetary signs to be in circulation beparties the Azerbaijan ones, 
as well as its own stamps. 
8. Nagorno-Karabakh shall have the right to maintain free and smooth 
transportation, as well as communication contacts with Armenia and Azerbaijan. 
9. Nagorno-Karabakh shall have its national guard (security forces), as well 
as police forces, to be formed on volunteerism. These forces cannot operate outside 
Nagorno-Karabakh without the consent of Azerbaijan government. 
10. The Azerbaijan Army, security forces and police shall not have the right 
to enter the territory of Nagorno-Karabakh without the consent of the Nagorno-
Karabakh governmental bodies. 
11. The Armenian language is the main language, and Azerbaijan - the 
second official language of Nagorno-Karabakh. Its citizens may use other native 
languages as well in all official and non-official cases. 
12. The Budget of Nagorno-Karabakh shall consist of the means received 
from its own sources. The government of Nagorno-Karabakh shall encourage 
158 
 
Azerbaijan companies, as well as foreign companies and persons to invest capital, 
and shall provide a guarantee for this. 
 
II. On the Lachin Corridor 
In the event that other decisions are not made about the special regime of 
Lachin region at the consent of Azerbaijan and Nagorno-Karabakh, use of the 
Lachin corridor by Nagorno-Karabakh for the provision of unimpeded contact 
between Nagorno-Karabakh and Armenia shall be a subject of individual 
agreement. Lachin region must remain a fully disarmed area at all times. 
 
II. On the city of Shusha and city of Shaumyan 
 
The parties agree that all the Azerbaijan refugees may return to their 
permanent residence in the city of Shusha. Their safety shall be provided by the 
respective authorities of Nagorno-Karabakh. They shall have the same rights as all 
the citizens of Nagorno-Karabakh, as well as the right to create political parties, to 
take part in elections at all levels, to be elected to the state legislative bodies and 
municipalities, to be employed in state service, as well as in law-enforcement 
authorities. 
Armenian refugees shall be granted the same rights at return to the city of 
Shaumyan. 
Residents of the city of Shusha and city of Shaumyan shall be able to use 
roads, and communication with other parts of Azerbaijan and Nagorno-Karabakh, 
and other contacts, with no restrictions. 
Authorities of Nagorno-Karabakh and Azerbaijan shall assist in the 
establishment and activity of representations of the OSCE Democratic Institutions 
& Human Rights Bureau in the cities of Shusha and Shaumyan correspondingly. 
The three parties shall sign the agreement on the status of Nagorno-
Karabakh and it shall come into force following its approval by the Minsk 
Conference, 
 
III. Agreement on cessation of the armed conflict 
 
The parties agree that the agreement on the cessation of the armed conflict 
shall cover the following provisions: 
I.The parties refuse to threaten with use of force, or use force for the 
settlement of disputes between them. They shall settle all such disputes through 
peaceful means, first through negotiations, or within the framework of the OSCE 
159 
 
Minsk Conference including the disputes which may arise in regard to the 
implementation of the agreement on cessation of the armed conflict. 
II. The parties shall withdraw their armed forces in accordance with the 
following provisions and in the way explained comprehensively in Annex 1. 
A. In the first stage, the forces in the current contact line to the east and 
south from Nagorno-Karabakh shall retreat in accordance with the lines indicated 
in Annex 1 and the table contained in that Annex, with due consideration of the 
Committee of High-Ranking Persons' (CHRP) recommendations in order to 
provide opportunity for initial placing of the front squad of OSCE multinational 
forces at the militarily grounded temporary buffer zone, separate the parties along 
this line and provide safety at the second stage of force withdrawal. 
B. In the second stage, the forces shall be withdrawn at the same time and 
in accordance with the table in the Annex 1: 
(1) Any Armenian forces outside the borders of the Republic of Armenia 
shall be taken into the borders of this Republic. 
(2) Forces of Nagorno-Karabakh shall be taken into the 1988 borders of the 
Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous District (NKAD) (with exception of Lachin 
region) until an agreement is reached on unimpeded movement between Nagorno-
Karabakh and Armenia. 
(3) Azerbaijan forces shall be withdrawn aside the line indicated in Annex 
I based on HLPG recommendations and from any Armenian territory. 
(4) Heavy weapons shall be withdrawn to the places indicated in Annex I 
under control of OSCE peace defense operation with observation of the 
transparency and accountability requirements explained in the Annex I based on 
HLPG recommendations. 
III. The territory released due to such withdrawal of forces, shall constitute 
a buffer zone and a separating area in accordance with the following provisions 
and as elaborated in Annex 2: 
A. Following withdrawal of forces, the buffer zone shall locate along the 
Nagorno-Karabakh's borders of 1988. In the event an additional agreement is 
reached, it may pass along the Lachin region's borders as well. The buffer zone 
shall not be inhabited; it shall be fully disarmed with the exception of OSCE peace 
defense operation's elements. 
B. As elaborated in Annex 2, the separating area allowed to cooperate 
with the standing mixed committee of the peace defense operation, shall be 
disarmed with exception of the following forces: 
(1) Elements of the peace defense operation, 
(2) Azerbaijan border guarding and mine-detecting squads, 
160 
 
(3) Azerbaijan civil police, number and allowed weapons which have 
been defined in Annex 2. 
C. As explained in Annex 2, a non-flight area shall be created in the 
buffer zone and separating areas under control of OSCE peace defense operation; 
the parties shall not allow any military flight in this area. 
D. Following the withdrawal of forces in accordance with the II Provision, 
the current safety structures of Nagorno-Karabakh shall provide safety in all places 
controlled by Nagorno-Karabakh authorities. 
IV. Pursuant to the OSCE Budapest summit's decision in 1994, the parties 
invite OSCE multinational peace defense operation and assist in 
its placing. It shall operate in cooperation with the Standing Mixed Committee and 
Armenian-Azerbaijan Intergovernmental Committee. Peace Defense Operations 
shall control withdrawal of forces and heavy weapons, prohibition of military 
flights, maintenance of disarmament regime, as well as the situation at the 
Armenian-Azerbaijan border as explained in Annex 2. 
Peace defense operation shall be established for a period not longer than one 
year in the initial stage based on the respective resolution of UN Security Council 
and prolonged at the recommendation of OSCE acting chairman in case of 
necessity. The parties agree that the total period of the multinational peace defense 
operation shall be at the minimal necessary bound depending on the situation in the 
region and the conflict's all-round settlement speed. The parties shall cooperate 
fully with Peace Defense Operations in order to provide the implementation of this 
agreement and prevent any violation, or stoppage, of peace defense operation. 
V. The parties shall assist in the return of refugees and IDPs to their per-
manent residence in the separating area in a safe and voluntary way as indicated in 
Annex 2. Peace Defense Operations shall control the safety of returning people in 
cooperation with the standing mixed committee in order to create trust of all parties 
to the observation of the disarmament regime in this area. In addition to the issues 
covered in this agreement, the parties shall conduct negotiations on the realization 
of the safe and voluntary return of all other persons who became refugees or 
internally displaced persons due to the conflict and tension occurring between 
Armenia and Azerbaijan after 1987. 
VI. The parties shall instantly realize all the measures for opening of 
roads, railroads, electric and communication lines, restoration of trade 
and other relations, as well as all the measures aimed at quickest realization of the 
necessary actions in accordance with the table contained in Annex 3, as well as 
concrete provisions. The parties shall guarantee the use of these communications 
by all persons, including ethnic minorities, and provide their unimpeded contact 
with their own ethnic communities at other places in the region. Each of the parties 
161 
 
undertakes the liability of eliminating all the blockades and providing unobstructed 
delivery of cargoes as well as persons to all other parties. The parties shall provide 
free and safe railroad communication between themselves. 
VII. The parties shall cooperate fully with the International Red Cross 
Committee, UN High Commission for Refugees and other international 
organizations in order to provide the shortest and safest return of all persons 
arrested in connection with the conflict, search for missing persons, return of all 
corpses, as well as indiscriminative transportation of humanitarian as well as 
rehabilitation aids to the regions which suffered during the conflict through the 
territory controlled by themselves. The parties shall cooperate with OSCE Peace 
Defense Operations through the Standing Mixed Committee in the realization of 
the measures aimed at strengthening of trust. 
VIII. The parties shall instantly create a Standing Mixed Committee to 
control implementation of this agreement's provisions on the problems regarding 
Azerbaijan and Nagorno-Karabakh. The Chairman of the SMC shall be a 
representative of OSCE acting chairman; one deputy chairman shall be from 
Azerbaijan, and one from Nagorno-Karabakh. The main task of SMC is control 
over the implementation of the agreement; tasks of the chairman from OSCE 
include as well as mediation at contradictions, and giving sanctions to taking 
measures at emergencies like natural calamities. SMC has got military, economic, 
humanitarian and cultural subsidiary committees, as well as a subsidiary committee 
for communication. SMC structure, functions and other details concerning it are 
explained in Annex 4. 
IX. The parties shall instantly create an Armenian-Azerbaijan 
Intergovernmental Committee for assisting in the prevention of border conflicts 
between Armenia and Azerbaijan, realization of relations between frontier troops 
and other respective safety forces of both the countries, as well as controlling and 
assisting in measures linked with the opening of roads, railroads, communications 
and pipelines, as well as the restoration of other links. AAIC shall have two 
cochairmen: one from Armenia and one from Azerbaijan. The Committee shall 
include the representative appointed by OSCE acting chairman. AAIC's structure, 
functions and other details concerning it are elaborated in Annex 5. 
X. Azerbaijan Republic and Republic of Armenia shall conduct bilateral 
and multilateral negotiations with the appropriate international and regional forums 
in order to provide an increase in regional safety, as well as full observation of the 
treaty on military balance and common weapons in Europe. 
XI. Each of the parties shall respect the safety of the other party and its 
population. The parties shall undertake to develop good-neighborhood relations 
between their peoples through assisting in trade and normal mutual activity and 
162 
 
avoid statements or actions that may break this agreement, or good-neighborhood 
relations. 
XII. In addition to the above-mentioned concrete provisions on the pro-
tection of peace and withdrawal of forces, and remembering the OSCE respective 
principles and liabilities, as well as the principles and liabilities reflected in the 
Helsinki document of 1992 and Budapest document of 1994, OSCE shall realize 
control over the full implementation of all aspects of this agreement through the 
corresponding mechanisms and take appropriate measures in accordance with 
those principles and resolutions aimed at the prevention of violation of the 
agreement's conditions and obstruction of such cases. 
XIII. Three parties shall sign the agreement on cessation of the armed 
conflict and it shall come into force following its approval by the Minsk 
Conference and ratification at the parliaments of the three parties. 
XIV. Following the signature of agreements and their approval by the Minsk 
Conference, Azerbaijan Republic and Republic of Armenia shall create full 
diplomatic relations with the permanent diplomatic missions at the level of 
ambassadors. 
 
IV. On liabilities 
 
1. The parties undertake mutual liabilities to provide observation of the 
above-mentioned agreements, including the guarantee of safety for Nagorno-
Karabakh, its population, as well as the refugees and IDPs returning to their 
previous residence. 
2. UN Security Council shall observe the implementation of the all-round 
agreement. 
3. The Cochairmen of the Minsk Conference may sign the agreement on 
the status of Nagorno-Karabakh and the agreement on cessation of the armed 
conflict as witnesses. The Presidents of Russia, USA and France confirm the three 
countries' intention to operate jointly in order to seriously control the 
implementation of the agreements and to take appropriate measures for the 
implementation of this agreement. 
OSCE or UN Security Council may take diplomatic, economic, or at a dead-
end, military measures in the event of the necessity in accordance with the UN 
Charter. 
November 7, 1998. 
163 
 
LITERATURE AND SOURCES 
 
1. "Conspiracy". Baku, 1995. 
2. "Heydar Al'iyev at the world's eyes". Baku, 2003. 
3. R.Mehdiyev. "Lisbon Summit - 96". Baku, 1997. 
4. A.Hassanov. "Azerbaijan and OSCE. Armenian-Azerbaijan conflict and Nagorno-
Karabakh problem on the background of All-European Safety". Baku, 1997. 
5. Z.Bunyadov. "Red Terror". Baku, 1993. 
6. "President 93 - 97". Baku, 1998. 
7. E.Abdullayev. "Successor of the Big Way". Baku, 2004. 
8. E.Abdullayev. "Azerbaijan on the Way of Democratic Development". Baku, 2004. 
9. N.Akhundov, M.Gassimov. "Azerbaijan and International Parliamentary 
Organizations". Baku, 1996. 
10. Y.Mahmudov. "Personality of Heydar Aliyev in Azerbaijan History". Baku, 2002. 
11. M.Gassimov. "Foreign Policy of Azerbaijan". Baku, 1997. 
12. E.Ahmadov. "Armenian Aggression against Azerbaijan and International 
Organizations". Baku, 1998. 
13. H.Rajabli, V.Ibayev. ""European International Organizations". Baku, 1999. 
14. I.Husseinova. "Founder of Independent Azerbaijan State". Baku, 2004. 
15. G.Aliyev. "Heydar Aliyev and Philosophy of National Mentality". Baku. 
2003. 
16. M.Ismayilov. "Events around NKAD in the false mirror of falsifiers". Baku, 1989. (In 
Russian). 
17. V.Arzumanli. "History expressed by politics, politics expressed by history". Baku, 
1999. 
18. "Vanguard". Baku, 2003. 
19. "Strategist". Baku, 2003. 
20. A.Isgandarov. "Historiography of March Slaughter, 1918". Baku, 1997. 
21. A.Samadov, A.Issayev. "History of Azerbaijan Salvation". Baku, 2002. 
22. "Hayat" newspaper. August 28, 1992. 
23. "Khalg" newspaper. February 21, 2001. 
24. "Azerbaijan" newspaper. February 24, 2001. 
25. "Azerbaijan" newspaper. February 27, 2001. 
26. "Khalg" newspaper. April 26, 2001. 
27. "Azerbaijan" newspaper. April 28, 2001. 
28. "Azerbaijan" newspaper. June 28, 2001. 
29. "Republic" newspaper. June 29, 2001. 
30. "Republic" newspaper. September 25, 2001. 
31. "Azerbaijan" newspaper. September 26. 2001. 
"Khalg" newspaper. June 26, 2002. 
164 
 
CONTENTS IN BRIEF 
 
Nagorno-Karabakh problem can be solved only based on international legal norms  
Author's note 
Foreword 
 
I PART 
 
History of the Armenia-Azerbaijan, 
Nagorno-Karabakh conflict 
 
1. Tracking historical facts 
2.Presentation of the Azerbaijan President Heydar Aliyev at the discussions in Milli Mejlis on February 
23, 2001 on the problem of Nagorno-Karabakh 
Final speech of the President of the Azerbaijan Republic Heydar Aliyev at the meeting of Milli Mejlis 
dated on February 24 . 
 
II PART 
 
Armenia-Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh conflict 
in international organizations 
 
1. Karabakh problem in the focus of attention of international organizations 
UN 
OSCE 
The Organization of Islamic Conference (OIC) 
European Union 
2. Negotiations process on the settlement of the conflict and OSCE'S mediation mission 
3. The European Council recognizes the fact that Armenia has occupied Azerbaijan territories 
 
III PART 
 
Documents adopted by international organizations 
 
United Nations Organization (UN) 
OSCE 
Amendments to OSCE Lisbon summit documents 
European Union 
Council of Europe 
The Organization of Islamic Conference 
 
IV PART 
 
OSCE proposals 
 
Comprehensive pact on the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict settlement 
Pact on cessation of Nagorno-Karabakh armed conflict 
On principles of all-round settlement of the Nagorno-Karabakh armed conflict 
Literature and sources 
165 
 
 
Elshad Islam Abdullayev 
 
 
THE NAGORNO-KARABAKH PROBLEM IN THE 
LIGHT OF INTERNATIONAL LAW 
 
 
«Tahsil» Publishing House Baku – 2005 
 
 
 
 
Nəşriyyat redaktoru Nina Suxomyas 
Bədii və texniki redaktoru Abdulla Ələkbərov 
Kompyuterçi-dizayner Arif Həsənov 
Korrektorları Nina Suxomyas, Ülkər Şaxmuradova 
 
 
 
 
Çapa imzalanmış 23.02.2005. Kağız formatı 70xl00 
1
/16. Ofset çapı. 
Tabaşirli kağız. Fiziki çap vərəqi 14,0+2,5 yap. şək. 
Sifariş 1. Tirajı 1000. 
 
 
Azərbaycan Respublikası Təhsil Nazirliyinin «Təhsil» nəşriyyatı, 
Bakı, 370073, Şəhriyar küçəsi, 6. 
 
