 
Chingiz Garasharly 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Turkic  
Civilization lost in the 
Mediterranean basin 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Baku – 2011 
 
 2
 
 
Leading adviser:                      Kamran Imanov 
     Professor, Chairman of  
Copyright Agency of the  
Republic of Azerbaijan 
 
Academic editor:                       Tofig Hajiyev 
                                               Corresponding member of  
Azerbaijan National  
Academy of Sciences  
Professor, Doctor of  
Philological sciences 
 
Chief editor: Michael Francis Gainey, M.A. 
 
Editor:                                       Leah Feldman 
 
 
Author:                                      Chingiz Garasharly 
Professor, Doctor of  
Philological sciences 
 
 
All Rights reserved 
No part of this book covered by the copyrights hereon may be 
reproduced or copied in any form or by any means – graphic, 
electronic, or mechanical including photocopying, taping, or 
information storage and retrieval systems – without written 
permission of the author. 
 
© Chingiz Garasharly, 2011 
 
 3
Contents 
 
Introduction…………….………………………………………8 
 
I. Who were the pre – Indo – Europeans of the  
    Mediterranean basin?.........................................................14 
 
1.1. The origin of the early Mediterraneans in the  
       Light of Legends…………………………………….....15 
 
1.2. Turkic Names of Pelasgians…………………………...19 
 
1.3. Tiras, Thracians and Turks…………………………….28 
 
1.4. Turkic Substratum in Old Greek………………. ……..42 
 
1.5. Troy – the Mediterranean Turan……………………….46 
 
1.6. Trojans in the North: Turkic Kings of Scandinavian  
       Sagas…………………………………………………...50 
 
II. Pelasgians and Trojans in Italy: Birth of   
     Etruscan Civilization…………………………………….57 
 
2.1. Turkic Names of Roman Kings………………………..58 
 
2.2. Why Etruscan Writings Remained Mysterious………..72 
 
2.3. A glimpse of Turkic Component of Etruscan  
       grammar………………………………………………..79 
 
2.4. Etruscan Writings Begin to Speak……………..............92 
 
Literature………………………………………………………..135 
 
 
 
 
 4
The President of Azerbaijan, Heydar Aliyev, in reply 
to the well-known Norwegian scientist Thor Heyerdahl’s 
statement about the common roots of ancient Azerbaijani-
Scandinavian cultures noted the importance of resear-
ching these historical relations. The Old Scandinavian 
sagas openly write about the culture brought to the North 
from Troy, the eastern coast of the Mediterranean sea, by 
Turks and Trojans. 
 
 
 
The Turks, like their distant Indo-European, Semitic, Caucasian 
and other relatives were born in Western Asia and left Mesopotamia 
many thousands of years ago. According to the English scientists 
S.Lloyd and G.Child, the Turanians, who settled in the basin of the 
Tigris  and Euphrates ten to twelve thousand years ago, moved to 
Asia. The same can be said about the Indo-Europeans and other Fore 
Asian peoples, who migrated to different parts of Eurasia, thereby 
giving rise to modern language families. 
Thus, the Turks who made up only part of the Turanian race 
settled in Central Asia cannot be considered Central Asians by blood. 
According to old sources, some Turanians who migrated Westward  
established the early Mediterranean civilization. They were those 
Turks who were considered by N.Y.Marr, a well-known Soviet 
linguist of the 1930s, to be pre-Roman, pre-Greek Turkic  settlers of 
the Mediterranean coasts. 
The book «The Turkic Civilization of the Mediterranean» is 
devoted to the study of the early onomasticon of the region and will 
reveal the secrets of the Etruscan writings, which contain the mysteries 
of  the early Mediterranean civilization. The nation which later became 
the Etruscans was known under the name Tursci in Latin. This word is 
from the same origin as old Turuska, which denoted the old Turks in 
 
 5
some ancient languages. The language of the old Turuskas discloses 
the mysteries of the Etruscan writings and of the early Mediterranean 
civilization, as a whole. 
Now we can explain why the old Scandinavian sagas dealt with 
the Trojans and Thracians as Turks and why Thor Heyerdahl, a great 
scientist, wrote about the existence of the same civilization between 
the West and Azerbaijan- an old Turkic land. 
 
 6
ACADEMIC  EDITOR'S  NOTE 
 
The Etruscans passed down a highly developed culture to later 
Europeans. The first democratic institutions and the initial pattern of 
parliament in Rome were founded by the Etruscans. The Renaissance, 
which revolutionized life across all of Europe had its roots in Etruscan 
civilization. The creators of the masterpieces of pre–Roman Italy, 
most mythological personages, philosophers, writers, scientists whom 
we have become accustomed to know as Greek or Roman by origin 
were all early Mediterraneans. Finally, their assimilated languages 
were used as «building materials» in the formation of Latin and Old 
Greek languages, which are now considered by linguists to be «the 
substratum of unknown origin». However, this research  will show 
how the so-called «unknown» and dark world of the Etruscans and 
Trojans and other related peoples of the region is sufficiently 
transparent. 
The book «The Turkic Civilization of  the Mediterranean» reveals 
the Turkic origin of the early languages of this region. Thanks to a 
strong knowledge of old and modern Turkic languages the author has 
discovered that the mysterious Etruscan writings were written in a 
language of a Turkic feature. These findings challenge traditional 
theories that limit the history of the old Turks to Central Asia. It is 
worthy of note that, the author has based the theoretical background of 
his research on European sources. He asserts the existence of a Turkic 
culture in the region based on stories from old Scandinavian writings 
about the Turkic origin of the Trojans and Thracians, old Turkic kings 
of Sweden and Norway and the conclusions of  outstanding European 
linguists about the Turkic origins of the Etruscans, etc. 
The result of this long research is completely compatible with all 
of these sources. The Turkic origin of the Etruscan writings is based 
not on separate words, as was revealed by previous research, but on 
 
 7
the whole lexico-grammatical system — the unity of all aspects of the 
language. 
The conclusions of this book open a new stage in historiography 
promoting  revaluation of the ethnic realities of some regions of both 
Europe, Asia Minor and the Caucasus as well as the correction of 
outdated traditional viewpoints that link  the presence of Turks in Asia 
Minor  and the adjoining territories to Middle Ages. 
 
 
Tofig Hajiyev 
Professor, Doctor of 
Philological sciences 
 
 8
 
Introduction 
 
The first Indo-European tribes, settled in the Mediterranean 
basin during the second millennium B.C., inherited the highly 
developed culture of the early inhabitants of the  region. The 
problem relating to the languages of  the early Mediterranean 
peoples has remained unsolved, although this issue has been 
researched during the last 500 years. Key languages have been 
examined from all over the world: Aramaic, Hebrew, Greek,    
Latin, Hittite, Lydian, Coptic, Chaldean, Egyptian, Celtic, Gothic, 
Albanian, Basque, Abhaz, Old Norse and many others [153, 172]. 
The Etruscan writings, the mythological  names of Greece, 
Rome and Troy, the substratum in Old Greek, Latin and other 
ancient  languages, preserved some information about the origin of 
the aboriginals require interpretation. 
In relation to the origin of the Mediterranean aboriginals there 
is a great discrepancy between antique traditions and the opinions 
of European linguists. According to the authors of antiquity, the 
Thracians, Pelasgians, Trojans and Etruscans were all kinsmen. 
Thracians and Trojans have a close relationship in the «Iliad». As 
K.Blegen writes, the Trojans were  part of the Thracian tribes who 
came to Troy during 3000 to 2500 B.C. from Eastern Europe [144, 
174]. The name  Dardan, the legendary forefather of the Trojans 
[41, 57], reveals the Dardanian origin of the Trojans. The Dardans 
were one of the biggest Thracian tribes [76, 518]. 
To Apollodoros, Dardan was the grandfather of Tros, the 
legendary founder of Troy [41, 353]. 
As for the Etruscans, ancient traditions indicate that they are 
descendants of the Trojans, who came to Italy after the collapse of 
Troy. 
The collapse of Troy coincides with the time of the appearance 
of the Trojans (Tursha) together with other sea peoples in Egypt 
[74, 109] – the 13th  century B.C.  Simultaneously they migrated to 
 
 9
Italy. They were the  same Tirsens, described by Herodotos, to have 
migrated to Italy from Asia Minor as a result of famine [59, 42]. 
These Tirsens, according to Dionisi Halikarnaski, a Greek 
historian, were the Pelasgians. According to him, Tirsens (or 
Tirrhenians) and Pelasgians were the same  nation [68, 95]. This 
idea is shared by Helanik of Lesbos, a 5th century Greek historian, 
who informs us that the Tirsens were initially called Pelasgians 
and, after the Greek occupation in Greece, some of them went to 
Italy [68, 95]. 
Thucydides, an old Greek historian, thought differently. To 
him, the Tirrhenians formed a greater ethnical union,the Pelasgians 
being only  part of them [68, 98]. 
The idea of Etruscan - Pelasgian kinship in our times was 
supported by some linguists, who discovered a close relationship 
between the Etruscan writings and the writings found on the island 
of Lemnos which was once settled by the Pelasgians. They possess 
only some dialectal differences [68, 104; 146, 39]. 
Thus, the Thracians, Trojans and Etruscans on the one hand and 
the Tirsens (Etruscans) and the Pelasgians on the other appear to be 
ethnically interrelated. However, some European linguists, not 
taking into account the traditions of  antiquity, have tried to relate 
the Thraco – Pelasgians to the Indo-Europeans. Neglecting the 
information of D.Halikarnaski, Helanik de Lesbos and Thucydides 
about  the Pelasgo - Tirsenian kinship, they isolated the Pelasgians 
from the Tirsens as Indo-Europeans, while the latter was 
considered to be of unknown origin. They also neglected the 
commonly known relationship between the Etruscan (Tirsenian) 
and Pelasgian writings, thereby excluding the Indo-European 
origins of the latter. 
Contradiction is also revealed in relation to Thraco – Trojan 
languages. These two peoples, mentioned in the «Iliad» and in 
other sources of antiquity as being kinsmen, are referred to as 
originally different peoples – the Thracians as Indo-European, but 
the Trojans as non – Indo-European. 
 
 10
Neither the information of old Scandinavian sources about the 
Turkic origin of the Thracians and the Trojans, nor the Turkic 
elements discovered in the Etruscan language, were given due 
attention by linguists. They associated these Turkisms with 
contacts between «Asian» Turks and the old inhabitants of Asia 
Minor, where the ancestors of the Etruscans had settled [106, 13]. 
Could there have been any Etruscan – Turkic contact if the first 
Turks are alleged by European researchers to have appeared in  
Asia Minor in the Middle Ages? 
The ancestors of the Etruscans, known to have left Asia Minor 
in the first millennium B.C., could not possibly have had any 
contact with the Asian Turks of the Middle Centuries. The truth is 
that  the Etruscans  themselves were Turkic by origin like their 
Trojan ancestors, who are referred to as Turks in old Scandinavian 
sources. 
The exclusion of the Turks from Mediterranean civilizations is 
connected with traditional theory, according to which the 
motherland of the Turks is Central Asia. However, this view is 
incompatible with the results of the Nostratics, which revealed    
the kinship of different language families of Eurasia and Africa. 
According to this branch of linguistics, at some time in the dim and 
distant past, mankind shared a single language. This became split 
into different dialects and changed over long periods of time. Fore 
Asia is considered the cradle for Nostratic languages (Indo-
European, Semitic, Uralic, Turkic, Caucasian, etc. [11, 28]. 
This has been proved by the discovery of lexico-grammatical 
features common to these languages. For instance, the personal 
pronouns mon, ton, son («I», «you», «he») in the Mordva (Uralic) 
language and the possessive pronouns mon, ton, son («my», 
«your», «his») in French are evidently of the same origin [80, 106]. 
To them can be added the Turkic men, sen («I», «you»), Georgian 
me, shen («I», «you»), etc. 
The relationship of Nostratic languages has been proved by 
numerous linguistic facts - very often on stable phonetical changes. 
 
 11
For instance, Nostratic d is observed to have changed into t, z, y in 
different proto-languages: Nost. daka «near», Semitic dak, Mongol 
daga, Turkic yakın «near», Sumerian zag «edge» [94, 19; 177, 215]. 
Nostratic L is observed to have changed into sh in Turkic 
languages whilst it has remained unchanged in other language 
families: Nost. ala «food», Indo-European hel «to feed», Semitic 
alya «fat», «grease», Turk ash «food», asha «food», asha «to eat» 
[177, 260]; Nost. yela «light», «bright», Dravid el «light», Kartvel 
el «to shine», Turkic yashu «to shine» [177, 281]. 
Linguistic facts to demonstrate the distant relationship of 
Nostratic languages, including Turkic, cover all spheres of these 
languages – lexicon, morphology and phonetics. 
There is a great deal of literary evidence and dictionaries to 
support  the view that all Nostratic languages, including Turkic, 
originate from a common root. If this is the case then why should 
the Turks be considered to have taken their origin from Central 
Asia when they have a common lexical and grammatical layer with 
other Nostratic languages, i.e. Indo-European, Uralic, Caucasian, 
etc.? 
In addition to the large comparative material that demonstrates 
the distant relationship of Nostratic languages, we have our own 
evidence that reveals the distant relationship of the Turkic and 
Latin languages. Some Latin words with the initial -v, for instance, 
correspond to the Turkic words which begin in -o, -u: 
 
        Latin                                                  Old Turkic 
 
vola «palm», «sole»                          ul «sole», «fundamental» 
voco «to call», «to name»                 oki «to call», «to name» 
voc «voice», «word»                         ok «voice», «word» 
vulgo «a large quantity»                    ulug «big», «great» 
vulqus «people», «folk»                    ulus «people», «nation» 
 
 
 12
We consider these similarities to be of Nostratic origin because 
the Latin counterparts of the compared words are also found in 
other Indo-European languages. Therefore, they cannot be referred 
to as later borrowings  from one language  to another. For instance, 
voco/voc in Latin is the same old Indian văk «word», Avestan văxš 
«word», etc., regarded by linguists as common Indo-European 
elements [55, 183]. However, the Turkic variants (okı, ok) permit 
us to refer all of these words to a group of relative languages larger 
than the Indo-European ones — the Nostratic languages, of which 
the Turkic languages are a part. 
The distant relationship of the Nostratic languages is also seen 
in the phonetical series of Turkic ulug «big», Latin vulgo «large 
quantity», Slavonian velik, Dravidian val, Uralic wola, Semitic 
w(l) all with the  meaning «big», «large», etc. [178, 109-110]. 
Thus, Turkic languages have an evident relationship with the 
Nostratic (Indo-European, Uralic, Semitic, etc.) languages.They 
cannot be isolated from the history of Western civilizations, in 
particular, from those of the Mediterranean basin. The theory about 
the Central Asian origins of the Turkic languages contradicts their 
distant relationship with the Indo – European, Semitic and other 
languages. Like other Nostratic peoples, the Turks have migrated to 
different parts of Eurasia. Only some of the Proto-Turks migrated 
to the East, whilst others, concretely those of Thraco-Trojan origin, 
could have initially settled somewhere between the Caucasus and 
the Mediterranean basin independently from the Asian Turks.  
The English scientists I.Lloyd and G.Child maintained that the 
Turks, who  settled in the basin of the Tigris and Euphrates in the 
12th millennium B.C., took an active part in the creation of  world 
civilization [11, 57]. One of these was the Etruscan civilization.  
Some European linguists found Turkic elements in the Etruscan 
language, but they could not go further on into the depths of that 
language, as it needed the knowledge of all the Turkic languages, 
in particular, those that kept the oldest phonetic features of the 
Proto-Turkic language. For instance, the Chuvash language is 
 
 13
known to differ from other Turkic languages with its frequent 
usage of the pre-positional interdental th instead of the common 
Turkic y: Chuvash. thithen «shining» — common Turkic yashin 
«radiance». The Chuvash variant is the key to the origin of the 
Etruscan thesan and is defined by linguists as denoting «radiance», 
«daybreak».  
As we shall witness in the corresponding chapter, the Chuvash 
variants of the Turkic words with the initial th serve as the key to 
the origin of numerous Etruscan words. 
In some cases Etruscologists managed to identify the meaning 
of some Etruscan words; not simply by guessing them to be of 
Turkic origin. For instance, the verb flerth, correctly translated as 
«to show itself», is identified as being the Turkic belirt («to show 
itself», «to signify») with the account of the widely spread b-f and 
t-th consonant shifts. These two examples (thesan, flerth) vividly 
show that the identification of the Turkic character of the Etruscan 
language is only possible through a profound knowledge of Turkic 
languages - with a special orientation to their phonetical systems. 
The answer to the question, relating to the origin of early 
Mediterranean languages, requires varied research into onomasti-
con, writings and the lexical substratum, left in the Indo-European 
languages of the region, as well as information from old sources. 
 
 14
I. Who were the Pre-Indo-Europeans  
of the Mediterranean Basin? 
 
The Greek and Italic languages of the Mediterranean basin are 
known to have been preceded by those of non – Indo-European 
origin, previously not identified by linguists. Indo-Europeans      
are considered to have arrived from Eastern Europe. The arrival of 
the first Hellenic people has been described by Xenophon so: 
«Some ten, or maybe fifteen centuries before the march of the    
Ten Thousand a band of Greek-speaking people made their way 
south out of the Balkan Mountains, down the Struma or Vardar 
valley in search of a more comfortable home. Suddenly they saw in 
front of them an immense amount of water, more water than they 
or their ancestors had ever seen before. In astonishment, they 
contrived to ask the natives what it was and  the natives, rather 
puzzled, said, «why, thalassa, of course». So, «thalassa» it 
remained, after nearly all the other words in that language had 
perished [149, 14]. 
This story reveals that the pre-Hellenic people of Greece spoke 
quite a different language in which thalassa meant «sea». It was 
adopted into the Greek language.  
Thala, which is not observed in the Indo-European languages, 
is consonant with the Old Turkic talay («sea», «ocean») [176, 
528]. 
The word talaz («wave», «waterspout»), in modern Turkish 
language,  is of the same origin [164, 392]. It originates from early 
Turkic languages of Asia Minor. 
Despite Kitto’s statement thalassa (thala-ssa) was not the only 
native word left in Old Greek, native Pelasgians had left a whole 
group of their words, known as the pre-Greek substratum, covering 
both onomasticon and vocabulary. A significant part of them has 
been discovered to be Turkic by origin. 
 
 
 
 15
1.1. The Origin of the Early Mediterraneans  
in the Light of Legends 
 
The biblical sons of Japhet – Gomer, Magog, Maday, Yavan, 
Tubal, Meshek and Tiras [51, 9] are known to represent some of 
the pre-historic peoples of Europe and Asia. Maday, for instance, 
personifies the Midians, the early settlers of Southern Azerbaijan 
(North of Iran). Some scientists compared Maday with the Turkic 
ethnonyms Matay, Mata Mada, etc. [57, p.74, 251] and the 
legendary Turanians of the area [26, 116]. 
Two other sons of Japhet — Gomer and Tiras and Gomer’s 
son — Togorma, who personified a part of the early inhabitants of 
the Mediterranean basin, are referred to in various genealogies as 
ancestors of the Turks: the old Turkic Bulgars are told to originate 
from Kemari, the biblical Gomer, which symbolizes the 
Cimmerians [21, 41; 30, 34]. The Turks, in old Scandinavian 
sources, originate from Tiras, Gomer’s brother, who is told to have 
been the first dweller of Thracia [98, 56].  
Analogical genealogies are also mentioned in various ancient 
sources [56, 155]. So, Japhet’s three legendary descendants found 
in different sources symbolized the Turkic peoples, who from time 
immemorial had settled in Asia Minor and Europe. 
According to the Scandinavian geographical writings of the 13th 
century, there first lived in Thracia, Tiras, Japhet’s son, from 
whom the  Turks have originated (A Tracia bygti fyst Tiras sonr 
Iafeths Noasonar. Fra honum er komen ðiod su, er Tyrkir heita) 
[98, 56-65]. 
Analogical information is found in a Khazar (Old Turkic tribe) 
genealogy of the 10th century, where Tir-s is mentioned amongst 
other Turkic tribes (Khazar, Avar, Uguz, Bizal, Tarna, Bulgar, 
Savir, etc.), the sons of Togorma, the son of Japhet [79, 74]. 
So the biblical Tiras, in the light of two different genealogies, 
appears to be Turkic by origin.  
 
 
 16
In the Khazar genealogy we also find the name  Togorma - the 
ancestor of these Turkic tribes. The same Togorma in the biblical 
genealogy is presented as the son of Gomer. 
Like Tiras, both biblical Gomer and his son Togorma, 
according to numerous genealogies and onomasticon, turn out to be 
Turkic ethnonyms. 
Gomer represents the old Turkic Gamars (Kamars) who 
settled long ago in Azerbaijan, throughout the Caucasus, Turkey, 
and Europe [57, 317] and who are known as Cimmerians in 
European sources. They are considered to be the ancestors of the 
old Turkic Bulgars in many genealogies [43, 155; 21, 41].  
Procopius, an old Greek author, describes the Cimmerians as 
being the ancestors of the Turkic Bulgars [30, 34]. 
As to Togorma, the son of Gomer, he has also been associated 
with the Turks. An Armenian source  of the 13th century presents 
Togorma as the ancestor of the Tatars (5, 16).   
It is certainly the same Togorma, who in a Khazar genealogy 
of Turkic tribes, is described as their ancestor [79, 74]. 
A state by the name of Togorma existed in Asia Minor in the  
7th century B.C. [54, 206]. A fortress called Togorma was situated 
in the country of the Hittites [121, 25]. These names reveal that 
Togorma, like Gomer, Tiras and other legendary brothers, is 
simply the personification of a real people of the Mediterranean 
basin. 
Togorma is, undoubtedly, a cognate of Togarmim, Togar, 
Tokarmar or Tokaram, which denoted the Turks who settled in 
the fields of South Russia and some other areas [20, 176; 21, 57; 
120, p.259, 367]. 
In the light of evident onomastic and epigraphic backgrounds, 
the possibility of distortion of these historical facts in the 
Scandinavian and other sources concerning the Turks, is excluded. 
Research has revealed more and more Turkic – Mediterranean 
onomastic parallels.  For instance, two other brothers of Tir-s in 
the Khazar genealogy, Bizal and Tarna, are observed in the 
 
 17
onomasticon of the Thracians and Trojans. Bizal, an old Turkic 
tribal name, corresponds to Bisalt, a Thracian ethnonym [137, 73].  
The element t in this ethnonym is the suffix of plurality used in 
old Turkic ethnonymy [57, 310].  
Tarna, an old Turkic tribal name is of the same origin  as 
Tarna, a provincial name of Troy [9, 70]. 
Old Scandinavians considered the Trojans and the Turks to be 
the same people. In their sagas the legendary people, who are told 
to have settled in the North, are presented as either Turks or 
Trojans: Upphaf allra frasagna i’ Norreni tungi ðeirri er sanindi 
fylgia, hofz ða er Tyrkir ok Asia menn bygdu nordrit… Hofud 
madr ðessa folks uar Odin son ðors, hann atti marga sonu «in 
the beginning of all trustworthy stories in the northern language it 
is told that  the North was settled by Turks and the people from 
Asia… The leader of this people was Odin, the son of Thor»       
[98, 93-95]. 
In the Scandinavian writings of the 13th century  («Junior Edda» 
by Snorri Sturluson, «The saga about Skyoldings», «The saga 
about Sturlungs, etc.) the people of Priam, a Trojan king, who is 
told to have come to the north of Europe under the leadership of 
Odin [98, 97], are presented as Trojans. Asia, which Turks or 
Trojans are referred to, is Asia Minor, where legendary Troy 
existed. 
Priam, the name of the last Trojan king, is a vivid example for 
Trojan – Turkic kinship. This name is quite consonant with 
Priyam, the name of a Turanian (Old Turkic) commander in a 
Kazakh epic («The story of Priyam») [34, 123]. 
This personal name is followed by a number of common Trojan – 
Turkic personal names. Troy itself, together with the name of its 
legendary founder, Tor, is the same Turyana (the country of the 
Turks) and its legendary leader, Tura, described in «Avesta» [84, 88].  
In the poem «Shahname» by  Firdovsi, an old Persian poet, the 
same country is represented as Turan and its eponym Tur [57, 
328; 84, 89]. 
 
 18
The association between the Trojans, Thracians and the Turks 
in old Scandinavian writings of the 13th and 14th centuries is 
logically consistent with ethnic names that were used to refer to 
these peoples in different sources: 
Tiras – Thracians, Turks (old Scandinavian writings); 
Tir-s, Turis – Turks (the Khazar document of the 10th C.); 
Tirsen – Etruscans (in Old Greek); 
Tursk – Etruscans (in Latin); 
Turushka – Turks (in Sanskrit); 
Turuska – Turks (in old Iranian sources); 
Tursi – Turks  (in an Armenian source); 
Tursha – Trojans (in an old Egyptian source of the 13th c. B.C.); 
Trosiya, Trusiya – Troy, Truse – Trojans (in old sources); 
Trause, Trakes – Thracians (in old sources) 
Taruisha - Troy (in a Hittite source of the 13th c. B.C.); 
The peoples mentioned in old sources under these names all 
appear to have a large number of common anthroponyms, 
ethnonyms and the writings they left in Italy appear to be Turkic. 
They were generations of the Turanians who had migrated to        
the Mediterranean basin independently from Asian Turks. The 
onomasticon of the peoples who were settled here and old 
genealogies concerning them reveal that they migrated from 
another centre of Turkic civilization, which seems to have existed 
in a large area between the Caspian and Black Sea and Asia Minor. 
As for the Central Asian Turks, they were only a part of the 
proto-Turks who, in the 8th millennium B.C., had left their 
motherland – Fore Asia [11, 53]. The English scientists, I.Lloyd 
and G.Child consider the Turanians to have migrated to Central 
Asia from Mesopotamia [11, 57]. 
Luis Delaporte, a French archeologist, in his work «The Hittite» 
mentions these people by the name Turki amongst those who 
fought against Naram-Sin (the heir of Sargon III) [21, 92]. The 
Turukkis and Turkis are also mentioned in the texts of Mari, Fore 
 
 19
Asia. For instance, a text referring to the early 2nd millennium B.C. 
mentions the Turukkis living in the province of Tiguna [21, 169]. 
The Turukkis/Turkis, who lived in 3rd and 2nd millennia B.C. 
in the territory of South Azerbaijan,  in the neighbourhood of 
Mesopotamia [2, 78], were the ancestors of the Azerbaijanis, who 
were later known as the Midians (Maday), mentioned in the Bible 
as a brother of Gomer, Tiras and others [51, 9]. 
In old Indian languages these people were known as Turukka 
(Prakrit) and Turushka (Sanskrit) [34, 258], the latter being close 
to Tursk («Etruscan») in Latin, Tursha («Trojan») in an  Egyptian 
source of the 2nd millennium B.C. [106, 30].  
The Etruscans and Trojans  were those Turks who, according to  
N.Y.Marr , a famous linguist of the 1930s, were said to have settled 
in the Mediterranean basin before the Greeks and Romans [122, 
119]. His conclusions about the early inhabitants of this region are 
correct as revealed by the onomasticon and Etruscan writings. Turkic 
elements, found in the old onomasticon of Greece, Italy and Troy, 
reveal the origin of the early settlers of the Mediterranean basin. 
 
1.2. Turkic Names of Pelasgians 
 
The language spoken by the Pelasgians, pre-Greek settlers of 
Greece, has not been identified yet. Nor has the origin of the names 
of most pre-Greek provinces and cities, or the names of  
mythological images of the country been identified. What is known 
is that these names are not Greek. This is also confirmed by the 
interpretations of the Greek myths. According to H.Kitto, a 
researcher of ancient Greece, the conflicts between pre-Greek 
Athena and Greek Poseidon is, in fact, a reflection of the wars 
between the native Athenians and the Hellenic occupants. The 
Athenians, the inhabitants of Attica, were not Greeks, more exactly 
pre-Greeks. However, Poseidon, as a Greek god, represented the 
Hellenic people [149, 14-15]. 
 
 20
The later Greeks themselves believed in an original non-
Hellenic population which they called Pelasgian, remnants of 
which still remained pure in classical times, speaking their own 
language. According to Herodotus, one of the two main branches of 
the later Greek people, the Ionians, were Pelasgian by descent, the 
other, the Dorians, were Hellenic. Greek-speaking people from the 
north migrated into this region and imposed their language on the 
Pelasgians [149, 15]. 
To the earlier historians of Greece, Thucydides and Herodotus, 
the country before the Greeks settled, was called Pelasgia [59, 98; 
121, 31]. 
Herodotus regarded the Ioninas as a «barbarian» people who 
had been Hellenized [149, 19]. 
So the pre-Greek settlers of Greece appear to have spoken a 
language, the origin of which is still unknown. 
In relation  to that language Herodotus wrote: «What language 
the Pelasgians used I cannot say for certain, but if I may conjecture 
from those Pelasgians who still exist… they spoke a barbarian 
language» [149, 15]. 
Neither could the European linguists manage to learn what 
language the Pelasgians used. Those who alleged it to be of Indo-
European origin were not based on serious linguistic facts. Most   
of the researchers could not differentiate the early non-Greek 
substratum from the later Indo-European layer, which had  
appeared in early Greek onomasticon as a result of the  assimilation 
of the Pelasgians. L.Gindin, a researcher of the pre-Greek substra-
tum in the old Greek language, admitted the existence of the oldest 
non-Indo-European layer, referring it, however, not to the 
Pelasgians, but to those who had settled in Greece before the 
Pelasgians. Like other European linguists, he supported the Indo-
European origins of  the Pelasgians [106, 18]. . 
This point of view does not conform with some of the facts - 
neither does it conform with the Etruscan character of the writings 
found on Lemnos, settled once by the Pelasgians, nor with the 
 
 21
information of ancient writers about the origin of  the Pelasgians. 
Both factors tie the Pelasgians with the Etruscans who are 
commonly known to have been non – Indo-European by origin. 
The Lemnos script has been  proved by Western linguists to 
have only a dialectal difference from the Etruscan writings [68, 
104]. It raises the question as to how the Pelasgians could have 
been Indo-European by origin in the event that their language had a 
close relationship with those of  the non-Indo-European Etruscans. 
In the light of  antique traditions the idea of their kinship appears to 
be more believable. The information by D.Halicarnasci concerning 
the Pelasgians and Tirrenians (Etruscans) being the same  nation 
[68, 95] and by Thucydides concerning the  Pelasgians being a part 
of  the Tirrenians [68, 98] originate from the historical reality 
concerning which they were well-informed. 
Tirrens or Tirsens in the old Greek language denoted the 
Etruscans. 
A similar idea is shared by Helanic of Lesbos, a 5th century 
historian, who  writes that Tirsens were initially called Pelasgians, 
some of which were later called Tirsens [68, 98;86]. 
Another important factor that illustrates the non-Indo-European 
origin of the Pelasgians is their close relationship to the Thracians - 
pre-Greek settlers of Greece. Pelasgo-Thracian onomastic parallels, 
as well as the Thraco – Trojan kinship, dealt with in the "Iliad", 
exclude the Indo-European origins of both Pelasgians and 
Thracians, as long as the Trojans are  known to have been neither 
Greek, nor of any other Indo-European peoples. According to 
sources, the pre-Greeks and Greeks also had racial differences. The 
Greeks were «Homer’s brown - haired Achaeans», who ruled over 
«black-haired people», the pre-Greek settlers of the Mediterranean 
basin [149, 22].  
According to Homer, Helen, Akhilles, Menelay and Agamem-
non, who were symbolic of the Greeks, were blond, while Hector 
and Paris, the Trojan brothers, were dark-haired [136, 64]. 
 
 22
Who were these ethnically interrelated peoples – Tirsens or 
Pelasgians, Pelasgians or Thracians, Trojans or Etruscans? As our 
research on their onomasticon and epigraphy demonstrate, the 
genealogical legends concerning their Turkic origin are to be 
trusted. 
A significant part of the old Greek personal names is found in 
Turkic anthroponomy. They are the names usually mentioned in 
ancient literature as belonging to the early settlers of Greece and 
some of them are openly referred to as Pelasgian by origin: 
Abas. According to mythological traditions, Abas was the 
ancestor of the Abants, a Pelasgo-Thracian tribal unit [106, 26].     
A similar name, in different phonetical forms, is observed in old 
Turkic onomasticon: Abas, Apas, Abaz (personal names); Abas, 
Avas (ethnonyms); Abaz, Apas (toponyms), etc. [123, 40]. 
A tribe by the name of Abas belonged to the old Turkic 
Khazars [79, 74]. It was also the personal name of the Caucasian 
Albanians, within which the Thracian Abants once settled Albania 
(Northern Azerbaijan) [57, 28]. 
Kupavon. The personage who bore this name, according to 
mythology, was a «swan-man», a Pelasgian [106, 26]. It finds its 
interpretation in Turkic words  such as ku, kub, kuw «swan» and 
Turkic ethnonyms with the same stems: kuban, kuwan, kuman  
which means «swan-man» [49, 66]. 
As a mythological personage Kupavon («swan-man») was also 
brought to Italy by the Pelasgians. This personal name is also 
mentioned by P.V.Maron, a Roman author, in the list of those sent 
to help Eney, a Trojan commander. Here  Kupavon is described 
with a swan’s feather on his head [104, 25]. 
A. I. Nemirovski considers this personage to be alien to Latin 
and Osk-Umbrian languages. For Nemirovski, this symbol was 
borrowed from neighbouring Thraco-Illirian tribes by the Slavs 
[104, 28]. 
The Turkic character of this personage is evidenced in Turkic 
mythology where  the swan is regarded as a creative beginning and 
 
 23
this belief has found its expression in the Turkic ethnonyms such as 
Kuman (<ku «swan» + man «man», Ku kizhi («ku» + kizhi 
«man»), the Tatar tribal names [23, 51-52]. 
A great number of pre-Greek (Pelasgo-Thracian) dynastic 
names are also found to exist in the anthroponomy of Turkic 
languages – Old Turk, Tatar, Bashkir, Uyghur, Kazakh, Kirghizian, 
etc.  
By denoting physical or moral superiority, these personal names 
answer the principles of anthroponomy. Such anthroponomic 
terminology was particularly characteristic of ancient peoples. 
What is more, the terminology of all these names are Turkic and 
they are only observed in old and modern Turkic languages: 
Egey — a mythological king of Athena [41, 13], the city which 
belonged to the Pelasgians. The same name is used in the Turkic 
(Kazakh) language. 
Egey is either derived from the Kirghizian egey («a man with 
equal power») [202, 942] or consists of the Turkic ege («prince», 
«owner») and the suffix -y (-ay, -ey), widely used in the Turkic 
languages to form personal names (Bekey, Bakay, Tinay, Esey, etc.). 
Keney, a pre-Greek personal name is the same Kirghizian 
Turkic Keney (32, 161), which is derived from ken («vast», 
«spacious»). 
Elat. In ancient literature Keney is presented as the son of Elat, 
a legendary pre-Greek king [91, 599]. It has a Turkic counterpart 
— Ilat, a Tatar personal name [125, 149]. It is derived from the 
Turkic ilat «population» [192, 343], elat «nomad», «nomadic» 
(people) [163, 161]. The same Turkic appellative is observed in old 
Greek – ilot «the lower layer of people» [59, 539], which refers to 
pre-Greek (Pelasgian) substratum in old Greek. 
Danay. This pre-Greek personal name [41, 25] is completely 
consonant with the Turkic (Kazakh) personal name Danay [168, 51]. 
A similar personal name — Tanay, used in Karachay, Balkar 
anthroponomy, was interpreted by  G. Geybullayev as consisting of 
Turkic tang (tan, dang, dan «day-break», «dawn») and the suffix -
 
 24
y/-ay to indicate the  time of birth. He also conjoins analogical 
personal name with the word tan – Tantuar («born at daybreak»), 
used in the anthroponomy of the Tatars and Bashkirs [13, 153]. 
Danay also possibly derives from the Turkic word dan (dang, 
tan «honour», «fame», «nobility») [192, 145], on the analogy of 
the Greek and Slavic personal names with the initial components 
cleo, slav («honour», «fame»). 
Danay, like Egey, as a personal name is characteristic of the 
pre-Greek and Turkic anthroponomy that is not being observed in 
other languages. 
Ergin. He is presented in Old Greek mythology as the son of 
Poseidon [41, 212].  Ergin has its anthroponomic parallel only in 
Turkic languages: Ergin (Turkish), Erkin (Kazakh). 
Deriving it from the Turkic ergin is reasonable for its specific 
meaning to characterize a person both physically and morally: 
«adult», «mature», «free», «self-dependent» [187, 78]. Ergin/Erkin, 
derived from the Turkic erg/erk («power», «strong», «right») [176, 
295-296], was also used as an official title in some Turkic 
languages [22, 15]. 
Gerey. This name directly referred to the Pelasgians [41, 191] 
and is completely consonant with the Turkic Gerey [125, 125]. 
This Turkic personal name is connected with the Turkic appellative 
geray, girey («worthy», «respectable») and was used as an official 
title of the Crimean khans [188, 1555]. On the basis of this 
semantics its transition to a personal name is quite possible. 
Inakh. A king of Argos, a Greek province, bore this name [59, 
565]. Like Gerey, it appears to have originated from an appellative 
denoting a high title. Old Turkic inakh («a confidential person», 
«minister») was used as a title, the bearer of which was considered 
to have a close relation to the ruler. In the 15th C.Chagatay  
(Turkic) language it meant «minister» or «the representative of the 
emperor» [22, 16].  
As a derivative of the Turkic inan («to believe») this title 
expressed the confidentiality of the person. [22, 15]. 
 
 25
Transition of this title to a personal name in Turkic languages 
has not been observed. 
Yapik. This pre-Greek personal name [173, 807] corresponds 
to old Turkic Yapig, a personal name [176, 236]. Plutarchus 
presents Yapik as the grandson of Pelasg, which personifies the 
Pelasgians [115, 199].  
Yapik, is described by Vergil as the son of Yasiy, who is the 
relative of Dardan, the ancestor of the Trojans [118, 356]. 
Yapik, in both sources, is associated with the Pelasgo-Trojan 
world. 
This personal name, as well as its old Turkic counterpart, can be 
interpreted in two ways: 
1. It can be derived from the Turkic yapig («closed») or from 
the Tatar yabik («closed», «thin», «tired», «miserable»). In the 
Tatar language it has anthroponomic semantics which is seen in the 
expression yabik kishi «miserable man» [189, 279]; 
2. As a metonymic name it can be derived from the Turkic 
yapik («wide cloak made of felt or wool») [189, 262]. Analogical 
semantic phenomenon – change of the name of a cloth into a 
personal name is usual for Turkic languages. For instance, the 
nickname Tulum in the Gagauz (Turkic) language is derived from 
tulum («fur», «sheepskin») [172, 478]. 
Tulumni, an Etruscan personal name, is of the same origin: 
tulum + ni adjective forming suffix, which means «a person with 
overalls» or «a person who makes overalls» [105, 49]. 
Yapik, the Pelasgian personal name, is a cognate of a tribal 
name of  Attika [53, 214], a Pelasgian province. 
Homer. Homer, a famous pre-Greek poet, was an Ionian Greek 
[149, 43]. Ionian Greeks were originally Hellenized Pelasgians 
[149, 15-19]. Therefore, the similarity between the names Homer 
and Ghumar, an epic personage in the Kazakh mythology, as well 
as their being both folk singers and poets [34, 199], serve as an 
argument to derive them from the same source - common for the 
Pelasgians and Turanians. If we remember the identity between the 
 
 26
names of Priam, a Trojan king, and Priyam, a Turanian personage 
in the old Kazakh epos, and other anthroponomic ties, the 
Mediterranean – Turkic relations become even more and more 
visible. 
According to A.Koniratbayev, a Kazakh researcher, the old 
Greeks might have inherited Homer and other epic personages 
from the old Turkic Saks, the direct ancestors of the Kazakhs, as a 
result of contacts [34, 199]. The Saks, and their kinsmen, the 
Cimmerians, are known to have settled the northern Black Sea 
basin from time immemorial [42, 85]. However, the old Turkic 
elements in the old Greek anthroponomy and literature originate 
from inside - from the language of pre-Greek Pelasgians. The old 
Greeks are known to have inherited most of their mythological epic 
characters from the Pelasgo-Thracian inhabitants of the country, 
who in the Bible were known under the names of Gomer, Tiras and 
others. 
Those who consider the Turkic elements in the old Greek 
language to have been borrowed from outside, simply do not know 
about the origin of the pre-Greek population of Greece. If the 
Turkic elements in the old Greek language had been borrowed from 
outside they would not have covered onomasticon. 
Among onomastic parallels there are not only personal names, 
but also names of rivers, ethnonyms, etc. 
Ataman, a Thesalian tribal name [117, 495], is consonant with 
the Turkic appellative ataman («leader») which can be associated 
with the superior position of the Atamans in the area. In the 
relations of ancient tribes military and political superiority was of 
significant importance. 
Personal name Adaman, used by Turkic Kirghizians, sounds 
quite similar [32, 99]. 
Tartar, the name of a river, which flowed in the territory of the 
the same province [111, 121], is identical with Tartar, the name of 
a river in Azerbaijan. 
 
 27
The river Selenga [111, 29] flowing in the territory of old 
Greece, does not differ from the name of a Siberian river – 
Selenga. It originates from the Turkic seleng, selen («noise», 
«rumble») [190, 479], an apparent hydronymic term. Similar river 
names (Seleng, Selenj) were used in many areas where Turkic 
peoples lived. 
However, the interpretation of the pre-Greek Selenga by 
European scientists is quite unbelievable: they derived it from two 
theonyms – Selene and Ga, the mythological Mediterranean gods 
[111, 29]. If they had paid attention to the cognate Turkic river 
names (Selenga, Seleng), spread in large areas where the Turks 
lived, they would not have derived this river name from any local 
ethnonym. 
 
The list of common pre-Greek (Pelasgian)  
and Turkic names 
 
       Pre - Greek               Turkic 
 
Abas Abas, Apas (Old Turkic) 
Egey Egey (Kazakh) 
Ergin Ergin, Erkin (Turkish, Kazakh) 
Danay  Danay (Kazakh) 
Tanay (Altay) 
Ismen Ismeney (Chuvash) 
Gerey Gerey (Kumik, Bashkir) 
Keney Keney (Kirghiz) 
Ketey Ketey (Kazakh) 
Titiy Tetiy (Chuvash) 
Tenes Teniz (Kazakh) 
Med Medeu (Kazakh) 
Yapik Yapig (Old Turkic) 
Yolay Yulay (Tatar, Bashkir) 
Elat Ilat (Tatar) 
Inakh İnakh (title) (Old Turkic) 
 
 28
Homer Ghumer (Kazakh) 
Selenga (river) Selenga (river) 
Tartar (river) Tartar (river) 
Ataman (tribe) Ataman (Turkic appellative) 
Adaman, personal name 
 
Turkic names are also observed in the onomasticon of  the 
Thracians, who are described as Turkic by origin in old 
Scandinavian sources [98, 56]. Some researchers consider the 
Thracians and Pelasgians to have been the same peoples [61, 95].  
It is not by meer chance that a great number of Thracian names are 
found to be Turkic, like those of the Pelasgians. 
 
1.3. Tiras, Thracians and Turks 
 
By the end of the first millennium B.C. the Thracians, like other 
early settlers of the Mediterranean basin and Eastern Europe, had 
already been assimilated by the Greeks and Romans. Despite the 
allegation of western researchers that the Thracians were Indo-
European by origin, in the Scandinavian writings of the 13th and 
14th centuries they were openly referred to as Turks. 
Tiras. Old Scandinavian writings tell us about the legendary 
Tiras, «the first dweller of Thracia from whom the Turks have 
originated» [98, 56-65]. Tiras is the same Tir-s, described in the 10th 
century Khazar (Old Turkic) document among Turkic peoples – 
Khazar, Avar, Uguz, Bulqar, Savir, Bizal, Tarna, etc. [79, 74]. 
Tiras/Tir-s is the same as Tirsen - the Greek name of the Etruscans. 
Bizal, another Turkic tribe, mentioned in the list of Khazar’s 
«brothers», is the  same Bisalt, a well-known Thracian tribe      
[137, 73]. The element -t in its content is the old Turkic suffix of 
plurality (-t), usually observed in Turkic ethnonyms (Tirkut, Soyut, 
Oyrot, etc.) . 
Another «brother» in the list – Tarna is found in the Trojan 
onomasticon – Tarna. It is mentioned in the "Iliad"  as a provincial 
 
 29
name in Troy [9, 70]. Tarna is known to have been one of the old 
Turkic (Khazar) tribes [57, 139]. 
These parallels are followed by a great number of personal and 
other names common to the Thracians and Turks: 
Dardan. This is the name of a Thracian tribe [76, 518] - also 
connected with the origin of the Trojans. In ancient traditions  
Dardan was the ancestor of the Trojans, the symbol of Thracian – 
Trojan kinship [144, 174]. 
Its interpretation, as derived from the Albanian dardhe («pear») 
[61, 19],  is not conformable to the principles of ethnonomy or 
anthroponomy. In addition, Dardan is not found in any Indo-
European language. 
However, it is found in the Turkic onomasticon and finds its 
reasonable interpretation in the Turkic languages: Dardan, used as 
a personal name in the Kirghizian language [202, 186], is derived 
from the word dardan («healthy», «clumsy», «very great»). It is 
just an anthroponomical term, denoting a positive physical feature, 
characteristic of men. 
Dardan, used also as name of a mountain in Kazakhstan, is 
associated with the meaning of «greatness» within this appellative. 
The Turkic word dardan is derived from dardi («to consider 
himself superior»), stemmed from the element dar («as big as a 
mountain») [36, 261-262]. 
In the Kirghizian folklore Dardan was used as a title of athletes 
and knights [202, 186]. 
Thus, there is no need to derive Dardan from the Albanian 
dardhe («pear») if it is used in the Turkic languages as a personal 
name and has a reasonable interpretation. 
Artay, a Thracian personal name [53, 245], is of the same 
origin with the Turkic Ertay [125, 60]. The latter was interpreted 
as the combination of the Turkic er («man», «hero») and tay 
(«like», «similar»): «like a man», «manlike» [57, 272]. The names 
denoting such a notion were particularly characteristic of all 
ancient peoples. 
 
 30
This comparison reveals in the Thracian Artay the same 
elements – ar «man» and tay («like»). The Thracian ar («man») 
corresponds to the Chuvash variant of the Turkic er: ar («man»). 
Aksay. This personal name [53, 245] can be compared with 
Akshay, a Turkic personal name used by  the Tatars and Bashkirs 
[142, 55]. It consists of the Turkic aksa, aksha («whitish») and the 
suffix -y (-ay), widely used in Turkic personal names. 
The Mari language, greatly influenced by the Bulgar and Chuvash 
languages, has the personal name Aksay which is phonetically more 
similar to Aksay in the Thracian language [125, 297]. 
Agis. Turkic personal names similar to Thracian Agis [137, 
189] are Egiz, Igiz in Kazakh and Karakalpak languages [168, 
166]. They are derived from the Turkic appellative agis/egiz 
(«tall», «high») [187, p. 702, 703], which is widely observed in the 
formatıon of personal names. 
Dinis. This personal name [83, 320] is similar to Deniz (old 
Turkic), Dingiz (Tatar, Bashkir) and connected with the Turkic 
deniz/dengiz/dingiz/tingiz/tinis («sea») [194, 194]. 
Teres, the name of a Thracian king [53, 324], is similar to 
Teris, a personal name in a Turkic (Kazakh) epic [34, 178] and 
Tires, the personal name used by the Tatars and Bashkirs [142, 66]. 
It is derived from the Turkic appellative tires/ters («persistent»). 
Tamir, the name of a Thracian mythological singer [137, 9], 
sounds like Turkic Damir (Kazakh), Timer (Tatar, Bashkir), a 
personal name, stemmed from the Turkic appellative damir/tamir 
(«iron») [194, 188] and used to indicate firmness of man’s character. 
Dekeney, a Thracian personal name [109, 236], is similar to 
Tekeney, a Chuvash name [125, 218]. It can be  associated with 
tegin/tekin («prince») used as a title in the old Turkic language: 
Alp Tegin, Kul Tegin, Esen Tegin [176, 547]. 
A similar personal name – Tegen was used in the old 
anthroponomy of Italy [96, 433]. 
 
 31
Terey, a Thracian personal name [53, 55], can be compared 
with old Turkic Tiriy and interpreted as being derived from the 
Turkic tiri («alive», «brisk») [49, 90]. 
The Misians, a Thracian tribe, settled on the Danube, had 
leaders by the names Rol and Tsirak [72, 7]. 
Rol, which is a cognate of Orol, a personal name of the Daks, a 
Thracian tribe [109, 23], differs from the latter with the omission of 
the initial consonant r. Omission of a vowel before r is also observed 
in the Thracian personal name Remaks (Remak+s) [137, 242] whose 
Turkic counterpart is Ermak - an old Turkic personal name used by 
the Tatars and Bashkirs [142, 59]. It consists of the components er 
(«man») and mak («praise», «honour») in Turkic languages. 
Thracian Rol/Orol coincides to the Turkic Oral, a personal 
name, used by the Kazakhs and Karakalpaks [71, 349; 168, 329]. 
Tsirak, the name of the other Thracian (Dak) leader, is the 
same Sirak/Shirak, old Turkic personal names [119, 103]. They 
can be derived from the Turkic (Kirghizian) sirak «long-legged», 
«tall» or chirak («clever») [13, 153], both having anthroponomic 
semantics. 
The life of the Thracian Daks, according to an author of the 2nd 
century, was connected with mountains [109, 231]. In the light of 
this information the connection of this Thracian tribal name with 
the Turkic dagh («mountain») [36, 263] seems quite reasonable. 
G.Moravcsik, in his work dealing with Turkic ethnonyms in 
Byzantian sources, refers the Daks to the Pechenegs, an old   
Turkic tribe [150, 116]. 
Furthermore, an 11th century Arabian author, mentions 
Dakhlan among the cities belonging to the Turkic Kimak khans 
[34, 33-36], which once more shows the Turkic origin of the Daks. 
Degis [53, 46], a personal name of the Daks, is yet another 
argument to show the Turkic origin of the Thracian Daks. It is the 
same Tegis, a Kazakh personal name [168, 385], derived from the 
appellative tegis (Kazakh), tegiz (Kirghiz), denoting «truthful», 
«right». 
 
 32
Thracian – Turkic parallels are also seen in other branches of 
onomasticon. 
Assa, a Thracian toponym [111, 245], has a number of 
equivalents in Turkic toponomy (Assa, Ass, As) and ethnonymy 
(As, Ass, Az). Turkic  tribes under these names inhabited a large 
territory between the Urals and Altay [56, 138-139]. 
Aral, the name of a Thracian city [111, 106] may be derived 
from the Turkic aral («forest», «island», «a bushy area along a 
river or a lake»), which lies in the Turkic toponyms Aralda, 
Aralagash [184, 21], Aral - a lake in Middle Asia. 
Aral is also found as a personal name in Middle Asian Turkic 
anthroponomy [71, 316]. 
Kizik, a Thracian name, is the name of a town [83, 327] and of 
a Thracian king who ruled the country of the Dolions [41, 19]. 
A similar Turkic name (Kizik) was used as an ethnonym (an 
Oghuz tribe in Turkey) [29, 48], personal name (Kazakh Kizik 
bay) and river name (Tatar Kizikchul) [56, 185; 168, 271]. 
These names are derived from the Turkic word kizik («hot», 
«violent»), and whose semantics is appropriate for its being used in 
any branch of onomasticon. 
Saki, a Thracian tribal name [53, 168], can be compared with 
the Turkic Saka/Sak - old settlers of the North Caucasus. To 
Menandros, a 6th century Byzantian author, in ancient times the 
Turks were called Saka. Fiofilact Simokatta, a 7th century 
Byzantian author, identifies the Scythians, who settled in the 
Caucasus and in the North, with the Turks [75, 20]. 
The ethnonym Saka, with its phonetical variants observed in 
the ethnogeny of Turkic peoples,  reveals the Turkic origin of the 
Thracian Saki, a tribal name. Similar tribal names are found in the 
context of the Kazakhs (Shaka),  Kirghizians (Sake, Saka) and the 
Khakas (Sakay), etc. [57, 90]. 
Saka, as a personal name, was used by the Misians, a Thracian 
tribe [53, 167-168] .The same personal name was found in the 
 
 33
anthroponomy of the Turks: Saka (Kirghizian), Sak (Tatar, 
Bashkir) and Sakay (Chuvash) [32, 106; 125, 218; 142, 65]. 
Personal names in ancient society embodied the positive moral 
and physical features  of a man. Accordingly, the above mentioned 
names can be cognate with the Turkic sak («attentive», «careful») 
or with the Turkic saka/sagga («healthy», «bearing») [1, 101]. 
The semantics of these words enabled them to form ethnonyms,  
largely observed in Thracian-Turkic ethnonymy. 
Basar, a Thracian name, widely spread in the onomasticon of 
Eastern Europe, was associated with the Thracian appellative 
basarey («fox»). Such names have been preserved in the territories 
of Bulgaria (Basarova), Romania (Basaraba) and in the anthro-
ponomy of the Bulgarians (Basarov), Serbs (Basarichevirh), etc. 
[147, 455]. 
Analogical personal names are observed in the anthroponomy 
of Turkic peoples: Chuvash Basaray, Turkmen Basar, Kuman 
Basaraba [100, 72]. 
There are also cognate ethnonyms such as Basar, Bazar in the 
onomasticon of Turkic peoples (Karakalpak, Uzbek, Kirghizian) 
[58, 61]. 
The Thracian bassara («fox»), to which these Thracian names 
refer, can be compared with the Turkic (Azerbaijani dialect) 
peserek («fox»), Chuvash pasara («polecat»), but its connection 
with the above mentioned names is not certain. 
Payon, also called Peon, was the name of a Thracian tribe    
[53, 321]. In Byzantian sources Payon was associated with the 
Turkic Bulgars [150, 242] who in numerous old sources are 
referred to as Cimmerians - the early settlers of North Black Sea 
basin. 
This name in various variants is observed in the Turkic 
onomasticon: Turkic tribal names: Boyan (Oghuz) [190, 1468], 
bayan, bayyan (Kirghiz, Karakalpak) [58, 60]. Personal names: 
Poyan (Khakas), Buyan (Tuva) [125, 143].  
 
 34
It is derived from the Turkic payan/bayan/puyan («rich») 
[193, 28]. 
Some Peonian names also have Turkic equivalents: 
Dober, a Peonian tribal name [53, 66], corresponds to the 
Turkic ethnonym Duber/Tuber/Tiber, which was found in the 
context of the Oghuz Turks [49, 126]. 
Tuba kizhi, a Siberian Turkic tribal name, is the loan 
translation of Duber/Tuber: they are derived from the Turkic 
tube/tobe («mountain», «hill»), er («man») and kizhi («man»): 
Tuber < tube-er «mountainous people» [49, 126]. 
The suffix er («man») is a widely used ethnonym-forming element 
in Turkic onomasticon: Bulgar, Khazar, Mishar, Aghacher, etc. 
Ayniy, a Peonian personal name [53, 41],  may be of the same 
origin as Turkic personal names such as Ayna [71, 316], Ayneken 
(Ayne-ken), Ayniken [32, 99], etc. 
Bias, a Peonian personal name [53, 40], can be compared with 
the personal name Biyash, used in Kazakh anthroponomy [168, 
135]. There was not any letter denoting the sound sh in old Greek 
and Latin languages. Thus, theoretically, Peonian Bias could 
originally have been in the form of Biash or Biyash, which can be 
interpreted as being combination of Turkic bi/biy - a title, and 
dimunitive suffix sh. 
Susak, a Thracian personal name [113, 199], is the same Susak 
used as a nickname by Turkic Gagauz people [172, 610]. It is 
derived from the cognate appellative – susak («pumpkin»). The 
personal name is associated with the secondary meaning 
(«foolish», «blockhead») of the word susak. 
Susak, as a personal name, can also be metonymic, i.e. used to 
denote the person growing pumpkins. 
Dinis, a Thracian personal name [83, 320], corresponds to 
Turkic Deniz, Tengiz and derived from the word deniz/dingiz 
(«sea»). 
Dengizikh, having the same root (dengiz), was Atilla’s son’s 
name [49, 45]. 
 
 35
Itil, a Thracian personal name [53, 147], sounds like Etil in old 
Turkic anthroponomy. Etil alp was the name of a legendary hero of 
the Turks [6, 177]. Nowadays it is used in Kazakh (Edil) and Tatar 
(Idel) languages [168, 167; 125, 122]. 
Researchers derive this personal name from a Turkic 
(Bulgarian) river name – Itel/Edil (the Volga river). 
Moskon, the name of a Thracian ruler [137, 58], is consonant 
with Moskom, an old Tatar personal name [33, 166], although its 
etymology cannot be identified. 
Some Thracian appellatives, kept in the works of different 
authors, appear to be Turkic. 
Belegin («the code of laws») belonged to North Thracians [109, 
236]. In this word we can see the Turkic belge («document»), 
belgin («definite») [193, 230], which are logically associated with 
the notion of law: belegin denoted a document, containing a 
definite group of laws. 
Aule («yard», «aul») [72, 89] is the same aul, avil, avla, having  
analogical meanings in the Turkic languages [192, 83]. 
Thracian basarey («fox») [147, 455] can be compared with the 
word pasara («polecat») in the Chuvash language and peserek 
(«fox») used in some Azerbaijani dialects. 
Tape/tepe, a Thracian geographical term, supposed by 
researchers to denote «cliff», «stone» [60, 42], is the same as the 
Turkic tepe («hill»). Tape is found in the name of a mountain 
height in Dacia - a Thracian province. 
Teba («hill») used in Latin is of the same origin and could have 
been borrowed from the early Pelasgo-Trojan languages of İtaly. 
There is one more source to identify the Turkic origins of the 
Pelasgo-Thracian people. It is the onomasticon of Caucasian 
Albania, where the settlement of the Thraco – Pelasgian tribes, 
recorded in the works of ancient authors and related linguistic facts, 
have not been given enough attention. Turkic names in the 
onomasticon of Albania, researched by Azerbaijani scientists 
during the last two decades, have been found to originate from the 
 
 36
Pelasgo – Thracian languages. Leading Albanian tribes were the 
same Mediterranean people, or at least they shared ethnically 
related cultures. 
Caucasian Albania, which covered the territory of North 
Azerbaijan, was alleged to have been initially settled by the tribes 
speaking Caucasian languages. However, post-Soviet researchers 
have discovered that the ethnonym Alban, and most ethnonyms 
and personal names of the Albanians were in the onomasticon of 
the Turkic peoples of  Kazakhstan and Middle Asia. Researchers 
raised the question as to why the Albanians should be considered to 
be of Caucasian origin, while the tribes, called Alban, Gargar, etc. 
existed in the ethnogeny of Turkic peoples - neither of them of 
Caucasian origin [57, 79-81]. 
According to M.Kirzioglu and Sh.Kaya, Turkish historians,   
the Albanians had arrived in Albania with the Saks from the  north 
[30, 194]. This idea seems compatible with the presence of the 
same names in the onomasticon of Kazakhstan and Middle Asia 
where, during the 1st millennium B.C., the Saks settled [13, 195]. 
Nevertheless, there is no source to show that the Albanians 
arrived with the Saks, although their onomasticon is deeply related. 
However, it is natural to think so, because the Saks were Turkic by 
origin. The Albanians seem to have been more related with the 
Cimmerians, who also arrived in Albania from the north-more 
exactly from the Northern Black Sea basin, which they inhabited in 
the  1st millennium B.C. [13, 130]. 
The point is that the Cimmerians were associated by a number 
of researchers with the Pelasgo-Thracian peoples of the 
Mediterranean [31, 190-191], who participated in the ethnical life 
of Albania (Abants, Enians, Misians, etc.). Many Pelasgo-Thracian 
and Turkic lexical parallels are also common for the Albanians. 
For instance, Zober, the name of an Albanian king, was 
compared to Zaber(gan), a personal name, belonging to the old 
Turkic Kutirgurs of the North Caucasus [57, 461]. It was interpre-
ted as being derived from the Turkic sabar («noble») [13, 177]. 
 
 37
In fact, the same name (Zober) also belonged to a Thracian 
king [147, 461]. 
Abas, an Albanian personal name, was compared with the     
old Turkic Abas [123, 40], whilst the same personal name – Abas 
can be observed in the anthroponomy of the Pelasgo-Thracians 
[106, 26]. 
This is also the case with Mide, the name of an Albanian king 
[87, 461], compared with the Turkic Metey [57, 401]. However, 
Albanian Mide and Turkic Metey, Medeu, etc. [125, 217; 168, 
290] may also be compared with  Medok - the name of a Thracian 
king (137, 101). 
Old sources openly inform us that the Pelasgo-Thracian tribes 
settled in Albania. Thracian Abants, who were also known as 
Evbeyans, migrated to Albania from the North Caucusus [57, 72] 
and established there their province called Abant [57, 78].  
The Enians who settled in Albania had come from Thesalia, an 
old Greek province. The city they settled in was known as Yunan 
and Hurum [57, 73], both of which meant «Greek». However, they 
were not Hellenic Greeks, as is considered by some researchers, 
they were a pre-Greek people - ousted from Greece after the Dorian 
occupation of Pelasgia, modern Greece. 
Enians were Ionians, who were regarded by Herodotus as 
Hellenized «barbarians». He asserted that the Ionians were 
Pelasgian by descent [149, 15]. 
The  city, by the name Misia in Caucasian Albania [3, 24], 
might have been connected with the Misians - a Thracian tribe 
[137, 26-28]. 
Ties have also been found in Albanian - Illirian onomastic 
parallels. Illirians, considered to have been Pelasgian by descent 
[68, 100], appear to have had numerous names common with those 
of the Albanians. Sisak, an Illirian toponym [76, 509], corresponds 
to the name of an Albanian king – Sisak [57, 224]. The same 
personal name, with a slight phonetical difference, belonged to the 
Turkic Khazars [45, 238]. 
 
 38
Karn, an Illirian ethnonym [76, 509], lies in Karnakat, an 
Albanian toponym, consisting of Karna and the suffix kat, found 
in some other Albanian names [57, 100]. In Turkic onomasticon 
cognate names are Karnak, a city of Oguz Turks, and Karnas, a 
personal name in the Kirghizian epic «Manas») [14, 732; 176,429]. 
Neither the ethnical origin, nor the name of the Illirians have 
been identified by linguists. O. Trubachev derives the ethnonym, 
Illiri, from the name of the river Visla, on which the Illirians 
settled. To him they were initially called uisluri, by the name of the 
river, which later changed into Illiri [38, 69]. 
Such «inventions» made by linguists were  made possible by 
the lack of knowledge concerning the ethnical past of Europe. As a 
result, early peoples, assimilated by Indo-Europeans, are now 
presented as early Indo-Europeans of Europe. Pelasgo-Thracians, 
Illirians and many others were as «Indo-European» as modern 
Slavonic Bulgars are. Now speaking a Slavonic language, they 
were once old Turkic Bulgars who kept not only their ethnical 
name, but also a significant layer of old Bulgarian words in their 
present Slavonian language. 
Both the ethnonym Illiri and the name of a related province – 
Illirik can be referred to as Ilirik, Illirik, Turkic personal names of 
the Huns and the Sabirs. 
N.A.Baskakov derives these Turkic names from the com-
bination of il(k) («prince», literally «first») and erik («swift», 
«sharp») [49, 45]. 
Another argument to demonstrate the Mediterranean-Albanian 
relationship is the information about the migration of the 
Gargarians, an Albanian tribe, from Asia Minor. According to 
Strabo, they came to the North Caucasus together with the Thracian 
Evbeys [116, 521]. There was a city called Gargar near Troy  
[111, 144]. 
The Gargars are said to have come to the North Caucasus 
through the field Themiskir, a fertile field in Pontus. The classical 
(Italian) expression terramar («greasy land») for «fertile», used in 
 
 39
ancient literature, serves to reveal the Turkic origin of the name 
Themiskir as denoting «fertile land»: semiz «fertile», literally 
«greasy» and kir «field». Thus, the territories, where the 
Gargarians and other tribes of antiquity were settled, had pure 
Turkic names. 
Albanians, who gave their name to the country, were also 
associated with the early inhabitants of the Mediterranean basin. 
People by the name Alban are told, in one source, to have settled in 
Italy and to be of Trojan origin. Their being of Trojan origin  
means that they are Turkic as much as the Trojans who, in 
Scandinavian sagas, are told to be Turkic and had pure Turkic 
names. 
The information that Caucasian Albanians had kinships in 
Cyprus [10, 15] is also a reasonable argument that would tie them 
with the early Mediterraneans - as long as the pre-Greek Cyprus 
was settled by the Pelasgians. 
Numerous facts reveal that the Trojans had ethnic ties with the 
Caucasus and pre-Caspian Turkic peoples who were known in 
ancient times as the Turanians. In old Persian sources these Turkic 
lands were called Turyana and Turan - their eponyms were Tura 
and Tur [57, 328; 84, 89]. 
These names completely correspond to Troy, an ancient state in 
Asia Minor with the eponym Tor. The fact that these parallels 
represented the same culture, which stretched from the 
Mediterranean basin to the Caucasus and further on to Trans – 
Caspian Turan, is revealed in the light of legendary images and 
stories. First of all, we should mention that the name Priyam, 
described in a Kazakh (Turkic) epic as a Turanian commander [34, 
123] is identical to  Priam - the name of the last Trojan king. 
Another argument to demonstrate Trojan-Turanian ties is 
Vergil’s information that Eney, a Trojan hero, is from the Caucasus 
by birth and was breast-fed by a Hircanian tiger [118, 189]. 
Hircania is known to have been the name of a pre-Caspian province 
[57, 206]. 
 
 40
The relationship between the pre-Greek (Pelasgian) folk-singer, 
Homer, and the legendary Turanian folk-singer, Gumar, described 
in Kazakh epics, and some other parallels reveal the real existence 
of the common Trojan-Turanian world. 
Common personal, tribal and geographical names in these 
languages are evident enough to demonstrate the common roots of 
the Mediterranean and Turkic civilizations. The list below covers 
Thracian-Turkic onomastic parallels: 
 
  Thracian Personal Names     Old Turkic Personal Names 
 
Artay Ertay 
Agis Egiz 
Aksay Akshay 
Dardan Dardan 
Dekeney Tekeney 
Dinis Deniz 
Bias Biyash 
Ayniy Ayna, Ayniken 
Degis Tegis 
Teres Teris 
Tamir Damir 
Tsirak Sirak 
Saka Saka, sak 
Itil Etil 
Moskon Moskom 
Susak  Susak 
Zober Zaber (gan) 
Kizik Kizik 
Rol, Orol Oral 
       
 
 
 41
         Thracian Ethnonyms       Old Turkic Ethnonyms 
 
Tiras                       Tir-s, Turis 
Bisalt                      Bizal 
Saki                       Sak, Saka 
Payon                     Payan, Bayan 
Dober                     Duber, Tuber 
 
Thracian toponyms which correspond to mixed types of 
onomastic units in Turkic languages: 
 
     Thracian                                  Turkic 
 
Assa (town)                   Assa, As (towns, tribal names) 
Aral (town)                   Aral (personal name), 
                                       Aral (lake), Aral (ethnonym),  
                                       Aralda, Aral-agash (place names) 
Kizik (town)                  Kizik (tribal name), Kizik-chul,  
                                       river name 
Basar (toponym)           Basar/Bazar (ethnonym), 
                                       Basar (anthroponym) 
 
         Common Illirian  –  Turkic Names 
 
Illiri (etnonym),             Illirik, Ilirik (personal names) 
İllirik (toponym)  
Sisak (toponym)            Sisak (personal name)                                    
Karn (ethnonym)          Karnak (toponym), Karnas (personal  
                                       name) 
                                       Karnakat, Albanian toponym 
 
In addition to onomastic parallels, there is one more source   
that reveals the Turkic origin of the Pelasgo-Thracian languages: 
the Turkic substratum of old Greek, in particular, in the dialect      
in which Homer wrote his famous poetry. The origin of such 
 
 42
Turkisms cannot be naturally associated with later Greek 
(Byzantian) – Turkic contacts. This substratum originates from the 
pre-Greek languages, which left obvious Turkic personal names 
(Ergin, Gerey, Dardan, Artay and many others) in the 
mythological anthroponomy of Greece. 
 
1.4. Turkic Substratum in Old Greek 
 
The old Greek  dialects spoken in the 1st millennium B.C. could 
not have borrowed Turkic elements through outside contacts as it 
was supposed by some researchers. Neither Turkic – Byzantian 
relations referring to later periods could have been a source of 
Turkic words in the old Greek dialects of the period of Homer. 
Historically recorded contacts could have never caused the 
formation of pre-Greek Turkic onomasticon of Greece and nearby 
territories. The possible source of the Turkic substratum of the 
early period was of Pelasgo-Thracian origin, which is particularly 
obvious in the Attican dialect - the dialect with which Homer had 
written his poetry. Attica, like some other provinces of Greece, is 
known to have been populated by the Pelasgians [149, 43]. 
Turkic origin of most borrowings is revealed in the light of 
consonant changes that is common in many languages. Turkic b/p, 
for instance, is found to coincide with the old Greek f in the word 
gefira («bridge»), whose Turkic equivalent is kepir/keper - the 
Chuvash variant of Turkic köprü («bridge»). 
This consonant change is mostly characteristic for Indo-Euro-
pean languages [16, 85]. As an example this can be demonstrated 
in the change of the Latin word pater into the Germanic word 
fader, etc. 
This phonetic regularity is also observed in the suffixes of the 
instrumental case form of the noun in the Attican dialect of old  
Greek: - fi, - fin («through», «by means of»). These suffixes, not 
characteristic of the Greek and other Indo-European languages, are of 
the same origin as the Turkic -pe,  -be, -pen, -ben, the suffixes of the 
 
 43
instrumental case form of the noun (Chuvash and Karaim languages): 
Old Greek. ores «mountain» - Oresfi «through mountain», thakrio 
«tear» - thakriofin «with tear» [174, 1888], Chuvash (Turkic) thul 
«road» - thulpa «through the road», lasha «horse» - lashapa «by 
horse», erekh «wine» - erekhepe «with wine». 
The shift of the consonant b into f regularly observed in          
the Etruscan language, clearly indicates that it is a phonetic 
phenomenon - general for early Mediterranean languages of proto-
Turkic origin.  
Another phonetical feature observed in the Turkic elements of 
old Greek is the correspondence of the interdental θ (th) with the 
Turkic t in the pre-position. It is observed in the locative case 
forms used in the Attican dialect of the old Greek language and in 
some pre-Greek appellatives. These case forms, not characteristic 
of the old Greek language, originate from the early language          
of Attica, the Pelasgian language: -thi «in, at» - Turk. -te/de; –then 
«from» - Turk. ten/den «from»: old Greek kerothi «in the heart», 
Ilothi «in Troy», Korinthothi «in Korinthos» [174, 1888] – Turk. 
ürekte «in the heart» (ürek-te); old Greek. oykothen «from 
home», uranothen «from the sky» [173, 809] – Turk. evden (ev-
den) «from home». 
The variants of  these suffixes with the initial interdental th is 
also observed in the Bashkir (Turkic) language: -tha, -the «in», 
«at», -than , -then «from»: kalalartha «in cities», kalalarthan 
«from cities» [169, 758]. 
The same suffixes were used in the Etruscan language (-thi: 
spurethi «in the city», -then: cumethen «from Cume»). 
The same pre-positional consonant change is also observed in a 
number of old Greek words which have Turkic equivalents with the 
initial t: 
thes «to organize», «to arrange» [173, 781]. It coincides with 
the Turkic tüz/tez/tiz («to organize», «to arrange») [194, 311]. The 
Turkic (Uygur): mejlis tüz «to organize feast» [194, 311-312]. 
 
 44
The Etruscan thes, which is of the same origin, is always found 
in the texts dealing with ritual feasts, in the meaning «to organize». 
Thoina, thoine «feast», «party» [173, 791-792]. This old Greek 
word is of the same origin as the Turkic toy («feast») [176, 572]. 
th-y as a pre-positional consonant shift, observed in many 
languages, is found between old Greek thorak («armour») [111, 3] 
and Turkic yarak with the same meaning. The old Greek thorak is 
considered to be of an unknown origin, but in the light of the 
systematic initial shift of the consonants th-y, in the Chuvash and 
other Turkic languages, its origin turns out to be completely clear: 
common Turkic initial y is regularly replaced with th in the 
Chuvash language; common Turkic. yarash «to suit», yarı «half», 
yan «to burn» in the Chuvash language sounds as thurash, thura 
and thun. Common Turkic a is observed to change into u in the 
Chuvash variants. These consonant and vowel changes reveal the 
etymology of old Greek thorak («armour»), permitting us to relate 
it to the Turkic yarak («armour») which originates from the verb 
yara «to serve», «to be needed». 
Seemingly, it is one more example that proves the opinion of 
N.Y.Marr, that the Chuvash language with its proto-Turkic pho-
netic structure, serves as a bridge to the early languages of Europe. 
As we shall see in the second chapter, the pre-positional th is 
found to serve as a key to the origin of numerous Etruscan words. 
Eris («rivalry», «competition»). This so-called old Greek word 
is in fact the Turkic erish («rivalry», «competition»), the Kipchak 
variant of the Turkic yarish/yaris [201, 148-149]. 
Turkic erish/eris/yarish also serves as a verb («to rival», «to 
compete»). 
Iren, used in the meaning of «brave» in the old Greek [116,   
66-67], is the same Turkic iren («brave») derived from ir/er 
(«warrior», «man») with the diminutive suffix -n/-en in the Turkic 
languages [192, 291]. 
Its Turkic derivation eriz («brave»), used in the old Turkic langua-
ge, is seemingly a cognate of the old Greek iras («brave») [92, 100]. 
 
 45
Ilot, denoting «the lower layer of people» [59, 539], is the same 
Turkic ilat/elat («the common people»), which is stemmed from 
the Turkic il/el («people») [192, 313]. 
Ireneo, the old Greek verb with the meaning «dirge» [173, 
805], is evidently cognate with the old Turkic yirinu («dirge»), the 
derivative of the Turkic ir/yir («epic poem», «song») [201, 285].  
The old Greek ialem, ielem («sad song», «dirge») [173, 805] 
could also be of Turkic origin as in these languages we find the 
verbs ila/yila with the meaning «to weep». 
Eu. The old Greek eu («good») [173, 680], compared by 
linguists to Indo-European uesu/ uašui/aššu («good») [55, 780], 
can well be tied in with the Turkic eyi/iyi/ii («good»). Especially in 
the light of the Etruscan ii («good»), observed in some texts, the 
relationship between eu and Turkic eyi seems more pertinent. 
For their obvious similarity some old Greek – Turkic parallels 
have drawn linguists’ attention, although their interpretation is far 
from correct. For instance, the Turkic (Chuvash) kepir («bridge»), 
admitted as being cognate with old Greek gefira («bridge»), was 
considered to be of Greek origin [164, 158]. However, the earliest 
contacts of the Greeks with the Asian Turks within the new era is 
not synchronous with the presence of this word in all Turkic 
languages that spread from Asia Minor to China. So we have to 
accept the reverse version – the borrowing of gefira by the Greeks 
from the Pelasgo – Thracian settlers of Greece, who had also left 
old Turkic names in the old Greek onomasticon. Thus, Turkisms in 
the old Greek language originated not from outside, but from inside 
contacts, from the contacts of the local Pelasgo – Thracians with 
the Greeks - the later inhabitants of Greece. 
It should also be mentioned that the Turkic elements in the old 
Greek language have a clear Turkic etymology. For instance, 
Turkic kepir/keper/körpu («bridge») is derived from the Turkic 
köp («to swell up», «to become swollen»), while the Greek gefira 
has not been etymologized according to the Greek language. 
 
 46
The analogical result is achieved by researching the onomasti-
con of Troy. This is quite logical since the Trojans were the same 
ethno-linguistic group as the Pelasgo-Thracians, more exactly a 
part of them, who settled in Asia Minor in 3000-2500 B.C. [144, 174]. 
 
1.5. Troy – the Mediterranean Turan 
 
The Trojans, the early inhabitants of the eastern coast  of the 
Aegean sea, originated from the Dardanians - a Thracian tribe. 
Their being of Thracian origin is mentioned in the classical 
literature and is identified in onomastic material. For instance, 
Dardan, described in the «Iliad» as the ancestor of the Trojans [85, 
164], personifies the Dardanians. Dardania, a province in Troy, was 
the place the Dardanians settled in [85, 164]. 
The toponym Taruisha («Troy»), mentioned in the Annals of 
Tudhalias, a Hittite ruler of 1250-1220 B.C., permits us to refer the 
history of Troy to a period much older than the time of Homer [60, 25]. 
Like Pelasgo – Thracian personal names, those of the Trojans 
have reasonable Turkic interpretation, denoting mostly the moral 
and physical advantages of the people, heroism, etc. 
Priam, the name of the last Trojan king, is obviously the     
same Priyam, the name of a Turanian commander, described in an 
old Turkic (Kazakh) epic [34, 123]. It should be mentioned that   
the Kazakh anthroponomy is particularly distinguished among 
Turkic languages for containing evident early Mediterranean 
(Trojan, Pelasgian) names. Even the name of the Ionian (Pelasgian) 
folk singer and poet, Homer, turns out to have its counterpart in    
the Kazakh epic: Gumar, a mythological Turanian folk singer   
[34, 199]. These obvious parallels attracted the attention of 
A.Koniratbayev - a Kazakh researcher. However, not having any 
information concerning the origin of the Pelasgian settlers of 
Greece, he saw these epic relations in outside contacts. 
To him, the Saks, the ancestors of the Kazakhs, who settled in 
the 1st millennium B.C. in the north Black Sea basin [34, 199], 
 
 47
might have lent this personage to the Greeks, like other old Turkic 
epic personages.  
Homer was Ionian by origin and therefore a Pelasgian [149, 
43]. The Pelasgians, in their turn, were close kinsmen of the Turkic 
Saks and Cimmerians.  
We discover in the anthoponomy of the Trojans a whole group 
of Turkic names, which have evident counterparts in the old 
Turkic, Kazakh, Kirghizian, Chuvash and other Turkic languages. 
Dardan, an ancestor of Priam’s generation [85, 164], is the 
same Kirghizian Dardan - a personal name [32, 102]. 
Dardan was also a provincial name in Troy [90, 114] and the 
name of a mountain in Kazakhstan [35, 35]. 
Turkic Dardan stems from the Kirghizian appellative dardan, 
which forms the personal name meaning «healthy», «enormous», 
«clumsy» [202, 186]. The name (Dardan), used today by the 
Bulgars  to mean «strong man» [125, 454], is the same Kirghizian 
personal name. The Bulgarians must have borrowed this name, like 
many other Turkic anthroponyms, from their Turkic ancestors, the 
old Bulgarians. 
This semantics of this appellative is also adequate to form the 
name of a mountain (Dardan in Kazakhstan): the element dar in 
dardan means «as big as a mountain» «enourmous» in the Kazakh 
language [36, 261]. 
Alber, the name of a Trojan commander, is the same old  
Turkic Alper, denoting «hero», «brave» (O.Turk. alp, alb, «hero», 
«brave» - er «man») [49, 136-137]. 
Alper was widely used as a component of Old Turkic personal 
names, and in the name of Alper Tonga, a Turanian ruler [176, 37]. 
The Trojans, who settled in North Europe after the collapse of 
Troy, left this name in old Germanic sagas. «The saga about 
Nibelungs» tells us about the albs («heroes») and their king 
Alberikh - Trojan by origin [139, 131-133].  
Askan, the name of a Trojan hero [9, 205], is completely 
consonant with an Old Turkic personal name – Askan, used by the 
 
 48
Huns [150, 75]. Today it is observed in the anthroponomy of the 
Turkic Altays [125, 50]. 
Its origin stems from the appellative askan («violent», «naughty») 
[200, 44], the Chuvash variant of the Turkic azhgın [165, 85]. 
Paris, the name of Priam’s son, is consonant with the Turkic 
(Khakas) Paris [125, 64], a variant of the personal names 
Baris/Barys/Barysh/Bars, used in other Turkic languages. It is 
derived from the Turkic parys/pars/bars («ounce», «snow 
leopard») [193, 68] and used as the symbol of strength in Turkic 
anthroponomy. It is also observed in such compound personal 
names as Barsbeg, Barskan [176, 84-85], Barısbek (Kazakh) 
[168, 114], Barisbi (Karachay – Balkar), etc. [125, 116]. 
Atas, the name of another son of Priam [41, 190], can be 
compared with Atas, a Kazakh personal name (168, 63), derived 
from the Turkic ata («father») with the unproductive suffix s, 
denoting likeness, similarity: ata-s «like father», «similar to 
father». The analogical word  is observed in the Bashkir language 
(atas «like father») [169, 58]. 
Il. In ancient literature Il is presented as the son of Dardan [41, 
66]. Its Turkic counterpart is the personal name Il, used by the 
Tatars, Bashkirs [142, 59] and Karakalpaks [71, 230]. 
It is derived from the Turkic polysemantic word il/el («people», 
«folk», «state», «power») [192, 339-341], denoting «man of 
power». It is also observed in Turkic compound personal names 
such as Ilmekey, Ilmet, Ilmorsa, etc. [142, 59], old Turkic Ilbilge, 
El Temür, El Bugha, etc. [176, p.169, 207]. 
Aytilla. To Apollodoros, Aytilla was Priam’s sister (41, 181). 
An analogical name is now used in the Kirghizian language as a 
male name [32, 99].  
Personal names that belong to both men and women are often 
observed in Turkic languages. The origin of these names have not 
been identified, but they are observed in Trojan and Turkic 
anthroponomy. 
 
 49
Batiya. This female personal name is referred to the daughter   
of Teucros, the first king of Troy [41, 65]. The same female name 
(Batiya) is used in the Kazakh anthroponomy [168, 441]. 
Dolon. This Trojan personal name [9, 149] sounds completely 
the same as the Turkic personal names Dolon in Kirghizian        
[32, 102] and Dolan in Kazakh [168, 160] languages. 
In genealogies Dolon is presented as the ancestor of the 
Kirghizian tribes. In a 16th century source, for instance, we see a 
person by the name Dolon-biy among the ancestors of the 
Kirghizians [133]. 
Koon, a Trojan personal name [9, 160], is consonant with 
Koyon (Kirghizian) [32, 104], a personal name of zoological origin 
(koyon «rabbit») [32, 42]. 
Thus, we find the names of both Priam and his generation in 
Turkic anthroponomy. So many parallels can never be incidental, 
particularly in the light of old Scandinavian stories about the Turkic 
origin of the Trojans and the Thracians. 
Parallels, discovered in other spheres of onomasticon, reveal 
that Troy and Turyana/Turan represented the same nation, or at 
least the different branches of the proto-Turks. 
Tarna, the name of a Trojan province [9, 70], is the same old 
Turkic Tarna - a Khazar tribal name [45, 23]. 
Traces of this ethnonym are found in Azerbaijan and the whole 
Caucasus, where tribesmen of Tarneans settled [57, 139]. 
Gargar is an important ethnomym which ties the Mediter-
ranean to the Turkic world. A town by the name Gargara          
was situated near Troy [111, 144]. A province under this name is 
mentioned in the «Iliad» [9, 114]. To these can also be added an 
old Italian province by the name of Gargaria which is surely 
connected with the Trojan migration to Italy. 
As was mentioned above, the identical names - Gargar/Karkar 
were spread in the Turkic onomasticon as the names of tribes 
(Azerbaijan, Turkmenistan), mountains (Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan), 
and as a personal name in «Manas», a Kirghyz epic [57, 79-81]. 
 
 50
Killa, the name of a Trojan town,  derived from the appellative 
killa («home», «temple»), was associated with the temple of 
Apollo located there. Western researchers interpret the name as 
originating from the Hittite word hila («home») and Lycian word 
kla («temple» [60, 23-35]. These words could have been borrowed 
from early Mediterranean languages. For instance, the Hittite is 
known to have had a huge number of non-Indo- European lexicon, 
although its grammar is Indo-European by origin [111, 18]. One of 
them was the word killa («home») - a local Mediterranean element.  
The same word is used in the modern Chuvash (Turkic) 
language (kil «home»)  which was also a component of the names 
Sarkel or Shrkil («white home»), a well-known city of the Turkic 
Khazars [48, 52; 114, 237]. 
Bayana. This non-Greek theonym was Athorodita’s epithet in 
Troy [126, 86]. In Greek mythology Athorodita was known as the 
goddess of marriage, birth and nursing» [99, 132]. The same 
function belonged to the Turkic Goddess, Bayana, which has 
obvious Turkic roots. Composed of the Turkic bay («protectress», 
«great», «sacred») and ana («mother»), the theonym denotes «the 
protectress of the tribe», «the great mother of the tribe» [87, 82-85]. 
After Troy was destroyed by the Greeks, its population 
migrated in different directions, among which two of them are of 
particular interest: those who migrated to Italy founded the 
Etruscan civilization and those who settled in the north of Europe 
became the heroes of the old Scandinavian sagas. 
 
1.6. Trojans in the North: Turkic Kings  
of Scandinavian Sagas 
 
The existence of the Trojans in the north of Europe is openly 
discussed in the old Scandinavian writings of the 13th and 14th 
centuries, in which «the people of Priam» are said to have settled in 
the North. Priam is known to have been the last king of Troy.  
 
 51
Some  Germanic sources write about the old kings of Sweden 
and Norway as Turkic kings and the royal nobility of Scandinavia 
as being of Trojan origin [62, p.73, 182]. 
The northward migration of the Trojans also found its reflection 
in the «Saga about Nibelungs» where the Trojans are called albs 
(«heroes») and their king – Alberikh [139, 131-133]. Alb is 
derived from the old Turkic alp, alb («brave», «daring») [176,37]. 
As to Alberikh, it consists of the same alb and old Turkic – erik 
(«swift», «energetic») [176, 177]. The first element of erig (er 
«brave», «warrior») was used in combination with alb/alp as a 
personal name: Alber, a Trojan personal name in the «Iliad», 
Alper – an Old Turkic personal name with the meaning «brave 
warrior», «brave man» and «daring man». 
A 13th century Scandinavian author, S.Sturluson, refers to the 
Trojan migration to the  north of Europe as the beginning of a new 
era. According to V. Sherbakov, the valley of the Alp mountains, in 
the beginning of the new era, was settled by a people who  spoke 
the Etruscan language [143, 194]. 
Onomasticon seems to reveal the Etruscans’ presence in the 
North: Tysk and Tyskland, Swedish and Danish terms to denote 
«German» and «Germany» [183, p.619, 705], correspond to the 
word Tusk, denoting «Etruscan», which is still observed on the 
map of Italy. The province where the Etruscans were settled is 
nowadays called Tuscany. 
The toponym Turya, a Finnish word to denote «Norway» is 
quite consonant with Troy and Turyana, the land of the Turks in 
old sources. It should be noted that it is just Sweden and Norway, 
whose old kings are presented in old Germanic sources as being 
Turkic [62, p.73.180]. 
Etruscan migration to the North may have been caused by 
Roman pursuit as long as the beginning of the new era was 
characterized with the complete collapse of Etruria. However, the 
Trojans, the ancestors of the Etruscans, seem to have migrated to 
the North much earlier, i.e. after the collapse of Troy. The evidence 
 
 52
we have for this is from information found in «The history of the 
kings of Britain» of the 12th century. This history explains that the 
Trojans had settled in Britain several centuries before the Roman 
occupation which dated back to the first century A.D.According   
to this source, Julius Caesar, who tries to conquer Britain, says: 
«Those Britons came from the same race as we do, for we Romans 
too are descended from Trojan stock. After the destruction of Troy, 
Aeneas was our first ancestor, just as theirs was Brutus, that same 
Brutus whose father was Silvius, the son of Ascanius, himself the 
son of Aeneas» [148, 107]. 
As we can see, the Trojans had settled in Britain before the 
Romans. 
The presence of the Trojans in Britain is also revealed by the 
onomasticon of that period. Kamber, Brutus’ son, who ruled 
Kambri (now Wales), bore an obvious Turkic (Trojan) name – 
Kamber. This Turkic personal name is known to be derived from 
Kamböri (kam «shaman» - böri «wolf») [34, 176]. 
Gurguit, another personal name referring to the Trojan dynasty 
of Britain [148, 331], is the old Turkic word Gurgut meaning 
«keeping welfare» (Turkic goru «to keep», qut «welfare») [7, 157]. 
The presence of the Trojans in the North is also revealed in       
the mapping of the spread of tummuli, characteristic of the Trojans. 
The spread of tummuli is analogical with the migration of the 
Trojans: from the Troad we can follow tummuli to Tuscany, then 
along the western coast of Europe from the Iberian Peninsula to 
Brittany and on to Britain, Germany, and the Netherlands… It seems 
that where the legends speak of Trojan origins, the tummuli are also 
found. The Trojans left tummuli and urnfields and we can trace the 
progress of urnfield cultures up the Danube to the Alps [159]. 
The practice of raising tummuli has its origin above the Black 
Sea in Crimea, among the Scythians and Cimmerians, who were 
referred to as the Turks by numerous authors of antiquity. 
Tummuli known as kurgan has also been discovered in other 
areas where the old Turks settled. 
 
 53
List of Common Trojan-Turkic names 
 
    Trojan Personal Names     Turkic Personal Names 
 
Alber Alper 
Askan Askan 
Atas Atas 
Aytilla Aytilla 
Batiya Batiya 
Dardan Dardan 
Dolon Dolon 
Il Il 
Paris Baris 
Koon Koyon 
Gurguit Gurgut 
Kamber Kamber 
                             Other names 
Troy (country) Turyana (Turan) (country) 
Gargar (town, province) Gargar (people, personal 
name, toponym) 
Tarna (province) Tarna (people) 
Killa (town) Shr-Kill (town) 
Bayana (theonym) Bayana (theonym) 
 
Evident Turkic elements in old Celtic languages are directly 
associated with the northward migration of the Trojans. Turkic 
elements might have been borrowed partially in the continental part 
of Northern Europe until the Celtic settlement in Britain and 
partially after they were settled: 
Turu («fortress»), used in old Irish poetry [77, 98], is the same 
Turkic tura («fortress») [176, 587]. 
Of the same origin are the Gaelic turach («fortress») [191, 465] 
and Old Turkic turagh («shelter») [176, 587]. They are all derived 
from the Turkic tur («to stand», «to leave», «to bear»). 
 
 54
Old Irish oglach («young», «warrior», «servant») [205, 381] is 
a cognate of the Turkic oghlak («young», «boy»), a variant of the 
common Turkic oghlan. 
The Celtic oglach is interpreted as the combination of og 
(«young») and the suffix lach, forming abstract nouns [205, 387]. 
The Turkic oghlak is known to be a derivative of the same 
ogho, ogh («young») and the noun forming suffix –lak in Turkic 
languages [192, 412]. 
The element ogho, as an independent noun, has survived in the 
Yakut language in the words «young», «child». That language is 
known to be one of the old Turkic languages keeping old elements. 
Oghlak is a cognate of modern Turkic oghlan («boy»). Its 
phonetical variants uhlan, ulan («warrior», «cavalier») are used in 
modern European languages [205, 954]. 
Iesin («beaming», «shining») [191, 443]. Old Celtic Iesin is a 
cognate of the Old Turkic yashin («beam», «lightning») [176, 
246]. This identity is evidently confirmed in the light of other 
variants of the same word in some Turkic languages: yasın,    
yazın, etc. [201, 149]. The Chuvash variant of the verb  thithen 
(«shining», «beaming») with its initial interdental consonant is 
closer to the Etruscan thesan («radiance», «the goddess of 
daybreak») which will be detailed below. 
Kil («shelter»). This celtic word is the same kil («home», 
«family») used in the Chuvash language. It has already been 
compared with the Trojan kil, used in the name of the Trojan city – 
Killa, and in the name of the Khazar (Old Turkic) city Sarkel (Sar 
– kel «white house») or Sh-r kil («white house»). 
Some old Turkic words were borrowed from the Celtic into the 
old English language: 
Curd. This word presented in an etymological dictionary 
expresses a coagulated substance formed from dried milk and 
having the form crod, crud in old English. References to the word 
are present in the Irish and Gaelic word gruth. However, this 
 
 55
information is not enough to clarify the origin of the word and thus 
it is considered to be of unknown origin [205, 236]. 
Its origin becomes completely clear when compared to the 
Turkic words kurut, korot, kurt, gurt, gurut («curd», «cottage 
cheese»). This is a well-known Turkic food made from milk. 
The appearance of this old Turkic word in Celtic and old 
Germanic languages excludes the possibility of its reference to later 
Turkic borrowings connected with the Germanic – Hun and later 
contacts. Instead crod/crud/gruth can be referred to the Trojan – 
Celtic contacts. 
Belt. Trojan – Etruscan migration to the north of Europe is 
reflected in the word belt (old Germanic belt, belti) considered by 
Varro, a Roman author, as an Etruscan borrowing [205, 88]. 
Belt is derived from the old Turkic bel («belt») or more 
precisely, its variant from beldik (bel + a noun forming suffix –
dik) in the Kirghizian language [190, 1616]. 
Tin. Old Germanic tin (old English tin, old High Germanic zin, 
Gothic tinam) is referred  to the pre-Indo-European settlers of 
Europe [205, 925]. Some of them are accepted by researchers as 
being of Trojan or Etruscan origin [205, 8-9]. These words appear 
to be cognates of the Turkic teneke/tinike («white, highly mal-
leable metal»), tinnik, tienlek, tenke («penny», «silver money»), 
having an identical semantic meaning as the English tin («white 
metal», «money»).  
A number of old Turkic elements are found in Swedish,   
Icelandic and other Scandinavian languages. For instance, ätt in 
Swedish and ed, ät in old Turkic means «wealth», «property of 
nobility». Correspondingly, adlig in Swedish and edlig in old   
Turkic denote «noble», «nobility». In both of them -lig serves as a 
word-forming element, the origin of which needs special research. 
Swedish anlag («talant», «ability»), formed through the 
combination of ana («to guess», «to understand») with the suffix -
lag [183], corresponds to the old Turkic aŋlag («talant», 
 
 56
«understanding»), having the same root – old Turkic aŋa «to 
understand». However, the old Turkic aŋlag seems to be derived 
from the verb aŋla («to understand» <aŋa+la) with a non-
productive noun-forming suffix -g [192, 153]. 
Swedish ösa, Icelandic asa («to ladle», «to scoop») is a cognate 
of the Chuvash as («to ladle», «to scoop») which in other Turkic 
languages has the form sus. 
Swedish and Icelandic öskar, askur («ladle», «scoop») are 
formed by means of the noun-forming suffix -kar/-kur and are 
analogical to the Chuvash askach («ladle», «scoop»), formed in the 
same way – through a combination of the verb as with the noun – 
forming suffix -kach (in other Turkic languages susguch «ladle», 
«scoop»). 
Non – Indo-European morphological elements have been 
discovered in the old Ligurian language spoken in Switzerland. The 
suffixes -aska, -oska, observed in many place names [110, 13] are 
analogical to the old Bulgarian aske, aska and preserved in the 
onomasticon of the Caucasus: Aginaske, Geliske, Dalkenaska, 
Turuske, etc. [44, 280-281]. 
Ligurians, considered by linguists to be among the non-Indo-
European peoples of Western Europe, seem to be related to the 
Cimmerians (the legendary ancestors of the Bulgarians) of which 
the above mentioned suffixes can reveal. 
A significant source to prove the Turkic origins of the Pelasgo-
Thracian and Trojan languages is the old Italian onomasticon      
left by the people who had laid the foundation of the Etruscan 
civilization. 
 
 
 57
II. Pelasgians and Trojans in Italy:  
the birth of the Etruscan Civilization 
 
Herodotus considered the Etruscans (Tirsens) to have been a 
part of the Lydians, who had left Asia Minor because of famine. 
After settling in Italy, he writes, all of the people were called 
Tirsens by the name of their leader who had led them to this 
country [59, 42]. 
This half-legendary information could be a vague reflection of 
the times when Troy had been defeated by the Greeks and its 
people were made to migrate to different countries all over Europe. 
Some of them, who were called in old Scandinavian writings as 
«the people of  Priam», the last Trojan king, had come to the north 
of Europe and had become «the first kings of Sweden and Norway» 
[62, p.73, 180] and the heroes of other Scandinavian sagas [98]. 
Many of the Trojans, who became the ancestors of the future 
Etruscans, were called Tirsens by Herodotus. However, they did 
not derive this name from their leader at all, as the nation was 
known by the name Tyrrhenians or Tirsens and was well-known in 
the Mediterranean basin before they had arrived in Italy. As was 
already mentioned, Thucydides considered the Tirsens to have been 
a greater ethnical union - a part of whom were later called the 
Pelasgians [68, 95]. 
The ancient origins of Tirsen, as an ethnic name, are also 
revealed in onomastic research. Both the word Tirsen and its Latin 
variant – Turski, are cognates of Tursha and Trusia, the names of 
the Trojans in old sources. 
The Tirsens’ migration to Italy coincides with the the fall of 
Troy in the 13th c. B.C. The Egyptian sources of the 13th c. B.C. 
inform us about Tursha as being among the sea peoples who had 
occupied Egypt. Tursha was identified by researchers to have been 
the Trojans [74, 109]. 
 
 
 58
2.1. Turkic names of Roman kings 
 
Roman kings with pride remembered their Trojan ancestry [85, 
99]. Julius Caesar bore the name Yul, the son of Eney, a Trojan 
commander, who led the Trojan immigrants to Italy [85, 99]. 
Numerous Roman names of Trojan origin appear to be old Turkic.  
Yul, for instance, is the same Turkic Yul, used by the Tatars 
and Bashkirs as a personal name [142, 68]. 
Yul and other Trojan personal names are usually interpreted on 
the basis of Latin or Greek appellatives, which is not logical at all. 
For instance, Julius (Yul) is referred to the Greek word ioulos 
«curly-headed» [125,544]. 
It is not logical, because the Trojans, known to have been  
neither Roman nor Greek by origin, could not have had Roman or 
Greek names during that period. They had settled these lands 
before the Greeks. What is more, the Romans and Greeks did not 
themselves have analogical names. 
Caesar (kesar), applied as a cognomen to Roman emperors, 
could have been related to the old Turkic kezer («leader», «hero»), 
used to denote a high title [167, 1174]. It may be a cognate of the 
Kirghizian kaysar («brave», «strong», «courageous» [202, 322] 
whose semantics permits its transformation into a higher title. 
The first component (Gay) of the name of Gayus Julius Caesar, 
the Roman dictator, is comparable with the old Turkic Gay - a 
tribal name belonging to the Turkic tribe Oghuz [15, 35]  and with 
Kay, a Kipchak tribal name [30, 162]. 
Transformation of a tribal or dynastical name into the names of 
persons is  common for the anthroponomy of all peoples. 
The transition from a tribal name to a personal name is also 
observed in the example of Tiberi, the name of a Roman king, a 
cognate of Tiber - an old Turkic ethnonym. Tiber was found in the 
context of the Tubalar generation, a Siberian Turkic tribe [119, 
594-595] and Tiber/Diver, ethnic units amongst the Turkic Oghuz 
tribe [49, 126]. 
 
 59
Titiy, a Roman horseman’s name [83, 357], can be compared 
with Tetey, a Chuvash personal name, Tetiu, a personal name used 
by Karachay-Balkars [125, p.119, 219] and Tetiy in «The word 
about Igor’s regiment», an old epic which includes a number of 
Turkic anthoponyms. N.A.Baskakov, a researcher of this Russian 
epic, derives Tetiy from the Turkic tetiy («clever») [49, 89], 
semantically a real anthroponomic term. 
The Roman name Titiy, which is of Pelasgian origin (Tit), was 
interpreted as a derivation of the Latin word tuer («to take care», 
«to save») [126, 173]. Deriving a well-known Pelasgian name from 
a Latin appellative  cannot be justified – particularly when this 
name was only observed in the Pelasgian language. 
Evident parallels are found in ancient literature, describing the 
ancient times of Italy. Theocrit Mosch Bion, for instance, has 
described local persons by the names Konar and Bukay [135, 34-52] 
which are old Turkic personal names: Konar, Bukay [142, 57-62]. 
The latter has been interpreted as having derived from the 
Turkic bukay «bull», «ox» [49, 136] whilst the former is 
seemingly connected with the Turkic (Kirghizian) kunar 
(«improper», «unsuitable») [202, 445]. 
In the «Epigram» by M.V.Marcial, a Roman author, we find 
another group of old Turkic names: Tegen, Turgid, Toraniy [96]. 
Tegen is the old Turkic Tegin, a personal name, originating 
from tegin («prince») [176, 547]. 
Turgid is the old Turkic Turgut, used as the tribal name  of the 
Tatars, Kipchaks and other Turkic peoples [30, 318]. As a personal 
name it is observed in Turkish anthroponomy. 
Turgut was also recorded in the ethnonymy of the 14th century 
Turkey [30, 318]. 
Of the same origin is Torquot, the name of  a Trojan king [33, 
61], and Torgout, a Turkic tribal name of the 17th – 18th century 
Middle Asia [97, 279]. 
Both Trojans and Turkic Torgouts are found to have used 
compound personal names with the initial element aga, which means 
 
 60
«noble», «owner» in Turkic. Trojan: Agaton, Priams’s son, and some 
pre-Greek names of Pelasgo-Thracian origin: Agesilay, Agaptolem, 
etc.; Middle Asian Torgouts: Agadak, Agasak [97, 278]. 
An analogical name was used by Beotians, a Thracian tribe: 
Agamed, a Beotian hero [83, 32]. 
Similar personal names are also observed in the anthroponomy 
of some Turkic peoples, for instance, Aka-Tay, Aka-bay, Kazakh 
personal names [168, 217]. 
As  for Toraniy, it is a Roman personal name that corresponds 
to the old Turkic Turan «the country of Turks» which is also     
used as a personal name in the anthroponomy of the Azerbaijanis, 
Turkmens and the other Turkic peoples. 
Some of the personal names of the Romans were comprised of 
the Turkic appellative olan/olen/ulen («son»), the first components 
of which denote either colour or bravery in Turkic: Sariolen (sari 
«yellow», «blond», olen «son»), Arulen (ar «bright», «redish», 
ulen «son»), «Coriolan (kur «brave», olan «son»). 
Sariolen Vokula, a Roman senator during the reign of Nero, 
the Roman emperor [83, 350], clearly bore a Turkic name. 
Sariolen is evidently derived from the Turkic sari-olan «a yellow 
boy». This analogical personal name is now observed in the Turkic 
Khakas language: Saroolakh (sari «yellow» - olakh «boy», a 
variant of olan [125, 65; 192, 411-412]. 
Vokula, the second name, is also Turkic. Vokil was the name 
of an Old Bulgarian prince [141, 131; 78, 276]. 
Sariolen Vocula was also called Diliy Vocula, where Diliy is 
the same Deli, Teli («crazy», «brave», «violent»), widely used as a 
personal name in old Turkic languages [71, 319; 142, 66; 194, 
215]. In classical Turkic literature Deli is known to have been used 
as a cognomen to express bravery, violence etc. of epic heroes. 
In this meaning the name has been borrowed by Eastern  
European languages. Bulgarian delija, Serbian deli, «brave», 
«proud», delija «warrior», Hungarian deli, delia, dalija «brave» 
[194, 216]. 
 
 61
Arulen (Arulen Rustic), a Roman citizen [113, 392], had a 
name derived from the old Turkic ar («bright», «redish», 
«yellow») and ulen («boy»), which means «redish or bright boy». 
Another vivid analogy of these Roman personal names is 
Konurolen in Turkic Kazakh anthroponomy. It consists of konur 
«chestnut brown» and olen «boy». 
Compared to Konurolen, a Turkic personal name, the Roman 
ones (Sariolen, Arulen) appear both etymologically and typolo-
gically to be Turkic: sari («yellow», «blond»), ar («redish») and 
olen/ulen («boy»). 
Coriolan. According to Plutarkhus, an old Greek author, 
Coriolan was a cognomen given to Martsi, a Roman civillian, for 
his bravery  [115, 511]. 
Cori, the first component might have been associated by him 
with the Latin cor («heart», «spirit») used to denote bravery. 
However, Turkic origin of both components of the previous two 
names (Sariolen, Arulen) permits us to interprete cori as the old 
Turkic kur («brave») and the whole name as «brave boy» (Turk. 
kur – olan). 
Their second component was also used independently as a 
personal name in the Turkic languages: Ulen, Ulan [49, 91]. 
Askani, a Roman king, Eney’s son [132, 12], is of the  same 
origin as Askan, a Trojan personal name [9, 205]. As we already 
know, Askan was also the name of a Hun leader  [150, 75] and a 
personal name of the Altays - a Turkic people [125, 50]. This name 
has a reasonable Turkic interpretation: askan «violent», «naughty», 
«cheerful»). It is the Chuvash variant of the Turkic azghyn [200, 
44]. It should be mentioned that Askani’s father, Eney, a Trojan 
hero, also carried a Turkic (Chuvash) name – Eney [125, 220]. 
That was also the case with Askani’s grandson, Brut, whose name 
was Turkic. The 17th century Altays, a Turkic people, used the 
personal name Brut/Burut [97, p.24, 56]. 
The Trojan migration to the north of Europe is associated with 
the name of Brut, who settled in Britain before the Roman 
occupation [148, 107]. 
 
 62
Manli, a Roman personal name [117, 516], coincides with the 
old Bulgarian Manli [138, 150] which was a variant of Menlik, an 
Old Turkic personal name [176, 151]. The name consists of the 
Turkic man/men («birth mark») and the suffix -li/lik, an adjective 
forming suffix. 
Sever, the name of the person who erected the golden palace of 
Nero, the Roman emperor [83, 350], coincides with the old 
Bulgarian Sevar [138, 150]. The latter was interpreted by N. 
Baskakov as «black man» (saw «black» - er «man») [49, 46]. Its 
origin can well be interpreted by the Turkic word sever («friend») 
[190, p.408, 505]. 
A survey on the old ethnonomy of Italy opens before our eyes 
an even larger panorama of Turkic tribal names of the Caucasus 
and Middle Asia. Among them old Bulgarian elements prove to be 
significant. 
Sikels, an old Italian tribe, who gave their name to Sicily, is the  
same Bulgarian Sekels, once settled in the North Caucasus. 
Modern Turkic Balkars, who are of Bulgarian origin, are still called 
Sekels by their neighbours [44, 282-289]. 
Another group of the Sekels, who now live in Hungary and who 
speak the Hungarian language, still remenber their Turkic ancestry. 
They have kept the manuscripts written by their Turkic ancestors 
[102, 111]. 
Sikels of Sicily, like many other peoples of Italy, are listed by 
researchers among non-Indo-European inhabitants of old Italy. 
Another name of the Bulgarian Sekels was Asile (<As ile «As 
people» in Turkic). It is consonant with Azils, the name of the 
legendary settlers of Pitsen, an old İtalian province [140, 372]. 
Pitsen, in its turn, sounds like Bisseni, Beseny which, in European 
sources  denoted the Pechenegs, a Turkic tribe [49, 37; 150, 249]. 
Ancient sources mention three peoples of old Sicily – Sikans, 
the oldest inhabitants, Sikels and Elims [74]. 
There was a province by the name Sikan in the 18th century 
onomasticon of Central Asia [97, 333]. It can also be compared 
 
 63
with Shigan, a Kazakh toponym with the meaning («front», 
«distinguished») [179, 252]. 
Later  the island was settled by the Elims, Trojan by origin. 
However, the origin of these peoples is as dark as that of the 
Trojans. In short, what the European researchers know about all 
these pre-Indo-European peoples is only their ethnical names and 
sometimes the places  they had come from. 
Thucydides  considered the Elims to have originated from the 
merging of the local Sikans with the Trojans [74, 125]. 
Elim is revealed in Turkic ethnonymy: Elim-ulu, a tribal name 
of the Kazakhs and Kirghizians [119, 112], meaning, «the son of 
Elim»; Elimey, a tribal name, existed in Midia, now in the territory 
of South Azerbaijan [57, 342]. 
Midia was the Greek variant of Maday. It was the biblical 
Maday - the legendary brother of Gomer (Cimmerians) and Tiras 
(Thracians). 
Turkic ethnonyms Ishim, Terim, Chulum, etc. were created by 
the analogy of Elim [119, p. 724, 745] with the suffix -im and its 
variants. 
Erik, a town, belonging to the Sicilian Elims is clearly 
interpreted through Turkic erik («camp», «quarters»). An 
alternative interpretation is the Turkic erik/erk («power»), which 
also used to mean the upper part of Turkic cities in Middle Asia 
that featured a tower [187, 776]. 
Of the same origin as the Sicilian Erik is Erk, which was in  
South Azerbaijan, old Midia. 
Among the Turkic settlers of Italy there were the Cimmerians 
who, in the 1st millennium B.C., settled in the North Black Sea 
basin, Asia Minor, the Caucasus, North and South Azerbaijan, and 
in other areas. They may have migrated to Italy from Asia Minor. 
In İtaly there was a town by name of Cimmerium, in the province 
of Campania, inhabited mainly by the Etruscans [175, 140]. 
The biblical Gomer, who personified the Cimmerians, is presen-
ted as the brother of Tiras, the first dweller of Thracia who, in old 
Scandinavian writings, is considered to be the ancestor of the Turks.  
 
 64
The Cimmerians, personified in the «Bible» by Gomer, was 
also associated with the Turks, concretely with the old Bulgars. In 
numerous genealogical stories the Cimmerians (Kemari, Kimar) 
are presented as the ancestor of the Turkic Bulgars [21, 41; 43, 
155]. This genealogy turns out to be  consistent with numerous 
linguistic factors. One of them is the presence of Bulgarian 
elements amongst the Turkic anthroponyms of the Romans  
(Manli, Sevar, Vokil, Askan, Eney), ethnonyms (Sekel, Asile). 
The second, but the most important factor, is the Bulgarian-
Chuvash dominance in the phonetics and morphology of the 
Etruscan language, which will be dealt with below. 
The term «Cimmerian» was the Greek form of the Turkic 
Gamar/Kamar [13, 130-132], which can also be found on the map 
of old Italy – Kamerina/Kamarina, the name of a Sicilian town 
[53, 154; 175, 115-116]. Sicily seems to have been populated by 
proto-Turkic people densely enough to preserve the original form 
of the term «Cimmerian». It is not by mere chance, that Turkic 
names of this island are observed in unison: Sikel, Sikan,  Elim, 
Erik, Kamar (ina), etc. 
In different sources the Cimmerians (Kamars) are associated 
either with the Turks or with the Pelasgo-Thracians (Ionians). This 
theory is completely consistent with the idea of kinship  between  
the Turks and the Pelasgo – Thracian peoples. For instance, the 
Cimmerians in an old Greek source are referred to as Yazon, a 
mythological person and known Pelasgian by origin [26, 42].  
A.Ustuner, a Turkish researcher, associates the Cimmerians 
with the Ionian culture [31, 190]. 
According to V.Sherbakov, the oldest settlers of the Mediter-
ranean basin – the Lydians, Hannaneans, Trojans, Etruscans and 
Cimmerians, spoke related languages [143, 191]. 
Procopius, an old Greek author, was the first to describe the 
Cimmerians as being the ancestors of the Turkic Bulgars [30, 34]. 
The Turkic origin of the Cimmerians is indirectly told by a 
Byzantian historian, who refers to them as Utigurs, a branch of the 
Turkic Huns, who settled in the North Caucasus [42, 85]. 
 
 65
A genealogical legend of the 17th century, recorded by Abul 
Gazi Bahadur in his work «Genealogy of the Turks», relates the old 
Turkic Bulgars to the Cimmerians (Kemari) [21, 41]. 
According to a Bulgar – Tatar legend, the Bulgars originated 
from the Kimar (Cimmerians) and the Alps [56, 155]. 
The former (Kimar) is the same Kemari, while Alp is 
presented as another ancestor of the Bulgars and opens a new chain 
of ethnic relationships – the relationship of the Cimmerians to the 
Albanians. Alp, like Kimar, and other genealogical images, must 
naturally personify a people and those are Albanians, whose name 
is known to consist of the Turkic alp/alb («hero»). The presence of 
the image of Alban in an old Bulgarian epic once more proves this 
fact [19, 419]. The Bulgars, as we know, are referred to as the 
Cimmerians in numerous legends. 
The kinship of the Cimmerians and Albanians is also consistent 
with the information of the «History of Albania» of the 7th century. 
In this source the relatives of the Albanians are referred to the 
North, where the Cimmerians had been located from time 
immemorial. Besides, a legend of the 10th century, which deals 
with the migration of the three sons of Japhet – Alp, Kimer and 
Turk, refers to these ethnically related peoples – the Cimmerians, 
Albanians and Turks [89, 106]. 
Not only in the Caucasus, but also in Italy, Kimer and Alp 
(Cimmerians and Albanians) appear side-by-side. According to 
Dante Alighier, a Roman author, there were two peoples of Trojan 
origin in Italy: the Romans and the Albanians [63, 337]. 
Were they the same Albanians who, according to different 
sources, came to Albania from Italy [40, 85] or from Thesalia, a 
Pelasgian province of old Greece [140, 42]. 
A  reasonable answer to this question is the fact that the ethnical 
map of Italy was also represented by the Gargars, who were among 
the biggest tribes of Caucasian Albania. 
 
 66
There was a province by the name of Gargaria in Italy [173, 
314] and a town by the name of Gargar near Troy [111, 144]. It is 
evident that the Gargarians might have come to Italy from Asia 
Minor, either together with the Trojans or with the Cimmerians. 
During the second millennium B.C. the Gargars settled between 
modern Turkey and Syria. A group of them were forced by  
Alexander of Macedon to move to the Caucasus [10, 32]. Thus, the 
Gargars are found to have migrated to Italy and the Caucasus from 
the same centre, i.e. Asia Minor. 
There is still one more link that ties Caucasian Albania with 
Italy. According to the «History of Albania», the Albanians 
originate from Ketari, whose  descendants live both in the north 
and in Cyprus [10, 15]. As this information was already detailed, 
we are going to consider the name Ketari, which has its 
counterpart on the map of old Italy. There was a city by name 
Cetaria in Sicily - a province of Italy [175, 136].  
As we already know, the name of Sicily originated from the 
Sikels of Trojan origin, which sounds the same as the Bulgarian 
Sekel, a Caucasian Turkic tribe. Like other legendary eponyms of 
the Turks (Kimar, Alp etc.), Ketari personifies a concrete people: 
Keder/Geder/Kedar – the name of the people who inhabited the 
territories where Turkic people now live. 
A people by the name of Kidar, who were in the content of the 
Huns [67, 82], were located in the North – in the Black Sea basin, 
where Ketari’s descendants are located by the Albanian author. 
Italy was named by the same peoples, whose ethnical names we 
discover from the old map of the country. According to Vergil, Italy 
was named after Ital, the leader of Enotrs, a Pelasgian tribe [118, 166]. 
A mountain and a town in Cyprus had a similar name – Idaliy 
[118, 412]. Cyprus, like other territories of the Mediterranean 
basin, was settled by the Pelasgians and other pre-Greek, pre-Indo-
European peoples. 
 
 67
Interestingly, identical names were found on the ethnical map 
of the old Turkic peoples. According to one source, the territory by 
the name of Kuban, settled in the 3rd and 4th centuries by Turkic 
Kipchaks, was called Italican [52, 393]. By a similar name (Idal) 
were called the Agh Huns, an old Turkic people [4, 119]. 
Regular old Italian – Turkic onomastic parallels, thus, reveal 
that  Italy was previously settled mainly by Turkic tribes  who left 
not only their names, but also the Etruscan writings, which appear 
to be Turkic in origin. The original name of the Etruscans, Turski 
in Latin, is in fact the same as Turuska which denoted «Turks» in 
some old languages. This language originated from the different 
old Turkic dialects of the Cimmerians, the Trojans, the Pelasgians 
and the Gargarians and they existed on the  map of Asia Minor, 
Caucasus and other areas settled by the Turks. 
 
The List of the Common Old Italian and  
Old Turkic Ethnonyms and Ethnotoponyms 
         
        Old Italian                       Old Turkic   
 
Turski                             Turushka 
Ital                                   İtalikan, Idal 
Cimmerium, 
Kamerina                      
Kamarina                       
Kamar, Kamer 
Kimar 
Cetaria                            Kedar, Keder, Geder 
Gargaria                         Gargar 
Alban                             Alban 
Sikel                                Sekel 
Sikan                               Sikan 
Azil                                  Asile 
Elim                                Elim 
Erik                                 Erik, Erk 
 
 
 
 68
The List of Common Old Italian and 
Old Turkic Personal Names and Titles 
 
        Old Italian                        Old Turkic 
 
Askani                             Askan 
Brut                                 Brut/Burut 
Bukay                             Bukay 
Konar                             Konar 
Manli                             Manli 
Sever                               Sevar 
Gay                                 Gay 
Tiberi                              Tiber 
Yul, Yuli                         Yul, Yulay 
Titiy                                Tetiy 
Caesar [kesar]               kezer  ("hero", 
"brave") 
Arulen                             «ar ulen» («redish 
boy») 
Sariolan                          «sari olan» («yellow 
boy») 
Vocula                             Vokil 
Turgid                             Turgut 
Tegen  Tegin 
 
Thus, the large territory between the Caucasus and Mediter-
ranean basin was settled by bearers of the same culture – The 
Trojans, Pelasgians, Thracians, Etruscans, Bulgarians, Gargarians 
and many others, who can be called western Turks or, more 
exactly, the European Turks. 
As old sources and legends show, this area had been the center 
of the same civilization from times immemorial. 
The migrations of these peoples and tribes within this territory 
were only partially recorded by ancient authors. For instance, the 
Gargars and the Thracian Abants are informed by some ancient 
 
 69
authors to have migrated to the Caucasus from the North and Asia 
Minor. However, it doesn’t mean that these peoples were originally 
alien to the Caucasus, and their ancestors are of Mediterranean 
origin. What the old authors told us about the migrations of the 
Mediterraneans to the Caucasus could only be some episodes of 
their mixed migrational history - especially of those that refer to 
later periods. In early periods there could have been reverse 
migrations of the same peoples  from the Caucasus back to the 
Mediterranean basin. There is a related story describing this in 
Vergil’s «Aeneid». Here Vergil recounts how Eney, a Trojan hero, 
was born in  the Caucasus and how he was breastfed by a tiger 
from Hircania [118, 189]. This means that the Trojans, whose 
presence in Asia Minor is known to go back to the third millennium 
B.C., had historical ties with the Caucasus, Hircania, the territory 
of modern South Azerbaijan and the southern coasts of the Caspian 
Sea [28, 22]. 
We also have evidence of the historical ties of the 
Mediterranean Turks, the Trojans, with  the eastern part of Turan 
and with the Turks of Middle Asia. It is vividly expressed in the 
name of Priam, a Trojan king, and Priyam, a Turanian 
commander, who is described in the Kazakh epic («The story of 
Priyam») [34, 123]. 
We  should also remember the relation of the Kazakh image of 
a folk singer, Gumar, to the pre-Greek (Pelasgian) Homer, a folk 
singer and the author of the «Iliad».  
These legendary and epic interrelations indicate that there 
existed a common culture, which was Turkic by origin, between the 
Mediterranean basin and the Caucasus and which even stretched 
further on to some parts of Central Asia. 
Old Turkic inhabitants of Italy, assimilated later by the Romans, 
left a significant substratum in Latin which can be interpreted 
through the Turkic languages. They have been borrowed mostly 
from the Etruscan language as is revealed by the discovery of the 
same words in Etruscan writings. 
 
 70
Macto «to praise». This word is of the same origin as the 
Turkic (Tatar) makta («to praise»). The Turkic origin of the Latin 
macto is revealed by the fact that it is not divided into the root and 
the suffix in Latin, whilst the Turkic makta is transparently divided 
into derivational elements: mak «praise» and ta-a verb – forming  
suffix [190, 1993 – 1997]. The suffix -ta is the Tatar variant of the 
Turkic verb-forming suffix -la. The word mak was also used in the 
old Turkic language in the form magh («praise») [176, 335]. 
Macto was borrowed in Latin from the Etruscan language        
in which the verb, makte, meant «to praise». A.Ernout and 
A.Meilletin, who believed that the Etruscan makte meant 
«praising», couldn’t however establish its Turkic origin. A. Ayda, a 
Turkish researcher, was the first to guess its Turkic origin, although 
its Latin variant (macto) didn’t attract her attention. 
Sagitta. Another evident of Turkism in Latin is sagitta 
(«arrow»), which is the same sagit («weapon») and sagidak 
(«quiver») in the Turkic languages [187, 279]. Only the Turkic 
variant of the compared words is divisible into derivative elements: 
saa/sag independently means «gun», but together with the suffix -
dak it has the meaning «bow together with quiver and arrow». 
However, sagitta in Latin is not divisible into the root and the suffix. 
As much as the Romans borrowed Turkisms (Etruscan words) 
not simply as a result of cultural contacts, but through the merging 
of two peoples-Latin-speaking Romans with the Etruscans, some 
derivational elements made their way into Latin as well. This is the 
case with origo («origin», «source», «kin») in Latin, which is a 
cognate of the old Turkic urug («seed», «kin», «generation»). In 
both languages the initial components of the compared words are 
observed to be used independently: -or, -ior («to arise», «to come 
into existence», «to be born») in Latin; -ur («to give birth», «to 
impregnate» in old Turkic [93, 12]. 
As for the second elements of the compared words, only in the 
old Turkic language is it found to be meaningful: -og/ok/-uk «to 
create», «to give rise». «to generate», ogh «offspring», «kin» [93, 
 
 71
14], while in Latin independent use of the second element in origo 
is not observed. 
Signo («mark», «token») refers to the Etruscan zik/zikh        
(«to write») which, in its turn, is of the same origin as the Turkic 
sig («to draw»), signak «hand-writing»  [170, 656], tsig («to 
write», «to draw a line», sigen «line», etc. 
Etruscan zik/zikh («to write») reveals the Turkic origin of the 
Latın one. 
Ordo («raw», «military structure», «military detachment») is 
comparable with the Turkic ordu «army», «military residence». 
Ordu in a Turkic etymological dictionary was referred to as the 
verb orut («to be located», «to pitch a camp» [192, 472]. 
To the list of the Turkic (Etruscan) substratum may also be 
added the Latin: ait, aio «to speak», «to answer» (old Turkic ait, ai 
«to speak», «to answer»), teba «hill» (old Turkic tebe, tepe «hill»), 
copia «multitude», «great quantity» (Turkic  kop/köp «much») and 
many others. 
Besides the onomasticon left in different sources and the lexical 
substratum in Latin, there is a third, but more important factor, 
enough to prove the Turkic origins of the pre-Roman settlers of 
Italy. It is the Etruscan writings, which have remained mysterious  
despite research carried out over several centuries. What is more, 
we find out which of the Turkic languages was most dominant in 
the formation of the Etruscan language. It was the language of the 
Cimmerians, from whom old Turkic Bulgars and the modern Chuvash 
take their origin. Thanks to the Cimmerian – Bulgar component of 
the Etruscan language we witness that the phonetical features of the 
Turkic Chuvash language serves as a key to the Etruscan texts. 
For instance, thesan (the Etruscan «goddess of daybreak», 
«radiance») is considered to be of unknown origin [157], while       
it finds  its vivid etymology in the Chuvash language in which      
the initial consonant th, like in the Etruscan language, corresponds 
to the common Turkic y. Accordingly, old Turkic yashin 
(«radiance», «god of thunder» <yashu «to shine») is found to be     
 
 72
a cognate of the Etruscan thesan through Chuvash thithen 
(«shining», «beaming» <thith «to shine»).  
This consonant exchange, as we shall see below, identifies the 
Turkic origin of numerous Etruscan words with the initial th. 
Etruscan texts are partially interpreted through the language of 
old Turkic writings, which is closer to the Turkic Oghuz language.  
Thus, we clearly observe the existence of different Turkic 
components in the formation of the Etrucan language, where the 
dominating one, especially in phonetics, is the Chuvash language. 
Such a diversity is also characteristic of Asian Turkic languages,     
in the formation of which various groups of Turkic languages     
have participated. Accordingly, Turkic languages have been 
grouped as being Oghuz-Bulgar, Oghuz-Karluk, Oghuz-Seljuk, 
Kipchak-Bulgar, etc. [45].  
Simultaneously, the Etruscan language had non-Turkic ele-
ments, which were referred by European linguists to Caucasian 
languages and the early languages of Asia Minor such as Hurrian, 
Urartian, etc. Therefore, only the smallest part – the so-called 
Caucasian – Hurrian component of the Etruscan language was 
somehow interpreted, but it was not enough to identify the nature of 
the Etruscan texts, especially their lexicon.  
 
2.2. Why Etruscan Writings  
Remained Mysterious 
 
Researchers have made attempts to find the key into the 
Etruscan writings in a number of languages – in Hebrew, Aramaic, 
Greek, Latin, Hittite, Lydian, Coptic, Chaldaean, Egyptian, Celtic, 
Gothic, Rhaeto – Romanic, Coptic, Albanian, Basque, Abkhaz and 
other langueges [153, 172]. 
In most cases external coincidences of words served as 
arguments to relate the Etruscan language to one or another 
language. In vulgar form it reveals itself in the researches of Z. 
 
 73
Mayani who tried to prove relationship of the Etruscan and 
Albanian (Indo-European) languages [92].  
Analogical cases of misinterpretation by Western researchers 
like L.Lantsi, V.Korssen, S.Bugge, V.Georgiev and others, could 
not help in the solution of this problem. Their method was 
deflected by another group of European Etruscologists, who 
adhered to studying the inherent structure of the language by  
means of a so-called combinatorial method. If V.Korssen, a 
representative of the first group, had compared the largely used 
Etruscan word avil with Aulus, a Latin personal name [106, 76] 
because of outer consonance, V.Deeke, the representative of the 
combinatorial method, could reveal that the word avil, which 
usually followed in Etruscan text the figures indicating the age of 
the deceased, denoted «year». Thus, based on the repetition of 
definite words in definite positions, he revealed the advantage of 
the new method [106, 76-77]. 
Later the combinatorial method was developed by F.Pibetso, 
F.Slotti, M.Pallottino, A.Pfiffig [105, 31-32] and others. 
However, the advantage of the combinatorial method is 
observed in small texts dealing with devotions, where the same 
words are usually repeated in the same positions in different texts. 
For instance, the expression thui kesu, which always follows the 
names of the deceased in epitaphs, is interpreted as «rests here», 
«lies here», on the analogy of the Latin expression hic cubat («lies 
here»), used in epitaphs [105, 47]. 
But the combinatorial method is not able to give the precise 
meaning and etymology of words. Therefore, it remains unknown 
what the word kesu actually means: «lies», «rests» or something else. 
Without comparative studies the etymology of these words 
cannot be achieved. In its turn, the comparative method to research 
the origin of the Etruscan language requires choosing the relative 
languages and having a deep knowledge of their structure. As a 
result of our research we find the Turkic languages to sevre as key to 
the dark world of the Etruscan writings. Through the material of the 
 
 74
Turkic languages many words and expressions, which have been 
correctly interpreted by the representatives of the combinatorial 
method, have been revealed to be of Turkic or Proto-Turkic origin.   
For  instance, the Etruscan turuke, often used in the texts 
dealing with devotion, is interpreted as «devoted», «gave». It 
usually follows the noun which is sacrificed or devoted and 
precedes the name of the person to whom the sacrifice or a 
monument has been devoted. This usual position of turuke allows 
researchers to interprete it as «gave», «devoted», etc. As is seen, 
although the function of the verb (devotion of any kind) is clear, its 
etymology remains unknown.  
By researching the Etruscan texts on the material of Turkic 
languages we can etymologize the words, whose contextual 
meanings have been correctly identified by means of the 
combinatorial method.  
Comparison of the verb turuke with the verb tu («to do», «to 
organize», «to create») in the Chuvash language permits us to define 
the origin of the former. The verb tu is the derivation of the verb 
dogur/tovur/tuvur/tuir [194, 247] , from which also originates the 
Etruscan tur. In several cases the verbs tur (Etr.) and tu (Chuv.) are 
observed to be used in the meaning of organizing a devotion or feast. 
For instance, the Chuvash ethke tu («to organize feast») is the same 
eski tur used in Etruscan texts that deal with feasting. What is more, 
the first components in both expressions are the same words with the 
meaning «drink», «feast»: Etrusc: eski, Chuvash: ethkě, in other 
Turkic languages: ichki, iski, etc («drink»). 
Thus, the Etruscan turuke/turke, interpreted by linguists as 
«gave», «devoted», finds its exact meaning in the Turkic tu (<tuir, 
tuvur, dogur) «to organize», «to do», which is semantically 
adequate for all cases of the use of the word tur in the Etruscan 
texts: if in an Etruscan text dealing with ceremonial feasting it 
denotes «to organize», in a text dealing with devotion of a 
monument by someone to someone, it has the meaning « to do». 
For instance, in the text dealing with the devotion of monuments to 
 
 75
Venel Atelina and Murila Herkna the verb turuke/turuke was 
interpreted as «devoted», while the Turkic facts allow us to 
precisely interpret their meaning as «organized», «made», which is 
semantically adequate in relation to the monument. 
 There are also cases in which the so-called Indo-European 
words drawn into comparison to prove the Indo-European origin of 
the Etruscan language turn out to be Turkic by origin. For instance, 
a number of Etruscan – Albanian lexical parallels presented by 
Z.Mayani appear to be Etruscan – Turkic parallels. The word 
vrath, written on a figure of a bullet, is compared by him to the 
Albanian vras («to beat», «to kill»), whilst the latter is the 
Bulgarian – Turkic varsa or variz (to beat») [70, 41], Chuvash 
varth («to fight», «to hit»). 
Comparison of the Etruscan thur [92, 115] with the Albanian 
dore («breed», «kin») [92, 115] to demonstrate Etruscan-Albanian 
kinship is not successful either, as it is the same tör, tür in the 
Turkic languages [165, 908]. The Etruscan thur, interpreted as 
«off-spring», «child» is directly related to the Chuvash thur with 
the same meaning («off-spring», «child») [200, 426]. 
Existence of Turkic elements of the Bulgar-Chuvash type in the 
Albanian language is completely compatible with the idea of 
I.Adelung, a European researcher, who associated the Albanians 
with the old Turkic Bulgars [66, 43]. This is conformable to 
common phonetical and morphological features of the Etruscan and 
Chuvash languages that will be dealt with below. 
Other «Albanian» words, discovered by Z.Mayani in the 
Etruscan language, are Turkic by  origin: dale («brave») — Turkic 
dali/deli («brave»), kep («to sew») — Turkic köbi («to sew»). 
These and other examples serve to prove Etruscan-Turkic 
kinship rather than Albanian (Indo-European) — Etruscan.  
One of the sources of the Turkisms in the Albanian language 
may have been the language of the Pelasgians, who have 
participated in the ethnogeny of the Albanians [68, 100]. They were 
the same Pelasgians, who by old Greek authors are referred to as a 
 
 76
part of the Tirsens. It was the  Pelasgians, who had left the above 
mentioned Turkic names and the Turkic substratum in the old 
Greek language. 
The same can be said about the language of the Hittites, whose 
onomastic facts, common with those of the Etruscans, were used as 
an argument to prove the Indo-European origin of the Etruscans. In 
fact, these «Hittite» words, common with those of the Turks, 
appear to have been borrowed from non-Indo-European languages 
of the  Mediterranean basin. Although the Hittite language was 
Indo-European with its word-changing morphological system, it 
was not Indo-European with its lexicon [111, 18]. Researchers 
found out that the Hittite counterparts of a number of Etruscan 
elements are early Mediterranean borrowings of non-Indo-
European origin. For instance, Tarhunna, the Hittite god of 
thunder-storm, which was compared with the Etruscan Tarkhon, a 
legendary personage [106, 214], to prove the Etruscan – Hittite 
relationship was, in fact, a local borrowing. 
Lexical borrowings in the Hittite and other Indo-European 
languages of Asia  Minor, like those in old Greek and Latin, were 
for the most part of Pelasgo-Trojan origin. Both the Etruscan 
Tarkhon and the old Turkic Tarkhan/Tarkan denoted titles, 
although the Etruscan one is somehow legendary. Tarkhon, 
together with Tirsen, is described as genealogical leader of the 
Etruscans [106, 23], whilst its old Turkic counterpart was a 
concrete title («ruler», «king», «minister», etc.) [22, 44]. 
Another Etruscan theonym, Eisar/Aisar, identified to be of the 
same origin as the Indo-European asura (Old Indian), ais (Oscan, 
Umbrian), esus (Celtic), is the same eisar («ruler», «owner» in a 
Turkic (Salar) language [128, 322]  and derived from the Turkic isi, 
ez, isir («owner», «ruler») [192, 238-240]. 
The Etruscan Velkhanu, compared with the Pelasgian Felkhan, 
the god of sky and light [99, 203-204] and the Latin Vulcan, the 
god of fire and light [99, 253], is the Turkic Ulgen, the god of sky, 
light and fire [46, 218; 84, 18]. 
 
 77
The opposition of the Bulgarian – Chuvash initial v to the 
common Turkic labialized vowels (u, o, etc.) has been discovered 
in the Etruscan Velkhanu, which corresponds to the Turkic Ulgen, 
the god with the same function. The same phonetical feature is seen 
between the above  mentioned vrath (Etrusc), varth (Chuvash), 
variz (Bulgar) «to fight», «to beat» and common Turkic urush «to 
fight», «to beat». 
The Chuvash language, with its history, is closely tied with the 
anciency of Europe through its Bulgaro-Cimmerian ancestors.  
The Caucasian morphological elements, found in the Etruscan 
language by European researchers, are the plural endings -r (-ar, -er, 
-ur) and the suffixes of the possessive case -l, -al, [106, 78], etc. 
Some Caucasian elements were found in numerals: Etruscan thu 
(«1»), Abkhaz zo [73, 224], Abazin za, Avar, tso («1»): Etruscan ki 
(«3») — Hurrian kig («3»), Chechen, ko («3»), etc. [73, 214]. 
The non-Turkic layer is connected with the mixed ethnical 
situation of the region of the 2nd and the 1st millennia B.C. 
However, this mixture is not large enough to stipulate deciphering 
any Etruscan text. Beyond the above mentioned elements no 
Etruscan word has a Caucasian interpretation.  
The efforts by V.V Ivanov to enlarge the number of Caucasian 
elements in the Etruscan lexicon has even a reverse effect: what he 
considers to be of Caucasian origin turns out  to be Turkic, like the 
so-called Albanian elements discovered by Z.Mayani in the 
Etruscan language.  
The Etruscan puia («woman», «wife»), compared by V.V.Ivanov 
with the Caucasian (Batsbi) pstuya («wife»), Hurrian asti («woman») 
is, in fact, a cognate of the Turkic bayan («woman»),  which is 
derived from Turkic bay/bey/puy («master», «boss», «rich») [193, 
28], of which the Chuvash one (puy) is completely consonant with  
the Etruscan puia. The element -a in puia indicates feminine     
gender. Structurally, it is similar to the Turkic biyke/pike [193, 134] 
consisting of the same biy - a phonetical variant of Turkic 
bay/bay/puy and ke - the suffix of the feminine gender («lady»). 
 
 78
The Etruscan word hus («child»), compared by V.V.Ivanov 
with the Caucasian (Dargin) ursi, Urartian arse «boy» [73, 212], is 
of the same origin as the Turkic usha, ushak, usak («boy», 
«child»), and the Sumerian ush «child». 
Etruscan klan («boy»), compared by the same linguist with the 
Caucasian korc (Lazgin), kuc’an (Udin) «child», is much closer to 
the Turkic uklan («boy»).  
A.Ayda, a Turkish researcher, interpretes the absence of the 
initial u in the Etruscan klan with the usual omission of the letters, 
denoting vowels, in the Etruscan orthography [18, 281]. An 
analogical case is common for old Turkic writings. 
The Etruscan papak, interpreted as «grandson», is the same 
papak («baby») in the Chuvash language, which is a variant of the 
Turkish bebek. 
Turkic elements in the Etruscan language are so evident that in 
different times they have attracted the attention of European 
linguists. In the late 19th century Isaac Taylor came forward with 
the proposal that Etruscan belonged to the Turanian family of 
languages whereby the key was to be found in Finnic, Turkic, 
Mongolic, Dravidic and Malayic dialects [153, 172]. 
Baron Carra de Vaux, the author of «La Langue Etrusque» and 
Wilhelm Brandenstein, the author of «Die Sprache als Geschi-
chtsquelle», admitted the Turkic origin of the Etruscans [18, XI]. 
W.Brandenstein wrote that the ancestors of the Etruscans might 
have migrated from Central Asia to the North – East  of Asia Minor 
in the 2nd millennium B.C., and from there they could have gone to 
Italy in the 900-800s. 
Later he changed his mind, coming to the conclusion that the 
Etruscans were originally from Asia Minor [106, 13]. 
The Etruscans’ being either of Central Asian or of Anatolian 
origin is a question of  history not directly relating to their ethnical 
origin. Of Turkic origin there could have been any people in the 
Mediterranean basin, having settled the area in pre-historic times and 
remaining beyond the memory of mankind. The origin of the 
 
 79
Etruscan language can be learned from linguistic facts, discovery of 
a relative language, which could be a key to the origin of the 
Etruscan texts. However,  many linguists attempted to solve the 
riddle about the historical location and ethnical origins of the 
Etruscans by referring them to one or another language without any 
profound linguistic analyses.  Professor Frans de Ruyt, Head of the 
Department of Etruscology at the University of Louvain, was right to 
call such research «the ridiculous attempts of charlatans to decipher 
Etruscan that appeared every year in many countries» [153, 174]. 
More or less positive results, gained through the so-called 
combinatorial method, were not duely valued. The Turkic character 
of many words achieved by means of this method was obvious and 
guessing it only needed phonetic evaluation of the usual consonant 
shifts. Having a sufficient knowledge of the Turkic lexicon one 
could easily guess that the Etruscan flerth, identified by linguists 
as denoting «to show itself», differs from the Turkic belirt («to 
show itself») on internationally known pre-positional f-b and post-
positional th-t consonant shifts. 
Comparative research of the Etruscan and Turkic languages 
reveals the essence of their grammatical systems to be of the same 
origin. 
 
2.3. A Glimpse of the Turkic Component  
of the Etruscan Grammar 
 
Following the identification of the Etruscan-Turkic relationship 
the phonetic features of  the Chuvash language plays a significant role. 
This language was distinguished by N.Y.Marr, a well-known Soviet 
linguist of the 1930s, as an old type of Turkic language with the 
ability to serve as a bridge to the early languages of Europe [122, 
115]. It should be mentioned that the Chuvash language, like the      
old Bulgar, has a fundamental phonetical, morphological and      
lexical difference from other Turkic languages. This sharp difference 
 
 80
excludes the present point of view in Turcology about the formation 
of the Bulgar-Chuvash languages in the region of the Volga river [45]. 
The old Turkic Bulgars are known to have settled the North 
Black Sea basin from time immemorial. Numerous genealogical 
legends derive their origin from the Cimmerians, known to have 
settled in the same region in the 1st millennium B.C. [30, 34; 56, 
155]. The Cimmerians were also present in Western Europe [143, 
191] , including old Italy.  
As research of the Etruscan texts reveals, the Etruscan  
language has two main Turkic components – the Bulgar - Chuvash 
component, connected with Cimmerians, and the component 
similar to the language of old Turkic writings. 
The Chuvash elements in the Etruscan language are observed 
both in phonetics and morphrology: 
th-y. The interdental th in both Etruscan and Chuvash 
languages in the initial position corresponds to y in the old Turkic 
language: Etrusk thesan («radiance», «the goddess of daybreak»), 
Chuvash thithen («shining», beaming» <thith “to shine», «to 
beam»), old Turkic yashin («radiance», «god of thunder» <yashu 
«to shine», «to beam); Etrusk thur («son», «off-spring»), Chuvash 
thur (<thavar) and Turkish yavru («child», «young one). 
The analysis of the Etruscan texts reveal more and more 
examples to show the correspondence of the initial th in the 
Etruscan and Chuvash languages, whilst in the old Turkic it has 
been replaced by y: Etruscan thumsa in a text, devoted to praising 
a deceased young woman, is identified as coinciding with the 
Chuvash themthe («soft», «mild», «gentle»), which in other Turkic 
languages has the form yumshak. 
A. M. Sherbak’s opinion, that the Chuvash variant of the pre-
positional th is prior to the old Turkic y [201, p.196, 259] is found 
to be true in the light of the Etruscan facts. 
v-g. In the Etruscan and Chuvash languages the post-positional 
v corresponds to common Turkic g: old Turkic teg («to touch 
upon», «to reach», «to concern»), Chuvash tiv «to touch upon», «to 
 
 81
concern», Etruscan tev, tva (in present tense form) with the same 
meanings. 
Although tva, used in an Etruscan text, was interpreted 
correctly, its etymology was not touched upon [105, 54]: 
 
 
eka sren tva ixnak herkle unial klan thra ske 
 
The sentence referring to the picture, describes the goddess   
Uni breastfeeding Heracle, her son. It was interpreted as «this 
description shows how Heracle, the son of Uni, suckles milk»     
[92, 180]. 
Here the meaning of tva can be precisely interpreted as «deals 
with», «touches on» (tev-a, present tense suffix in some Turkic 
languages > tva).  
The word thra corresponds to the old Turkic turi «milk» and 
ske – to the Chuvash sakh «to suckle», Lat. suqere, Old English 
sucan [205, 882] «to suckle». 
In another Etruscan text the imperative tev is found to mean 
«reach», «touch», like the Turkic teg and the Chuvash tiv. 
Thus, the Etruscan tev combines the two main meanings of the 
Turkic teg/tiv: «to touch», «to concern».  
v -o, u, ö, ü. Turkic words, beginning with labialized o/u/ö/ü, 
are often observed to begin with v in the Chuvash and Etruscan 
languages. The above mentioned Etruscan vrath, written on        
the figure of a bullet and interpreted as «beat», «hit», is quite 
consonant with the Bulgar and Chuvash variz, varth «to beat», «to 
hit»,  which in old Turkic is pronounced with the initial labialized 
u: urush «beat», «fight». 
This is also the case with the Etruscan Velkhanu and the Turkic 
Ulgen, the gods of sky and light in the mythology of both the 
Etruscans and Turks. 
The wide-spread opposition of the Bulgarian-Chuvash pre-
positional v to common Turkic labialized u, o, often serves as key 
to the etymology of many Etruscan words. 
 
 82
th-t. The phonetical opposition of Etruscan interdental th with 
Turkic t is observed in the pre-and post positions, which is also 
characteristic of other language families. It is mostly observed in 
the post position between the following Etruscan and Turkic lexical 
parallels: flerth – belirt («to show itself», «to designate»), eth – et 
(«to do»), inath – yinat (also yinath) («to get well», «to recover»), 
sth-süt («milk»), lth – elt, ilet (but Chuvash leth) «to take away», 
«to bring», «to convey»), etc. In two cases the Turkic variants have 
preserved the interdental th: yinath and leth. 
The etymological – semantic identity of all the above compared 
words are proved through the analysis of the surrounding words in 
the texts and some extralinguistic factors as we shall see below. 
The consonant shift of post-positional th-t(d) is also observed 
within the Turkic languages: old Turkic  ith-id-it «to send», old 
Turkic – Chuvash elt – leth «to bring», «to convey». 
th-t in pre-position is observed between the Etruscan thapin and 
Turkic tapin (to worship»), observed in an Etruscan text, devoted to 
worshipping, bringing sacrifices, in the theonym thanir/thanra [92, 
227], which correspond to the Turkic tanir/tanri/tanara («god»), etc. 
This permits us to identify the interdental th as a prototype for the post-
positional t in some Turkic words. 
th-sh. The interdental th is also found to change into sh in some 
words. For instance, in an Etruscan text the word ulath is found to 
coincide with the Turkic ulash («to reach»), which is also proved 
by the semantics of the surrounding words and by the content of the 
picture referring to the text [see p.94]. 
In  another text we discover the Etruscan word athay to 
coincide with the Turkic asha («to eat»). The text deals with a 
collective feasting ceremony [p. 120]. 
Both words in Turkic languages also have variants with the 
consonants: ulas, asa (Kazakh, Karakalpak). 
The consonant change of th-sh is also observed within the 
Turkic languages: Chuvash eth – common Turkic ish «work», 
Chuvash puth – common Turkic bash («head») [193, 86]. 
 
 83
The existence of the same consonant shift within the Turkic 
languages serves to justify the compared Etruscan – Turkic lexical 
parallels, with the analogical consonant difference, to be cognate. 
th-ch. Interchange of th-ch is observed between the Etruscan 
hinthu and the old Turkic inchu («inheritance», «heritage») in a 
text, devoted to honouring a deceased woman: Eisna hinthu 
«inheritance of Eisna" (an Etruscan goddess). 
This consonant interchange is a part of the  greater series of 
consonant shifts (s-sh-ch-th-ts) widely observed in Turkic 
languages. For instance, the Turkic verb «to drink»: ich – is – esh – 
ish – ech – yits, etc. [192, 391]. 
In the Etruscan texts dealing with feasting we observe the     
verb eš with the meaning «to drink» [p.120]. 
f-b. In some Etruscan words the pre-positional f is found to 
coincide with the Turkic b: flerth – belirt «to show itself», «to 
designate»; fir – ber/bir/ver «to give». 
This meaning of flerth was guessed by linguists, although its 
obvious identity with the Turkic belirt was not given attention to, 
being considered to be of unknown origin. 
The shift of the consonants f, b in the pre-position is known to 
be common in Indo-European languages: Latin pater –gothic 
fadar, etc. [16, 106-107]. 
The verb fir (Turkic bir/ber/ver «give») was interpreted by 
Etruscologists as «bring» and was considered to be of unknown 
origin [157], like the verb flerth. 
Some Etruscan words differ from their Turkic equivalents with 
the initial prosthetic h: above mentioned hinthu – Turk. inchu 
(«inheritance»). 
The same phonetic phenomenon is observed within some 
Turkic languages (e.g. the Khalaj language): hutun – odun 
«wood», hachug – aji «sour». etc. [24, 185-186]. 
The basic morphological elements, discovered in the Etruscan 
texts, are Turkic. Only the suffixes of the possessive case (-al, -us) 
 
 84
and the plural form (-ar, -er) of the noun, which were discovered 
by European linguists, are of Caucasian  origin: Larth-Larthal 
(«Larth-Larth’s), klan-klanar («son-sons») [112, 366-367]. 
Beyond these few non – Turkic elements, however, we discover 
an evident panorama of the Turkic grammatical system, not 
comparable with the ingredients of any other language found in 
Etruscan texts. Two morphological elements of the noun spur 
(«city»), presented by A. Pfiffig as locative (-thi) and accusative(-
ni) case suffixes, are also found in the Turkic languages. 
 
Locative Case Form 
 
The Etruscan locative is formed with the suffixes thi -the: 
thunkhulthe «in the temple», spurethi «in the city» [112, 367]. 
In Turkic languages the locative is formed in a similar way - by 
means of the suffixes -ta, -te, -tha -the. 
The Etruscan locative thi/the is also a cognate of the old Greek 
dialectal locative thi, considered to have been borrowed from the 
early languages of Greece: oikothi «at home», Korinthothi «in 
Korinth» [174, 1888]. 
 
Ablative Case Form  
 
The Etruscan suffix -then is a cognate of the Turkic -den/-ten/-
then («from»): Etr. Kumethen «from Kume» [155], Turkic ev-
evden «home-from home». 
The same case element was left in old Greek dialects by the 
early languages of the region: oikothen – «from home» [173, 809]. 
Early Greek -thi, -then were, undoubtedly, borrowed from the 
language of the Pelasgians, referred to by old Greek authors as the 
Tirsens (Etruscans). 
 
 
 85
Dative Case Form 
 
The suffixes -a, -e in the Etruscan texts, like in the Turkic 
languages, denote the dative case of the noun. It is usually observed 
in the names of gods, preceded by the verbs, which mean 
sacrificing and offering. In a text it is  offered to give sacrificial 
wine to the gods Thven and Velthit, whose names are in dative case 
forms: Thvene, Velthite:  
šuki fir thvene, šukikh firin velthite (old Turkic suchi/suchig 
«wine», bir/ver /verin «give»). 
A writing on a dish denotes that is has been devoted to Larth 
Sharshina, which has the suffix -ya:  
Lartha Sharshinaya «to Larth Sharshina». 
Also in Turkic languages, nouns ending in vowels, form a 
dative case by means of -ya (anaya < ana-ya «to mother»), while 
nouns ending in a consonant form the same case by means of -a 
and its variants. 
In the Etruscan language there is also a specific dative case 
suffix -ri/-eri [105, 42]: spureri «to the city», etc.), Nuntheri – to 
Nunth (a goddess).  
This suffix is analogical to the Turkic non-productive suffix -ri, 
denoting a specific form of the dative case. It has been preserved in 
adverbs denoting direction: icheri «inwards», yukhari «upwards». 
 
Possessive-Dative Case Form 
 
We also observe that the combination of the possessive and 
dative case suffixes is characteristic of the Turkic languages.  
The Etruscan ilina, which consists of the noun il «country», the 
suffix -in, denoting possession to the second person singular and -
a, dative case element, reads as «to your country». It is the same 
iline (il –in –e «to your country») in the Turkish language. This is 
said by a young woman to a soldier, whom she is seeing off to his 
country [p. 94]. 
 
 86
Kapzna in an Etruscan text is the same kapisina («to his   
door») in the Turkish language, which consists of the noun kap(i) 
(«door»), z, the suffix denoting possession, used with the nouns 
ending in a vowel (Turkic kapı-sı «his door») and -na, the dative 
case suffix, used after the words ending in a vowel (Turkic kapısı-
na). 
The Etruscan kapzna was discovered in a text on a grave  
stone, where it requested «not to bring harm to Hermes’s door». 
The Possessive form of the third person singular is found to be 
denoted by means of -u, -iu, similar to the Turkic -i, -u. In relation 
to the deceased we find hinthiu (hinth-iu «his rest», «his peace» 
(Turkic inch-i «his rest»)). 
Nouns in this case form is usually preceded by another noun to 
which it belongs: suthi hinthiu «silence of the grave», epl tularu 
«area of feasting» (tular «boundary», «area»), Tarsalus sakniu 
(«tombstone of Tarsal» (sakni, Turkic sagana «tombstone»)).  
 
Accusative Case Form 
 
In some Etruscan texts the suffix of the dative case of the noun 
(-a, -e) is found to denote the accusative case. For instance, in the 
expression athe kufarke («was driving horses»), athe is the Turkic 
ati, the accusative case form of at («horse»), used in this form with 
the verb kufarce (Turkic kuv «drive», kuvardi «was driving»). 
The Chuvash variants of the common Turkic accusative case 
indicator  (-i, -u, etc.) are -a/-e, which, as in the Etruscan language, 
can also function as a dative case indicator [90, 18]. 
In the Etruscan language, as in some Turkic languages, the 
accusative case of the noun is also formed by the suffix -ni:        
Etr. spureni, Turkic kochini («street»), taghni («mountain»), 
accusative case forms of the nouns kochi and  tagh. 
 
 
 87
Instrumental Case Form 
 
The Etruscan suffixes -ve, -vi are found to denote the 
instrumental case of the noun, which are cognate with Turkic -ba, -
bye, -be (Karaim) [17, 332], -pa/-pe/-pen [17, 331]. Chuvash: 
lashapa «by horse», thulpa «through road» [200]. 
Etruscan ve in the word ilakve means «by the goddess». This 
meaning of ilakve was identified by Etruscologists on the basis of 
Etruscan – Phoenician bilingual texts, where the expressions 
«chosen by the goddess», «appointed by the goddess» are found 
[105, 51]. The Etruscan counterparts of «by the goddess» is 
«ilakve», consisting of ilak «goddess» and -ve, the instrumental 
case suffix («by»). 
In old Greek the same case meaning was expressed by the 
suffixes -fi, -fin, borrowed from the Pelasgian language, from 
which also originate the above mentioned locative suffixes -thi and 
- then: ores «mountain» - oresfi «through mountain», deksitere 
«right» - deksiterefin «with right (hand)», etc. 
Thus, the function of the Etruscan instrumental case form is 
identified with the help of various factors – a bilingual text, pre-
Greek equivalents of the same suffixes and cognate Turkic 
(Karaim, Chuvash) suffixes with the same function. The Turkic 
variants (-be, -pe, -pa) of this instrumental case form differ from 
the Etruscan ones through the pre-positional v-b consonant shift, 
which is widely observed in the Turkic languages. 
  
Verb 
Imperative 
 
The analysis of the Etruscan texts permits us to distinguish 
suffixes functioning as imperative elements: -i, -e, -y in the 
singular, and -in, -un in the plural. 
In a text dealing with worshipping and sacrificing we observe 
the verbs flere, ale, usi, each denoting a request for carrying out a 
 
 88
rite: trinum flere «mark trinum», a religious ceremony. The same 
meaning is denoted by the cognate verb palar («to mark», «to 
celebrate»), the Chuvash variant of Turkic belir; hetum ale (?), 
vinum usi «taste wine» (Turk. us «to taste»). 
The verbs ending in vowels form imperatives with -y: athay. 
This was used in a text dealing with feasting, and corresponds to 
the Turkic asha «eat». It is used in the combination with eš    
(Turk. ech/esh/es «drink»): eš athay « drink and eat». The same 
combination was used in old Turkic: ich asha «drink and eat». 
In the Etruscan texts dealing with devotional sacrifice we also 
see verbs thesin, firin, tutin, turun, which differ from the 
corresponding thes, fir, tur with the suffix in/un, denoting plurality. 
They denote request, addressed to more than one person, which was 
expressed by the old Turkic -ing, -ung, denoting request [39, 275]: 
thesin fler «organize ceremony» (Turkic. tüz – tüzün «organize»), 
kepen tutin «hire a shaman» (Turkic tut – tutun «hire»), eski turun 
«arrange feast» (Chuvash ethke tu «organize feast») 
 
Tense Forms 
Present Tense Form 
 
The suffixes -a, -e, like the Turkic -a, -e, denotes a present 
action. For instance, in the sentence eka sren tva ikhnak herkle 
unial klan thra ske, translated as «this picture shows how Heracle, 
the son of Uni, sucks milk», tva («shows») and ske («sucks») 
denote a present action. These forms can be compared, for instance, 
with kile «comes» (<kil-e), vara «lives» (<var-a), etc., in the 
Turkic languages. 
 
Past Tense Forms 
 
The suffix ce in the Etruscan language has been identified by 
linguists to denote a past action, similar to the English Past Simple: 
turuce «devoted», amce «was». 
 
 89
A.Ayda, a Turkish researcher of the Etruscan language, has 
compared the Etruscan ce with the suffix che in the Chuvash 
language, which in other Turkic languages has the form te/ta [18, 
434]. However, this suffix in the Chuvash language is only used 
with the third person singular, but with other persons the common 
Turkic -ta  is used. The same is observed in the Etruscan language 
in which ce is usually used with the third person, while in an 
Etruscan text we observe the suffix -te to be used with the second 
person singular to denote a past action. In the text accompanied 
with the description of two fighting persons we find the verb 
enkten uttered by the winning person. We interpreted his word as 
«you became embarrassed», and on the analogy of the old Turkic 
engdin («you became embarrassed»). That person, depicted in the 
picture, is wounded and looks rather embarrased. 
In the old Bulgar language, which together with the Chuvash 
language, belongs to a separate branch of Turkic languages, the 
parallel use of the consonants t – ch in the past tense is observed: 
bolti – bolchi «became», «was».  
This is also found in the auxiliary verb eti-echi «was» [138, 
p.17, 102]. 
M.Pallottino distinguished in the Etruscan language the specific 
past tense suffixes -ša, -sa. We find that the same suffix (-sa, -se) 
in the Chuvash language is a non – productive indicator of a past 
action: kaysa (<kay-sa «went»), ethle-se (<ethlese «worked») [90, 
170]. – Etrusk. tulerase «was appointed», «was chosen». 
The Etruscan tulerase consists of the verb tul (old Turkic tulu 
«to choose», er – an old suffix, denoting the passive voice (in the 
Bashkir language) and -se, the indicator of  the past tense. 
This meaning of tulerase was identified by linguists in a 
comparison with a Phoenician bilingual text ,  in which it is 
informed that Tiberi Veliana was chosen by Astarta as atran of her 
kingdom [105, 102]. 
The suffix -er, denotes the passive voice, and  is also found in a 
combination with the suffix –ni, another indicator of a past action. 
 
 90
In the sentence vakl khuru pethereni («the  ritual of vakl was 
completed in October») the predicate (pethereni) consists of  peth 
(Turkic pit/pet «to finish», «to come to an end»),  -er, passive 
voice indicator and -ni, the indicator of a past action. 
The suffix -ni can be  compared with -ne, a past tense indicator 
in the Chuvash language: il «to take» -ilne («took») [90, 73].  
The tense form with the suffix -arke/-rke is frequently 
observed in the position in which it can denote a past continuous 
action. It is visible in the expression tarhnal spureni lukairke, 
translated by researchers as «the deceased ruled the city Tarhna». 
This tense form can be compared with the Turkic tense form 
denoting an action, which was going on in the past (-ardi), the first 
element of which is the indicator of continuation (-ar), and the 
second - the notion of the past (-di). In this case, the Etruscan 
lucairce is translated as «he was ruling», flerthrce (Turkic. belirt 
«to show itself») – as  «it was signifying», «it was emerging», 
kufarce (Turkic kuv «to drive») – as «(he) was driving».  
 
Auxiliary Verbs 
 
In accordance with the content of some Etruscan texts, the verbs 
erini and eth are found to function as auxiliaries. The former one 
functions as the indicator of the  past tense of the verb «to be» as 
old Turkic erdi («was»). We find the Etruscan verb erini used in 
this meaning in a sentence on an epitaph tarkhi salvi thanah erini. 
On the analogy of the Old Turkic turkcha yil takaghu erdi («The 
year on Turkic chronology was hen» (literally, «Turkic year was 
hen») this Etruscan sentence and the auxiliary function of the verb 
erini becomes clear (p.125). 
Eth in the Etruscan texts functions as Turkic et («to do», «to 
fulfil»), which also serves as an auxiliary: eth tuthiu «fulfil (your) 
duty» (old  Turkic tüsh «duty», «debt of honour»), eth šuki («fulfil 
sacrifice of wine») (old Turkic süji «wine»), etc. 
 
 91
Structural words 
 
Yen. In Etruscan texts yen is found to function as a conjunction 
denoting «and». It is a cognate of the Turkic yene («and»). For 
instance, the expression azuk yen eski, in a text dealing with 
commemorable feasting, is clearly interpreted as «meal and drink» 
(Turkic azuk «meal», ichki/iski «drink»). 
Nak. This word, widely used in the Etruscan texts in the 
meaning «how», «like», was compared by A. Ayda, a Turkish 
researcher, with the words neke, nak («how, «like») in the Turkic 
languages [18, 304-306]. 
This function of nak was also admitted by M.Pallottino [112, 
369] and some other linguists. 
K. The element k has been identified by linguists as being a 
structural word, denoting «also», «and» as in the sentence Larthal 
atnalk klan «the son of Larth and Atna» [105, 52]. The personal 
name Atna, together with the genitive case suffix (l), includes also 
the deictic element k («and»). 
In some Turkic languages the  deictic element ok denotes the 
same meaning: Kirghizian  ekem turd’ok «and my father stood 
up», Altay  alar-ok ede «and he would take» [187, 991-992]. 
M/ma. This element is found to have a double function, both 
coordinating («and») and intensifying. Etruscan ki tartira kim 
kleva can be interpreted as «play three times and also pray three 
times» (Turkic tartu «to play on a musical instrument», kele «to 
pray»). 
Turkic auxilary ma has the same function: Salar. pir ullulakh 
ma kichilakh vara «there lived the old and also the young wives» 
[128, 194]. 
Our aim is to research the dominating Turkic component of the 
Etruscan language which permits the deciphering of the mysterious 
Etruscan writings. We don’t deal with non-Turkic layers which 
have been sufficiently dealt with by European linguists. The 
function of the non – Turkic components (numerals, genitive case 
 
 92
indicators, the suffixes of plurality, etc.) have more or less been 
identified by Etruscologists. As much as the amount of non-Turkic 
layers are not large enough to decipher the Etruscan writings, the 
problem had remained unsolved and hundreds of researchers 
repeated these limited number of known facts from century to 
century up to the present time. 
 
2.4. Etruscan Writings Begin Speaking 
 
Deciphering the Etruscan writings required conducting a 
comparative study with Turkic languages. First of all the phonetic 
structure of the Turkic languages can serve as a key to the Etruscan 
phonetic system. Etruscan appears to be phonetically close to the 
Chuvash language, which is the only language that represents      
the old Turkic Bulgars who, together with their ancestors, the 
Cimmerians, composed part of the ethnic past of Western Europe, 
including Italy. 
As we have already mentioned, it is simply the Chuvash pre-
positional th that mediates between the Etruscan th and old   
Turkic y in the same position (Etruscan thesan «daybreak»,  
«light» - Chuvash thithen «beaming» - old Turkic yashin «light», 
«lightning»). Through this phonetical key (th-y in pre position) and 
others we could elucidate numerous Etruscan words, considered 
previously by researchers to be of unknown origin. 
The veracity of our translations on the material of Turkic 
languages, as we shall see, can be proved by means of some 
linguistic and extra-linguistic factors. Observance of these factors 
is revealing the dark nature of the Etruscan texts, throwing light on 
their Turkic origin. 
An important linguistic factor to show the Turkic nature of the 
Etruscan texts is that not just separate words, but the whole lexico-
morphological system of the sentences appear to be Turkic. 
We observe that all of the words in Etruscan texts are 
semantically tied. The texts dealing with religious ritual ceremonies 
 
 93
only consist of Turkic religious – ritual terms. In the texts dealing 
with sacrificing most of the words are old Turkic names of 
sacrificial foodstuffs and terms related to this ritual. 
In the texts dealing with memorial eating the bulk of the words 
are Turkic culinary terms. 
This obviously indicates the Turkic origin of the Etruscan 
language and also the correctness of our translations. 
Drawing extra-linguistic factors to indicate the Turkic origin of 
the Etruscan language we have tried to ensure that the translation of 
the texts corresponds with the content of the pictures which 
accompany them and also to ensure the authenticity of the translation 
within the religious, mythological context of the Etruscan culture as 
well as other nations of the same period in the region. 
All these factors reveal that the language of the Etruscan 
writings are Turkic by origin and that the people, called Tursci 
(«Etruscans») by the Romans, were the same Turuska («Turks») 
mentioned in ancient sources. 
The Etruscan texts, accompanied by descriptions, can be 
translated more accurately as the content of the text is evidently 
guessed from the pictures. For instance, in one of the pictures we 
observe a soldier, holding the hand of a young woman, who is 
evidently seeing him off to his motherland. The horse standing 
behind the soldier and the sad appearance of the woman signify the 
signs of parting [92, 121]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 94
 
 
This situation completely coincides with the words uttered by 
the woman. 
 
 
The sentence written from right to left sounds as follows: 
 
ii ulath  ilina inath 
 
In pure Turkish she wishes the soldier a happy journey saying ii 
ulath ilina, which in Turkish reads “iyi ulash iline”, literally, 
“reach your country well” (ii – iyi “well”, ulath - ulash “reach”, 
“join”, ilina – iline “to your country”). 
In the word ii the consonant y was omitted between the two 
sounds as in some Turkic languages (ii “good”, “well”). 
Ilina (Turkish iline) is the Turkic noun il (“country”) with the 
suffixes denoting possession (il – in “your country”) and dative 
case (-e): il – in – e (Etruscan il-in-a) “to your country”. 
 
 95
In the verb ulath (Turkish ulash “reach”, “join”) the interdental 
sound th coincides with the Turkish sh. This consonant interchange 
is also observed between the Etruscan athay (Turkic asha «to eat») 
in the text dealing with a feasting ritual, as well as within Turkic 
languages ( Turkic bash ~ Chuvash puth «head»). 
The expression ii ulath ilina (“reach your country well”) 
uttered by the Etruscan woman is followed by the word inath,  
which we can compare with the old Turkic verb yinat/yinath    
(“get well”, “recover”) [14, 687; 176, 261]. This comparison is 
semantically logical as it corresponds to the content of the previous 
expression: ii ulath ilina inath «reach your country well, recover”. 
In relation to the soldier being seen off by the woman the 
expression is quite appropriate. 
The absence of the pre-positional y in the word inath can be 
explained with the frequently observed omission of that consonant 
in many Turkic languages (yil~il “year”, in~yin “to go down”, etc).  
In reply to the woman the soldier asks her to bless Thaf and 
sympathize with Lathl, the Etruscan gods: 
 
thafa alkı 
lathlni kay 
 
Both alkı and kay are Turkic: old Turkic alkı «to bless», «to 
give blessing», kay «to sympathize»[176]. 
The answer is quite logical: in reply to the woman who wishes 
him to reach his country well (ii ulath ilina – Turkish. iyi ulash 
iline), he is asking her  to address these gods for his journey to be 
fortunate, to bless Thaf and to sympathize with Lathl. 
Thaf and Lathl have insignificant phonetical difference from 
the Lasl and Thvf mentioned in the list of the Etruscan gods, where 
they are presented side-by-side [106, 181]. 
The names are found in the Turkic dative (-a: Thaf-a) and 
accusative (-ni: Lathlni) case forms, both of which are known to 
be characteristic of the Etruscan morphology. 
 
 96
The text describing the parting of the woman with the soldier 
was first published by G. Korte, who didn’t provide a translation. 
Z.Mayani, who tried to interpret it into Albanian made inadmissible 
mistakes. For some reason he read the first three letters of the 
sentence as liu («god»), while there is no letter denoting l in the 
beginning, and the last five letters of the line he read in reverse 
direction, from left to right, getting a female «name» for the 
woman – Thania. Reading a part of the line from right to left and  
another part in reverse direction is inadmissible. 
Worse than this was the appearance of the invented female 
name (Thania) in the sentence uttered by the woman, where 
mentioning her own name is not logical at all. As we already know, 
the woman wished the soldier a good journey. 
Such  patterns of deciphering the Etruscan texts were usual for 
many researchers. Only the combinatorial method promoted the 
correct interpretation of some small texts, although the origin of the 
interpreted words remained unknown until today. 
In some Etruscan texts we observe the correspondence of       
the Etruscan post-positional th with Turkic t (ath~at “horse”, 
flerth~belirt “to show itself” etc).  
In one of the Etruscan pictures we see a young man driving a 
cart harnessed to four horses. 
 
 
 
 97
He is riding the horses very hard. The content of the picture is 
expressed in the sentence axla ithuk athe kufarce in which we 
easily see the expression athe kuf corresponding to the Turkic atı 
kov («to ride the horse ») [176, 461]. 
Athe is in the accusative case form of the noun, characteristic of 
the Chuvash language (-a, -e, in other Turkic languages -i) [90, 18]. 
Kufarce consists of the verb kuf («to ride»), the suffix arke, 
which denotes an action going on at a definite moment in the past and 
corresponds to the Turkic ardi with that meaning. The expression 
athe kufarce, thus, can be translated as «was driving horses».  
The word ithuk preceding the expression athe kufarce is 
consonant with the old Turkic ithuk («free», «set free», «given the 
free reins (about the horse)». Consequently the Etruscan sentence 
expresses «Akhla (personal name) was riding the horses given the 
free reins». 
Another consonant interchange, observed in the Etruscan and 
Turkic languages, is the pre-positional f-b. The above mentioned 
Etruscan flerth differs from the Turkic belirt with two consonant 
shifts: the widely spread post – positional th – t and pre-positional f 
– b. The Etruscan pre-positional f, by some linguists, are 
considered to have developed from b [105, 41], which is obvious 
between flerth and the Turkic belirt. 
Flerthrce is observed on a vase with the description of two 
persons embracing each other– a man and a woman. Around them 
we see devils. This scene means that one of them was destined to 
death. It is proved by the word axrum, considered by linguists to 
mean the mythological Akheron, who was believed to take the 
spirits of the dead to the other world. The text is as follows: 
eca ersce nac axrum flerthrce [92, 172]. 
The meanings of the words were identified correctly, although 
their etymology was not maintained: eca («this»), axrum 
(Akheron), ersce «shows», nak «how», flerthrce «was emerging»: 
«This shows how Akheron was emerging». 
 
 98
The analysis of the text based on the material of the Turkic 
languages testifies that the meanings of  the words nak and flerth 
have been guessed correctly, although their Turkic origin was not 
identified. In fact, nak is the Turkic nak, [18, 304], naku [134, 344] 
(“how”), flerth - Turkish belirt («to designate», «to show itself»). 
Thus, nak axrum flerthrce means «how akheron showed itself».  
The expression nac flerthrce is etymologically restored on the 
material of the Turkic languages: nak belirtirdi «how was 
emerging», «how was showing itself».  
Another example for the b~f consonant shift is the Turkic 
ber/bir/ver («to give») and the Etruscan fir used in a text in the 
same meaning: 
 
šucic firin tesim 
ic kle vanth šucic fir thvene 
etnam šuci firin etnam velthite etnam aisvale [92, 292] 
 
The word etnam is commonly known by linguists to denote 
«and». Vanth, Thven, Aisval are well-known Etruscan gods. The 
appellatives šuci/šucic, fir and kle, which are unknown to linguists, 
are all Turkic.  
The Etruscan fir, considered to denote «to bring», is  included 
in the list of words of unknown origin [157], although it is 
evidently the Turkic bir/ver («to give»). 
Cle/kle did not find its right etymology either. It is the same 
kele («to pray», «to request») used in the Turkic languages. 
The general idea of the text is denoted in the expression šucic 
fir, which is always followed by the names of the Etruscan gods. 
Each of the names ends with the suffix -e that corresponds to the 
form of the dative case (-e,-a) in Turkic languages. It is easily 
guessed that šucic fir denotes doing something in honour of these 
gods. The analysis of the text permits us to conclude that fir/firin is 
the Turkic bir/ber/ver («to give») and šuci, šucic is the old Turkic 
sujig, süjüg, süjü («wine») [176, 516]. Sacrificing wine to the 
gods was characteristic of both the old Turks and the early 
 
 99
inhabitants of the Mediterranean basin. In the «Iliad» by Homer we 
see Hecuba, the wife of the Trojan king, sacrifice wine to the gods 
for saving Troy from the Greek invaders [149, 56]. 
In the sentence šuci firin tesim the last word is the Turkic 
tüsem (Chuvash), tözüm (Kazak) («patience», «kindness», 
«voluntariness»). 
Patience and voluntariness are naturally the features referred to 
those who make sacrifice. So it is requested to sacrifice wine with 
patience and voluntarily. 
Ic kle vanth šucic fir thvene evidently denotes «pray to Vanth, 
give wine to Thven».  
Thus, the whole text deals with sacrificing and praying for      
the well–known Etruscan gods (Vanth and Thven) and its 
interpretation is obviously achieved through the Turkic lexicon. 
In numerous cases we find an identity between the Etruscan and 
the Chuvash phonetical systems. For instance, the Etruscan post-
positional th coincides with the Chuvash th in the words lth-leth 
(“to deliver”, “to bring”), whilst in other Turkic languages it has 
been replaced with t (elt, ilet).  
In the light of the Etruscan – Chuvash parallels the Chuvash 
language appears to have kept the oldest level of some proto-Turkic 
consonants, which  is observed in the Etruscan language.  
That is also the case with the pre-positional th in the Etruscan 
and Chuvash languages, which often coincides with the Turkic y. 
Just this consonant shift serves as a key to the origin of some of  
the Etruscan words: Etr. thesan «radiance», «the goddess of 
daybreak» - Chuvash. thithen «beaming», «shining» - old Turkic 
yashin «radiance» «the god of thunder»; Etr. thur «child» - Chuv. 
thur «child» (<thavar) – Turk. yavru «child»; Etr. thumsa – 
Chuv. themthe – Turk. yumshak «mild», «soft», etc. 
In spite of the transparent identity of numerous Etruscan~ 
Turkic words they have been considered by European linguists to 
be of unknown origin. 
 
 100
The systematic coincidence of the Etruscan – Chuvash 
interdental th with the Turkic y in pre-position and t in post-
position reveals that the Chuvash language has kept the initial 
forms of some proto – Turkic consonants and serves as a key for 
many Etruscan words. 
In the text, analysed below, we have discovered the same con-
sonant changes between the Etruscan and Turkic languages [156]: 
 
 
In the first lines of the text sacrificial meat, milk, butter, etc. are 
offered to the spirits by the names of Velshu, Shuplu, Hasmun 
and Cleuste.  
First, we find a relationship between the types of the sacrificial 
foodstuffs and the mythological images, who are offered sacrifice. 
These sacrificial objects are cattle products, e.g. milk, meat and 
butter and they seem to have a direct relation to velshu, shuplu and 
other images. 
 
 101
In the pantheon of ancient world peoples similar theonyms are 
numerous: Lithuanian spirits by the names of Velinas and Velial, 
Veles («the shadow of the deceased» [99, 228], etc. However,     
the Etruscan Velshu can be compared with Veles – Volos - Vlas,   
a cattle god, described in the «Word about Igor Regiment»,    
which was considered by N.A.Baskakov, a well-known Russian 
Turcologist, to be of Turkic (Bulgar-Chuvash) origin. He maintains 
that Veles/Volos, a Slavonic cattle god, originates from Bulgarian – 
Chuvash vilakhthi («cattle-breeder»), which is the combination of 
vilakh/vlakh «cattle» and the suffix thi, denoting profession. He 
thinks, with the omission of the final vowel, Vilakhth has changed 
into Volos/Veles. The old Turkic Bulgars, who are known to have 
lived in the neighbourhood with Slavonian and other peoples in the 
South-West of Europe, could have lent them this word, which is   
the case with numerous Bulgarian borrowings in the Slavonic 
languages. What is more, Veles, in the above mentioned Russian 
saga  is presented as the grand son of Boyan, a mythological singer 
[49, 141-142]. 
Boyan, known to have been an Old  Bulgar (Turkic) image,     
is widely represented in the anthroponomy of Turkic peoples 
(Boyan, Bayan, Buyan). N.A.Baskakov and other Russian scien-
tists derived this name from the Turkic bay («rich») [49, 143]. 
One more argument to show the link between Veles, a cattle 
god, with the Bulgar-Chuvash vilakhthi («cattle breeder») is that 
the Chuvash people are known to have had rituals and prayers 
related to cattle-breeding. These were kept untill the early 20th 
century. In one of them, for instance, people beg the god to give 
health to the Cattle-breader (vilakhthi) [49, 142]. 
Veles, in Slavonic mythology, is also the protector of music and 
singing. Herdsmen are known to have always had a horn and reed-
pipe as their symbols [49, 141]. The musical  aspect of Veles find 
its expression in the name of Shuplu who is the same suplu 
(flutist) described in an Etruscan text [92, 149]. 
 
 102
Finally, cleuste, to whom sacrificial foodstuffs are offered, is 
the leader of the ritual and is cognate with that of the Chuvash – 
keleputhe. He led the same rituals and was a participant of ritual 
eating ceremonies. The word keleputhe, consisting of kele 
(«praying», «supplication») and puth («head»), means «the head of 
praying», «the leader of supplication») [64, 92]. 
kle, a cognate word with the same meaning, is also observed in 
the Etruscan texts. In a text, dealing with praying, we find kle 
Vanth «supplicate to Vanth», «offer praying to Vanth». Vanth is 
known as one of the well-known Etruscan gods [92, 292]. 
Of the same origin as the Etruscan cleuste is also kelevthe 
(«priest») in the Chuvash language [200, 168]. Morphologically 
they are much closer - both ending in similar elements (-te, -the). 
We also find the appellatives to have Turkic equivalents, 
amongst which a dominating role belongs to the Bulgaro-Chuvash 
branch of Turkic languages. 
The names of the food, sacrificed to the Etruscan spirits, and 
other key words of the text are found to be Turkic: sth –Turk.      
süt “milk”, ath – Turk. et  “meat”, th – the Chuvash thu “butter”, a 
phonetical variant of the Turkic yagh. 
The Etruscan verb lth, directly related to the sacrificial food, is 
the verb leth (“to bring”, “to convey”, “to deliver”), the Chuvash 
variant of the old Turkic elt, Turkish ilet. Evidently, the Etruscan 
sth velshu lth c th velshu is interpreted on the basis of the Turkic 
languages as “milk to Velshu, bring also butter to Velshu”. 
The element c, denoting “also”, is cognate with the Turkic 
partical ok with the same meaning (“also”, “as well as”): Etruscan 
lth c “bring also”- Turkic elt ok “bring also”, Chuvash leth akh 
“bring also”. 
The Etruscan sth, compared with the Turkic süt (“milk”), is 
also observed in its full form (suth). A.Pfiffig, a European 
researcher, interpreted the expression celi suth used in an Etruscan 
text as denoting the sacrificial “hot milk”. He writes that pouring 
hot milk was a sacrificial ritual used by the Romans [92, 98]. The 
 
 103
Romans are known to have inherited most of their rituals and ritual 
lexicon from the Etruscans.  
Thus, we can observe two stable consonant changes between 
the Etruscan and Turkic languages: post-positional th~t (Etr. sth, 
lth – Turk. süt “milk”, elt “to bring”, “to deliver”) and pre-
positional th~y (Etr.th~Turk. yagh “butter”, Chuvash. thu). In 
both cases the Etruscan and Chuvash variants of the compared 
words are found to have identical consonants: Etr. lth- Chuv. leth 
“to bring”, “to deliver”, Etr. th~Chuv. thu “butter” 
As is seen, the Chuvash variants of the Turkic words serve as a 
key to the Etruscan text:  
 
     Etrusk:              Chuvash: 
sth …. lth c  th      set .... leth akh  thu 
“milk ...bring also butter” 
 
Etruscan - Chuvash lth-leth, th-thu have, in fact, the same 
phonetical features. The only difference between them is the 
omission of vowels in the Etruscan variants, which is a matter of 
orthographical traditions characteristic of both the old Turkic and 
Etruscan languages. 
The word thapicun, which ends the line, is found to be the old 
Turkic tapigh (“worship”) with the suffix of the instrumental case 
(-in, -un) denoting reason, accompaniment in the old Turkic: 
tapigh-in “for worshipping”; torun “according to the rite”, “for 
ritual”, etc. 
Thus, the whole line, consisting of pure Turkic elements, 
obviously means “milk to Velshu according to the rite”. 
M.Pallottino, a well-known Italian Etruscologist, interpreted 
thap as a verb expressing devotion to gods [151, 421].  
A.Ayda, a Turkish Etruscologist, defined its meaning as Turkic 
tap/tapin («to worship») [18, 289]. 
The analysis of the text reveals that the Etruscan thapic/thapin 
are, in fact, Turkic tapigh («worshipping»), tapin (to worship»). 
 
 104
In the second line the request is made to bring sacrificial meat 
and butter to Velshu: lth thapintas ath velshu th velshu. 
Three words of this line are already known: lth “bring”, th 
“butter” and thapin  “worship”. Ath, the name of a sacrificial food, 
is the Turkic ət/ et “meat” ,  the consonant of which (th) has been 
replaced with t in the Turkic languages just as in the above 
mentioned Etr. lth – Turk. elt  (“bring”, “convey”). 
Thapintas is a derivation of thapin (“worship”) with the 
adjective forming suffix tas (thapintas  ath “sacrificial meat”), 
which corresponds to the suffix tath, forming future participle in 
the Chuvash language: pultath «which is expected to be». 
The old Turkic form of this suffix was tach/tachi: Tatar: 
buldachi «which is expected to be» [90, 189]. 
In comparison with the Turkic tath/tach the Etruscan thapintas 
ath can be interpreted as «the meat which will be devoted» or «the 
meat which is for worshipping». 
Thus, the line lth thapintas ath velshu th velshu  is interpreted 
as “bring sacrificial meat to Velshu, butter to Velshu”. 
Then follows lth c (Turk. leth ok “also bring”), which is also 
repeated in the next line: lth c ls velshu ath shuplu  
In this line we can see another combination of sacrificial  
objects (ls, ath) and images to whom these objects are devoted 
(Velshu, Shuplu). 
Ath, offered to Shuplu, is the same sacrifice, offered to Velshu 
in the previous line (“meat”). 
Ls, which is offered to Velshu, is the Turkic (Chuvash) las 
(“pine”, “pine branch”). Branches of some trees, or the wreath 
made from them had a symbolic meaning in the ancient world. For 
instance, the branch of the laurus has been the symbol of honour. 
Poets, writers and dancers of Greece were awarded with the wreath 
of laurus [186, 219]. The branch of the vine was the sign of 
fertility, abundance and vital power in the mythology of the early 
settlers of the Mediterranean basin [186, 25]. It is not by chance 
that in an Etruscan text vinu talina, mentioned among sacrificial 
 
 105
objects in honour of Velkhanu, an Etruscan god [92, 228], means 
“branch of wine” (Turkic tal “branch”, vinu” “wine”, a word of 
Mediterranean origin) . 
Accordingly, the Etruscan ls , which sounds like the Chuvash 
las (“pine”), may have had a symbolical meaning in the Etruscan 
mythology. Consequently, lth c ls velshu means “bring also pine 
branch to Velshu”. The whole line- lth c ls velshu ath shuplu is 
interpreted as “bring also pine branch to Velshu, meat to Shuplu”. 
In the following line ath shuplu is repeated, but ls (“pine 
branch”) is offered to another image by the name Hasmun: ls 
hasmun “pine branch to Hasmun”. 
The above mentioned foodstuffs (sth, ath – Turk. süt “milk”, et 
“meat”) is offered in the next line to an image by the name Cleuste: 
Sth cleuste, ath cleuste “milk to Cleuste, meat to Cleuste”. 
Frequent use of the same sacrificial foodstuffs in the lines of the 
text, their usual accompaniment with the verb lth (“bring”) and 
names of certain images reveals that the text deals with sacrificial 
acts. This conclusion is completely justified by the Turkic words 
that denote names of foodstuffs and the verbs denoting “bring”, 
“sacrifice”, etc. The restoration of the original text using of Turkic 
words is especially sensational and leaves no doubt that the 
Etruscan language was  Turkic by origin and was even closer to the 
Chuvash language:  
 
    Etruscan       Chuvash                        Common Turkic 
 
1.sth... lth c th      set... leth akh thu...         süt…ilet ok yağ 
 (“milk, bring also butter”) 
 
2. lth…ath…th      leth…üt…thu     ilet…et…yağ 
 (“bring…meat…butter”) 
 
3. lth c ls… ath       leth akh las…üt         ilet…ok (…) …et 
  (“bring also pine branch…meat”). 
 
 
 106
Turkic appellatives, connected with worshipping, are still 
observed in other lines. For instance, mutin aprenshaish inpa 
thapicun can be interpreted as “let people be protected (saved) by 
worshipping” on the basis of Turkic bodun (“people”), abran      
“to be protected” and tapigh “worship”. Between mutin and the 
old Turkic bodun there is a difference of the widely observed        
b-m,     d-t consonant shifts, characteristic of the Turkic languages. 
Concerning the word aprenshaish, its root apren is a cognate      
of the Turkic abran (“to be protected,” “to be saved”, “to be 
forgiven”) used in the reflexive case form of the verb abra, abira, 
amra (“to protect”, “to save”, “to forgive”, “to love”) [192, 59-60]. 
Thus, interpreting mutin aprenshaish inpa thapicun as “let 
the people be protected by worshipping” is quite reasonable       
with respect to the content of the text that deals with worshipping 
and sacrificing. 
Like the Turkic abran (“to be protected”, “to be saved”), the 
Etruscan passive form apren is found to have its equivalent in 
active voice with the same meaning: Turkic abra, abira “ to love” 
~ Etrusk. apire, apirase. They are discovered in an Etruscan text 
before the names of well-known gods - Nunth, Uni and Letham; 
apire nuntheri “love Nunth”, apirase unialthi “love Uni”, ilucve 
apirase lethamsul “love Letham with lament” (The tile of     
Capua) [160]. 
The word Ilucve used in the third expression, interpreted as 
“with lament”, is a cognate of the Turkic ila, uli, the Sumerian ilu 
(“to weep”, “to yell”), yelak (“maudlin”, “weepy”). The element –
ve, which is found to form the instrumental case (“with”) in 
numerous Etruscan texts, is a cognate of the Turkic (Chuvash) -pe, 
-pa (“with”). The comparison permits us to translate ilucve apirase 
lethamsul as “ love  Letham with lament”.  
The meaning, referring to iluc, is also guessed in the word iluu 
in the analysed text. Here iluu thapicun evidently means “worship-
 
 107
ping with lament”, which is known to be a real part of comme-
morable rituals accompanied by sacrificing and worshipping. 
As is seen, in all the interpreted texts, the sentences appear not 
to be a mechanical combination of semantically non-related words, 
but they are all associated with sacrificing and other rituals. This 
result is achieved when the Etruscan texts are researched on the  
material of relative languages – the Turkic languages. Thanks to 
the genetic relationship of  these languages the translation of the 
Etruscan texts are achieved through semantically associated words, 
all serving to formulate a complete idea. 
Logical identity of all the words  within a  sentence is also 
observed in a ritual text consisting mainly of religious terms        
and the names of the Etruscan gods. As usual, it is the Turkic 
terminology that permits us to interpret another line of the text  
(The tile of Capua) [160]: 
 
lethamsul ilucu perpri šanti arvus ta aius nuntheri 
 
In this line, together with ilucu («lament»), we discover a 
sensational religious formula-arvus, which is evidently the old 
Turkic arvish/arvash («spell», «charm», «conjuration»). 
It is derived from the word arva («to bewitch», «to spell»,     
«to conjure»): kam arvash arvadi «the shaman conjured» [176, 58]. 
All the words that accompany arvus in the text are semantically 
and morphologically Turkic: 
 
šanti arvus ta aius nuntheri 
 
Just based on sandi («honourable»), arvish («spell», «conjura-
tion»), ta («also») and ay («to tell») in the old Turkic language    
we can achieve semantically a logical combination of words - a 
whole lexico-grammatical unit: «utter an honourable conjuration    
to [Nunth]». We can see a sensational correlation between the 
Etruscan sentence and its Turkic equivalent: 
 
 
 108
      Etruscan                                           Old Turkic 
 
šanti arvus ta aius nuntheri           sandi arvish ta ayiz  
                                                          [nunthe] ri 
 
The only difference is the absence of the ethnonym Nunth in   
the old Turkic pantheon. 
The word sandi is derived from the old Turkic san («honour») 
and the adjective forming suffix-di, characteristic of Turkic 
morphology [57, 319]. 
The word ayiz, stemmed from the old Turkic ay («to tell»), is in 
the imperative form of the verb, adressed to the second person 
plural, to express a request. The suffix -iz, denoting this meaning, 
is observed in Azerbaijani and other Turkic dialects: gediz «go»    
(< get «to go» - iz, etc.). 
This suffix is a cognate of eghez/ighiz, having the same 
function in the  old Turkic language: bareghez («go» < bar-eghez) 
[90, 75]. 
In the text of Perugia the notion of spelling is expressed by    
the word špel. Here we observe logical ties between the related 
words that give a complete idea about spelling as a ritual [158]: 
In the 28th- 32nd lines of the text we find špel («spell») and      
the name of the location where spelling is realized – špelanethi, 
which is in the locative case form (-thi): 
 
špelanethi fulumkhva špelthi eštak 
 
The sentence is clearly interpreted as follows: «Let’s hear the 
spell which is to be in shpelane». 
eštak corresponds to the Turkic eshit («to hear», «to listen»), 
which in imperative form of the second person plural (let’s hear) 
sounds like eshidek (Azerbaijani). 
 
 
 
 109
 
 
The element k forms the imperative - desirable mood of the 
verb  in some Turkic languages [90, 79]. 
fulumkhva seems to be a participle form of the ferb ful (Turkic 
bol/pul «to be»), although its morphological function cannot be 
identified. It is interpreted as «which will be», «which is to be» 
according to the context. 
 
 110
Between ful and the Turkic bol («to be») there is an f-b 
consonant change observed between flerth-belirt («to show 
itself»), fir-bir («to give»), etc. 
The syntactical structure of the sentence is completely Turkic: 
   
       Etruscan                                              Turkic 
špelanethi fulumkhva špelthi       špelane] de bulghay [špel]ti 
eštak                                                eshidek 
 
The Turkic variant of the compared sentences, with the 
exception of the words špel and špelane, is the etymological 
equivalent of the Etruscan one and the word order in both of them 
is identical: the adverbial modifier of place expressed by the noun 
in locative case (Etrusc thi – Turkic de), the participle used as 
attribute (Etrusc. ful – Turkic bol «to be»), the object in accusative 
case form (Etruscan thi – Turkic ti), finally, the predicate in 
imperative - desirable mood form. 
The etruscan locative and accusative suffixes in the sentence  
are homonymous (-thi, -thi), which is also the case with the      
same forms in some Turkic languages: locative case suffixes:           
-da/-de/-ta/-te; accusative case forms: -ti/-thi/-the/-ze [165, 1038; 
169, 761]. 
The element -thi as the indicator of the accusative case is also 
observed in its short  form (-th) in which the vowel, like in other 
Etruscan words, was omitted. In the 23rd line of the text the word 
špelth (<špelthi) is followed by the verb uta, which corresponds to 
the Turkic ute/öte («to perform», «to fulfil»). 
In the expression špelth uta the suffix th (<thi) appears under 
the government of the verb uta («to perform»), which requires the 
noun to be used in the accusative case form. 
The Turkic ute/öte («to perform») is found to be used in similar 
expressions. In the Turkic Salar language we find this verb in 
combination with  the noun nemes («a ritual prayer») – nemes ute 
«to perform the ritual prayer» [128, 183], which throws light on the 
Etruscan špelth uta («to  perform a ritual spell»). 
 
 111
Researchers who studied the Etruscan texts using external 
analogies between words failed to reveal the real content of the text 
of Perugia. F.Latipov, like some European researchers, tried to 
identify the word cnl, featured  in the text, by using  an external 
analogy with the word canal, and therefore arriving at the 
conclusion that the text dealt with a treaty between  two persons on 
the irrigation of a hired lot of land. 
However, in the text there is no other word, except knl, to 
connect the writing with irrigation or any other type of economic 
activity. On the basis of a single word that is externally similar to 
something we cannot  refer any text to an entire sphere of activity. 
In order to define the content of a text we must find more than one 
word in it that is logically related and semantically tied. 
When we research the Perugian text through the material of the 
Turkic languages, we find more and more expressions in which all 
the words are semantically and logically tied. 
In the text we discover cnl, and other words, to be related with 
religious formulas, and not with irrigation. In the 18th-19th lines of 
the text the expression intemamer cnl velthina is found to denote 
a religious formula. The third word, velthina, is a well-known term 
used in other Etruscan texts to denote an idolized ancestor. The 
images of the same root, velthit/velthr, are often presented in texts 
side by side with Ais, an Etruscan goddess [92, p.265, 292]. 
intemamer cnl velthina based on the vocabulary of Turkic 
languages means «eternal rest to Velthina»: intemamer is a word 
combination consisting of two synonymic words, intem and amer, 
which are the Turkic yintem («eternal») and amru «eternal» [176, 
p.42, 262]; cnl is a cognate of kanil («comfortable») in the 
language of the old Turkic Bulgars) [127, 131] and kanle 
(«comfortably», «calm» in the Chuvash language), stemmed from 
kan («to rest», «to become calm»). 
Thus, the content of the expression is quite logical: wishing an 
eternal rest to the deceased is a well-known religious formula used 
by all nations. 
 
 112
We observe semantic ties between all the words of the 
expression which formulate a complete idea - an idea which is 
familiar to all nations. 
This Etruscan expression, like others, is completely 
reconstructed by means of lexical equivalents in the old Turkic 
language: 
 
      Etruscan                                      Old Turkic 
intem amer cnl velthina             yintem amru kanil [velthina] 
                                                                 
In the 13th-14th lines of the text we read the expression velthina 
hintha kape muniklet, which denotes «rejoice the monument of 
velthina’s peace»: kape is a cognate of the old Bulgarian kep 
(«idol», «monument»), which was also borrowed into Slavonic 
languages: kap «monument», kapishe «a heathenish temple»    
[199, 135]. 
The old Turks, like the Etruscans, used to prepare the idol of   
the deceased that they worshipped and kept it to perpetuate his 
memory [18, 192]. Such idols, found in Etruscan graves, indicate 
this religious tradition. 
hintha, known from other texts as denoting a notion, relating  
to the deceased, is one more argument to exclude the relation of   
the text to irrigation. 
Z.Mayani interpreted hinth as denoting the spirit of the 
deceased based on hinthial teriasals written on a tombstone. He 
translates it as «the spirit of Teresi» [92, 54], not paying attention 
to its etymology.  
The old Turkic inch («rest», «peace», «silence») permits us to 
interprete hinthial teriasals as «the peace of Teresi», which is a 
usual notion relating to the deceased. 
muniklet is the old Turkic mungilet/mengilet («to rejoice») 
[176, p.342, 353], the derivation of mengi/mungi («joy», 
«delight») and the verb forming suffixes -le+t. 
 
 
 113
As is seen, «rejoicing the idol of Velthina’s peace» is a logical 
continuation of the idea of the previous expression, where eternal 
rest is wished to Velthina.  
There is a logical tie both between the two expressions and 
between the words in each of them. This logic is visible in all parts 
of the text as well as in the expression which explains how to 
gladden the idol of the deceased.  
«velthina hintha kape muniklet» is preceded by falaš khiem 
fušle, which throughout old Turkic religious terminology, is 
interpreted as «with consolatory words and grief».  
Usual patterns of pre-positional consonant shift (flerth-belirt 
«to signify», fir-bir «to give», etc.) permit us to relate the word 
falaš to the Turkic bolush/pulaš («consolatory word», «help by 
means of consolatory word»), which is a mourning term. 
Fušle, may be a cognate of the old Turkic bush/push «grief» 
[176, 84] through the b-f consonant shift, khiem, a coordinating 
conjunction with the meaning «also», «and», although we are not 
quite certain of this. 
falaš in the same meaning was used in the 15th line: šran kzl 
thii falšti. 
The expression, which both lexically and morphologically is 
Turkic, means «sing a passionate consolatory lament» (literally, 
«sing a passionate lament of consolation»). 
As falš (<falaš) is under the government of the verb šran 
(«sing»), it is in the accusative case form (ti: falšti), which we saw 
in the above mentioned expressions špelthi eštak, špelth uta, in 
which špel is in the same case form under the influence of the 
verbs eštak («to hear») and uta («to perform») 
šran is the Turkic sarna/sarina («to sing») [46, 194; 190, 334], 
thii is the Turkic yigi («lament»), which differs from the Etruscan 
one through the pre-positional th-y consonant shift (like common 
Turkic yumshak – Chuvash themthe «soft» - Etruscan thumsa), 
and omission of the consonant g between the two vowels is usual 
for Turkic languages. 
 
 114
kzl, in which vowels were omitted, corresponds to the Turkish 
kızıl («ardent», «passionate») [197, 548]. 
Thus, šran kzl thii falšti is clearly interpreted as «sing a 
passionate consolatory lament» and is both lexically and 
morphologically Turkic. This can be completely reconstructed 
through the Turkic lexicon in the same syntactical order: 
 
    Etruscan                                             Turkic 
šran kzl thii falšti                            sarna kizil yigi bolushtu 
 
šran, with the same meaning, is found in another Etruscan    
text (Tabula Cortonensis) (154), completely devoted to religious 
rituals. The text was devoted to honouring the memorable year of 
Titi Laris (Titinal Larisal salini saulesla). Here salini is in the 
possessive – accusative case from of the word sal «year», which 
will be detailed in an Etruscan text dealing with the animal 
calendar: sal-i-ni – Turkic yil-i-ni/zil-i-ni «his year» in the accusa-
tive case; saulesla «to honour» – in Turkic: chawla / sawla «to ho-
nour» <chaw / saw «honour» +la verb forming suffix [14,133, 444]. 
The text, completely devoted to various rituals, also has the 
phrase šran šarc clthnthersna. This is interpreted as «sing a song 
to the crowd in the temple» on the basis of the Turkic sarna (sing), 
sharkı («song»), kil («house», «home») and teresh (Chuvash 
«multitude», «masses» <ter «to gather», «to get together»).  
The Etruscan thersna is in the dative case, formed by means of 
the suffix –na, the same –na, forming the dative case in the Turkic 
languages (we should remember the above mentioned Etruscan 
kapzna, ilina - Turkic kapısına «to [its] door», ilina «to [your] 
country»). 
As for the word cilth - it has been identified by European 
Etruscologists as «temple» and is of the same origin as the Turkic 
(Chuvash) kil «home», «house». 
The Turkic variant of the text differs from the Etruscan one 
with the only non-identified morphological element thn in the 
word cilthn. 
 
 115
     Etruscan                                         Turkic 
šran šarc kilthn thersna               sarna sharkı kilin terishina 
 
As is seen, the same Etruscan words found in different texts   
and in different parts of the same text, function in the meanings as 
has been identified. This is also  the case with the word thii (Turkic 
yigi «lament») in the sentence šran kzl thii falšti translated as 
«sing a passionate consolatory lament» on the analogy of the 
Turkic sarna kızıl yigi bolushtu. 
thii, with the meaning «lament», is also found in the 9th-10th 
lines of the text where we see some other words all semantically 
associated. As usual, this semantical whole is achieved through the 
Turkic lexicon. Here it is informed that «after the lament and 
mourning» (thii thilskuna kenu) «a feasting present» (eplk felik) 
will be given «to the son of Larth Afuna» (larthal afuneš klen) «in 
the chapel» (thunkhulthe). 
The first key expression, thii thilškuna kenu, is interpreted as 
«after the lament [and] mourning» in this way: 
thii is the above mentioned yigi («lament») and differing from 
it through the pre-positional th-y consonant shift and the omission 
of g between the two vowels, characteristic of the Turkic 
languages: agach – a:ch «tree», agiz – a:z «mouth», agır – a:r 
«heavy» [172]. 
The pre-positional th-y consonant shift is also observed 
between the Turkic yogh («mourning») and its old form, thogia, 
found in an old Greek source [201, 207]. 
The word  thilškuna corresponds to the Turkic yiglash/ilash 
(«weeping for a dead person together»). The element sh in 
yiglash/ilash shows a joint action: yigla/igla/ila «to weep» 
yiglash/iglash/ilash «to weep together» [14,678]. 
The element ku in thilškuna coincides with the old Turkic 
gu/gü/ku, which changes a verb into a noun (ich «to drink», ichkü 
- «drinking», er «to be» - ergü«dwelling») [176,654]. On the   
basis of this old suffix the Etruscan thilšku (<thilišku) can be 
 
 116
reconstructed as yiglashgu/yilashgu («lamenting jointly», «joint 
weeping»). 
The suffix -na in thilškuna, as a word changing element,  
appears under the government of kenu (Old Turkic ken «after»): 
thii thilškuna kenu, thus, means «after lament and mourning» and 
is reconstructed in Turkic languages as yigi yilishgu […] ken. 
After the words denoting lament and mourning follows eplk 
felik, dedicated to Larth Afuna’s son in the chapel. 
felik is the above mentioned Turkic belik/belek («gift», 
«present») [193, 112] and differs from the latter on the pre-
positional f-b consonant shift widely observed between the 
Etruscan and Turkic languages. 
eplk (in another text epl) is considered as being cognate with 
the Latin epulum («ceremonial eating», «feast») [92, 286]. 
Thus, eplk felik, which denotes «feasting present», logically 
completes the  idea indicating that after the ritual of lament and 
mourning there will follow another one - feasting present, that is, a 
commemorable feast, which is a common ritual for all nations. 
The ritual would be provided in the chapel, thunkhulte, in 
which the suffix the is known to be the indicator of the locative 
case (Turkic -ta/-te). 
The origin of thunkhul has not been identified. 
The word epl («feasting») is repeated in the 7th and 8th lines of 
the Perugian text in which we also find transparent Turkic culinary 
terms: 
 
azuk yen eski epl tularu 
 
epl, which is considered to be an Etruscan borrowing in Latin 
(epulum) [92, 286], is undoubtedly of the same root as the Turkic 
ebirik («commemorable feast») [187, 988]. 
The previous expression  azuk yen eski, consisting of the 
Turkic azuk («meal»), yene («and»), ichki/iski/echki («drink»), 
clearly reveals  the content of the sentence: «commemorable feast 
with meal and drink». 
 
 117
The last word – tularu, identified by linguists as denoting 
«boundary», «limit», shows here the allotment where the eating 
ceremony was provided. Researchers, who correctly guessed the 
meaning of tular, usually observed on stones placed on the 
boundaries of towns and allotments to show their limit  
[105,54;106,92], did not know about its old Turkic origin: tu «to 
fence», «to enclose», tul «to be enclosed [47, 158]. 
The Etruscans added the suffix of plurality (-ar) to this root 
changing it into the noun - tular («limit», «boundary»). 
The suffix –u, in tularu, is the Turkic possessive case element 
denoting that the object belongs to the previous object: epl tularu, 
thus, means «the boundary (allotment) of ceremonial ritual» (epl).  
In the 34th -36th lines the expression azuk yen eski is repeated 
and accompanied by other culinary terms of Turkic origin: 
 
turun eškuneze azuk yen eski athumikš. 
 
azuk yen eski («meal and drink») in the combination with 
athumicš (Turkic asim/asham «share», «portion») denotes «a 
portion of the feasting meal and drink». Together with the verb 
turun, always used in Etruscan texts to mean «to present», «to 
devote», etc, the whole line expresses semantically a complete idea, 
i.e. calling people, who are feasting, to share a portion of the 
feasting meal and drink. This openly reflects the essence of 
commemorable ceremonies. 
The verb turun, which is considered to denote «to present», «to 
devote», is a cognate of the verb tu («to organize», «to do». «to 
feast») in the Chuvash language in which ethke tu «to feast» 
(literally «to organize drink») is the direct equivalent of the 
Etruscan turun eski.   
The verb tu, originates from the Old Turkic tovur/tuvur/tuir 
[194, 247], of which the Etruscan tur has originated. 
In the Perugian text the plural form of tur, formed by the suffix 
-un, was used: turun. This suffix is of the same origin as the old 
Turkic uŋ/iŋ, denoting a request [39, 275]. 
 
 118
This element is also observed in the Etruscan verbs thesin 
(«organize» - Turk. tüzün), firin («give» - Turk. verin/berin), 
tutin («hire» - Turk. tutun). 
In modern Turkic languages the suffixes un, in are used to 
denote request and order. 
The whole sentence (with exclusion of eškuneze, not identified) 
means «share a portion of feasting meal and drink». 
athumikš is also observed in an Etruscan text devoted to 
sacrificing: 
 
etnam athumika thluthkva [92, 294] 
 
Again, the Etruscan words are identified through the same 
consonant shifts: th-y, th-sh. 
athumika, and the above mentioned athumikš, consist of 
athum (Turkic asham/asım «portion», «share»), stemmed from 
the Turkic asha «to eat» (the Etruscan atha) and the suffix -ik 
which is a cognate of the old Turkic dimunitive -k, -ak (yul «river» 
- yulak «small river»). 
thluth, the root of thluthkva, through the pre-positional th-y 
and post-positional th-sh consonant shifts, corresponds to the old 
Turkic yulush («sacrificing») [176, 279]. 
etnam, on bilingual texts, has been identified to denote «and» 
[112,375]. 
Thus, etnam athumika thluthkva means «and sacrificial 
portion», which is an evident notion that relates to the practice of 
sacrifice. 
In the 25th-27th lines of the Perugian text, besides the usual 
culinary terms (azuk yen eski «meal and drink»), we find other 
Turkic words all semantically and logically related: 
 
velthinaš aten azuk yen eski ipa 
 
In this line the feast is organized in the name of Velthina: 
velthinaš aten. Here aten is the Turkic ad («name») used in the 
possessive – dative case form: at-e-n [a] «in his name», literally, 
 
 119
«to his name»: at «name», -e suffix denoting possession (at-e «his 
name») and -na, dative case indicator. The suffix -e is the Chuvash 
variant of Turkic -i, -y, -u denoting possession and -na is the dative 
case indicator  used after nouns ending in vowels. 
The etymology of ipa is revealed in a comparison with the 
Turkic ip («present», «gift»). The morphological element -a in ipa 
coincides with the Turkic (Chuvash) suffix -a/-e denoting 
possession. In other Turkic languages this suffix coincides with i, 
u, ü: ipi (<ip-i «its/his/her present».  
The Etruscan sentence, translated as «in the name of Velthina 
meal and drink present», is transparently reconstructed in Turkic 
languages: 
 
          Etruscan                                             Turkic 
velthinaš aten azuk yen eski ipa         [velthina] adina azuk  
              yene iski ipi 
 
In some Etruscan texts we discover another group of Turkic 
culinary terms that once more reveals that the interpretation of the 
Etruscan writings through the Turkic languages is the only accurate 
way and proves that the Etruscan language is really Turkic by origin. 
In one of these texts we also find the word ii, denoting «good», 
as in the text dealing with the parting of a soldier from a woman 
where she wishes him a good journey: ii ulash ilina – «reach your 
country well». 
The usage of the Turkic ii in the same meaning («good», 
«well») in different texts is a reasonable argument to prove the 
correctness of our translations. This word is also found in two short 
Etruscan sentences meaning «good». The texts, accompanied by a 
picture of a man with a cup of wine in his hand, reads as follows: 
 
avilerek iienieš 
 
Z.Mayani, an Etruscologist, has interpreted it as “a wine cup  
for Avil” [92, 280]. He translates iienieš as “wine” based on the 
Phoenician yain and the Greek oin(os) (“wine”) [92, 145]. In fact 
 
 120
iienieš, written as one word, consists of three components of  
which only one, eni, is a cognate of yain, oin (os) (“wine”). The 
preceding (ii) and the ending (eš) components are Turkic ii 
(“good”) and ich/ech/is (“to drink”). The whole expression (ii eni 
eš) means “drink a good wine”. 
The element eš is found in the same meaning in combination 
with the word vinum - another old Mediterranean word for “wine”: 
vinum eši (eš-i) “drink wine” [92, 243]. 
The element avil, mostly used with figures indicating the date 
of birth and death of the deceased on tombstones, has been 
identified as denoting “year”. Its plural form (aviler), with an 
adjective forming suffix (-ek), may certainly indicate longevity of 
the wine as the mark of its quality.  
The second sentence, referring to the picture, contains the same 
expression with a slight orthographical difference which is usual 
for all Etruscan writings: 
 
ara uthlek i enei eš 
 
i enei eš (in the previous sentence ii eni eš “drink a good wine”) 
is preceded by an interesting expression and is logically tied with 
the latter: “look for luck” (Turkic ara “look for“, old Turkic öthlek 
“luck”). 
The whole sentence is interpreted as follows: “look for luck, 
drink a good wine”. 
The idea of the text is to associate luck with a good wine as a 
poetical way for praising the latter. The man, holding a cup of wine 
in his hand, was undoubtedly a vintner by profession. Indicating the 
profession of the deceased on their tombs was usual for the 
Etruscans and other peoples of the Mediterranean basin. 
In the text we find the words with the meaning «wine» 
(eni/enei) and the related Turkic verb, denoting “to drink” (eš, eši). 
In some other texts dealing with a commemorative feast, the 
verb eš is found in combination with the word athay (eš athay) and 
is similar to the Turkic ich asha (“to feast”, literally, “drink and eat”). 
 
 121
eš athay….vinum usi trinum flere in krapsti [146, 537] 
In this text we find a group of Turkic words, all connected with 
a commemorable ceremony: eš athay “drink –eat” (Turk. ich asha 
“drink- eat”), vinum usi “taste wine” (old Turk. us, usa “to taste”); 
trinum flere “mark trinum (a ritual)”. 
In the text the participants of the ritual are invited to feast (eš 
athay), to taste wine (vinum usi) and to mark trinum (trinum 
flere) in this temple (in crapsti). The origin of crapsti has not been 
identified. However, the verb, flere (fler-e), is of the same origin as 
the Turkic belirt (“to designate”, “to show itself”) which also 
means “to mark”, “to celebrate” in the Chuvash language: pâlart. 
Polycemy is an important argument to show the relationship of 
the compared Etruscan-Turkic words. According to our researches, 
the Etruscan ip is revealed to include all the meanings the Turkic ip 
has (1. “present”. “gift”; 2. “use”, “benefit”; 3. “rest”, “peace”; 4. 
“happiness”; 5. “cure”, “healing”) [192, 286]. 
In relation to dead persons the Etruscan ip is found to mean 
“peace”, “rest”: ipa seth “reach peace” [146, 250]  (Turkic. ip 
“rest”, “peace”, and yet/sit/zet “to reach”). 
Ipa is in the dative case: ip-a “to rest”, “to peace” (Turkic –a,-e). 
“Reaching rest” is known to be a notion familiar to all nations. 
In the English language, for instance, there are analogical 
expressions used in relation to the deceased: “he has gone to rest”, 
“to lay to rest”, “let him rest in peace”,etc. 
Etruscan ip in this meaning is found in numerous texts: 
 
iši minthi ip itinie 
 
The sentence written on a tomb [27, 95] means “the lord has 
created peace in me”. All the words are of Turkic origin: iši-Turk. 
ise/isi (isi(<iye-si) “the lord”, “the master”; minthi “in me” – the 
locative form of the Turkic personal pronoun min: minde; 
ip~Turk. ip “peace”, “rest”; itin-old Turk. itin/etin “to make for 
himself”, “to create for himself” (<it/et “to do”, “to make” + in, the 
suffix of the reflexive verb). 
 
 122
The use of the personal pronoun (minthi), instead of the noun 
(“in sarcophagus”), is usual for the Etruscan texts and serves for 
stylistic purpose. 
The Etruscan ip with the meaning “cure”, “healing” is found in 
a short writing on an amphora: ip siune [92, 168].The Turkic ip 
(“cure”, “healing”) and su (“water”) allow us to interpret the text as 
“healing water”. 
A short Etruscan text (Cipo de Rubiera «Siglo VI. C) includes 
the name of a well-known goddess, Eisna, accompanied by evident 
Turkic words dealing with the healing quality of her remedy: 
                      
 
 The first part of the text sounds as follows: 
 
kuvei pul eisna imi 
 
The expression kuvei pul, preceding eisna, means  «be lucky» 
(Turk. kuv, kuw «luck», pul «to be»). 
The word imi, which coincides with the possessive case form of 
the Turkic word im («remedy») [192,270] (+i «belonging to her»), 
means «her remedy». 
Thus, the whole sentence, which both lexically and morpholo-
gically is pure Turkic, denotes «Let Eisna’s remedy be lucky». 
The following word (iive) can supposedly be Turkic ii («good») 
with the instrumental case suffix -ve, which we shall detail below. 
If we accept iive in that meaning the sentence is translated as «Let 
Eisna’s remedy be lucky and good». However, we are not quite 
certain about the meaning of iive, although the other words have 
 
 123
clear Turkic equivalents (kuv, pul, im) and are both semantically 
and morphologically related. 
The following part of the text, centered on the expression ati 
amake («mother’s disease»), is the logical continuation of the first 
part. Ati is an Etruscan term, expressing relationship («mother»). 
Amake is same as the Turkic amak («disease», «illness») [200, 32] 
used in the Chuvash variant of the possessive case form (-e): 
amak-e «(her) disease». 
Thus, there is an evident logical tie between im («remedy») in 
the first and amak («disease») in the second part of the sentence. 
The analysis of the other words apparently shows that Eisna’s 
remedy is expected to cure the mother’s disease. This is expressed 
by the verbs sal (sal-al) and kezilas, both of which are Turkic: sal 
(«to break up», «to drop», kesil «to cease», «to be cut». 
The interrelation of these two verbs with the different types of 
pronouns (mi, «I», minv «by me») is clearly based on voice: the 
verb sal («to drop», «to break up»), which is in the active voice, 
has been used with the personal pronoun in the nominative case, mi 
salal. Although the morphological function of the element –al is 
not certain, the expression can be interpreted as «I [can] break up», 
«I [am able to] break up». 
kezilas, in which we see the Turkic kesil («to be cut», «to be 
ceased»), the passive form of the verb kes («to cut», «to cease»), 
has required the personal pronoun mi to be in the instrumental case 
form: minv (<min-ve) «by me». The expression minv kezil means 
«to be cut by me», «to be ceased by me». 
Thus, both the verbs sal and kezil are found to denote breaking 
up, curing the mother’s disease (ati amake) by means of the 
goddess Eisna’s remedy (eisna imi). All the appellatives (im 
«remedy», amak «disease», sal «to break up», kezil «to be cut») 
are Turkic. That is also the case with the morphological elements, 
except –al (sal-al), the origin of which has not been identified. 
The suffix -as in the verb kezilas (<kez-il-as) corresponds to 
the Turkic (Chuvash) participle forming suffix - as with a modal 
 
 124
colour of necessity, expectation [90,86]: kezilas «expected to be 
ceased», «ceasable», minv kezilas «ceasable by me», «possible to 
be ceased by me». 
Thus, the sentence, kuvei pul eisna imi iive mi salal minv 
kezilas ati amake, is both lexically and morphologically Turkic. 
All the words in this sentence, like those  in other Etruscan 
texts, appear to be semantically linked. It is not the combination of 
logically non-related words - but the combination of the words in 
which we observe logical development of a concrete idea. The 
logical ties, openly observed between the expressions such as kuvei 
pul («be lucky») – Eisna imi («Eisna’s remedy») – ati amake 
(«mother’s disease»»), salal, kezilas («to break up», «to cease») 
etc., permit us to conclude that the text is about the remedy of the 
goddess, able to cure the mother’s disease. 
The Turkic possessive case indicators, observed in other 
Etruscan writings, are also found in this text: im «remedy» - imi 
«her or his remedy», amak «disease» - amake «her or his disease» 
(compare the Turk. im – imi, amak – amake). 
The element v, identified as denoting the instrumental case in 
the word minv (<minve «by me»), is also found to be regularly 
used in other Etruscan texts. This means the realization of an action 
done by someone or by means of something. This function of the 
element ve has been identified in bilingual Etruscan and Phoenician 
texts. Two Phoenician expressions denoting «chosen by the 
goddess (Astarta)», and «appointed by the goddess», corresponds 
to «ilakve alšase» and «ilakve tulerase» in the Etruscan variant of 
the texts [105, 51]. 
The expressions were interpreted correctly, although the origin 
of the suffixes were not identified by researchers. As we know, this 
suffix is of the same origin as the Turkic (Chuvash, Karaim) -be, -
pe («by», «with») used in the same meaning. 
The Etruscan text and its reconstructed Turkic variant is 
analogical with the exception of the suffixes -al (salal), -ei (kuvei), 
not identified  on Turkic facts: 
 
 125
    Etruscan                                     Turkic 
 
kuvei pul eisna imi                kuv (….) pul [eisna] imi 
mi salal minv kezilas             min sal […..] minpe kesilasi ana  
ati amake                                amake 
 
The comparative study of the Etruscan and Old Turkic texts, 
written on tombstones, allows us to reveal cognate expressions. In 
the epitaphs of both languages we discover words dealing with the 
animal calendar. For instance, we discover that tarkhi salvi 
thanah erini in an Etruscan epitaph is in fact the analogy of 
«turkcha yil takaghu erdi» («Year on Turkic chronology was 
hen») in an old Turkic epitaph. 
The Etruscan tarkhi corresponds to the ethnonym tark, 
denoting «Turk» in some old sources. In one source, for instance, 
the ethnonym apakhtark denotes the Scythian Turks [130, 75]. 
Tarkh, as an ethnonym, is found to have been used  in different 
parts of old Europe. For instance, a people by the name Satarkh 
inhabited  ancient Crimea [108, 30-33], where in different times 
B.C. the Cimmerians, Scythians, Bulgars and other peoples, related 
with the Turks, were settled.  
A similar name (tarcomn) was used in pre-Greek Crete, which 
was settled by the Pelasgians [81, 72]. 
The Thracians, who bore a similar ethnic name, Thrak/Trak, 
are described as being Turkic in Scandinavian sagas. 
The above mentioned peoples were pre-Indo-European by 
origin and ethnically interrelated (Cimmerians, Pelasgians, etc.). 
The Etruscans, who were part of them, could naturally have had 
such an ethnical name. 
The word tarkh referred to the Etruscans. The element tark 
was used in the names of the Roman kings of Etruscan origin  - 
Lucius Tarquinius Priscus, Lucius Tarquinius Superbus and others. 
Finally, Tarkheti, the name of the legendary founder of Rome, 
lies on the same ethnonym. Rome is known to have been founded 
by the Etruscans - the descendants of the Trojans [115, 26]. 
 
 126
Tark, as an ethnonym denoting the Etruscans, attracted the 
attention of F.Latipov, who interpretes tark thesi vakil as «the 
speech of the Etruscan type» in which thez is compared with the 
Turkic töz («type», «kind») [89, 109]. 
We find tarkh in the same function in the epitaph of Thefri 
Velimna, who is called tarkhis klan («Etrucsan boy») [146, 507]. 
These facts permit us to admit tarkhi in the sentence tarkhi 
salvi thanah erini as denoting «Etruscan». 
On the basis of the Turkic facts the sentence sounds as «The 
year on the Etruscan chronology was hen»: salvi «on chronology», 
literally «by year» is a cognate of the Turkic jal/zil/sil «year» +      
-be/-pe/-pa, instrumental case suffixes («with», «by», «on»); 
thanah is the old Turkic takaghu («hen»), the Turkic (Shor) tanak 
«hen»; erini – the old Turkic erdi («was»). 
The Urartian šale («year») [182, 266] which is a cognate of the 
Etruscan sal, is phonetically closer to the Etruscan sal than the 
Turkic jal/zil/sil. Both the Urartians and the Etruscans, being from 
Asia Minor by origin, appear to have had a number of common 
words - mostly of proto-Turkic origin. 
The old Turkic erdi, as a result of omission of the consonant r, 
has changed into idi/-edi («was») in modern Turkic languages. 
That was also the case with the Bashkir (Turkic) form of  ine 
(«was») which, through the reconstruction of the consonant  r, 
takes the form (irne) and is closer to the Etruscan erini. 
The old Turkic er («to be») was widely used in the old Turkic 
epitaphs: yili tonguz erür «(his) year is swine», Turkcha yili luu 
erür «Turkic year is dragon» [69, p.71, 98]. 
The expression tarkhi salvi is found in one more Etruscan 
epitaph, although which animal or bird is meant by the following 
word kukuti is not easy to interprete. It may probably be the 
Turkic (Karaim) koghut («cock») [188, 517]. However, the 
presence of this year in the Etruscan calendar needs to be 
identified. 
 
 127
In another epitaph (ka mutana thanku ilus) the expression 
tarkhi salvi was not used. However, thanku ilus sounds as      
«year of swine»: Turkic il/yil «year», danggus/ ta(n)guz/dangkuz/ 
tongiz «swine» [194, 268]. 
Thus, we discover old Turkic terms related to the animal 
calendar on Etruscan epitaphs, which was common for old Turkic 
epitaphs: tarkhi (Etruscan) – turkcha («Turkic»); sal – sil/zil/jal 
(«age», «year»), il(us) – il/yıl («year»), thanah –tanak/takaghu 
«hen», thanku- tanguz («swine»), erini – erdi «was», -vi – be/pe, 
instrumental case suffixes («by», «with», «on»). 
The above mentioned Etruscan sentence closely corresponds to 
the Turkic one which is reconstructed using the material of the 
Turkic languages:  
 
          Etruscan                                      Turkic 
 
Tarkhi salvi thanah erini            turkcha sil tanak erdi (irne)  
 
A good knowledge of the Etruscan mythology often helps with 
the interpretation of some Etruscan mythological texts. 
An Etruscan writing on a grave stone sounds as hermial 
kapzna slman [27, 93]. 
 
 
 
In ancient mythology Hermes (Etruscan Herme) was considered 
to be the door-keeper of the next world. The pillars (herms), 
erected on burial places, symbolized guardianship of roads, 
boundaries and doors. Damaging the herms was considered a 
terrible sacrilege [99, 292]. 
The Etruscan writing on a grave pillar, hermial kapzna slman, 
calling people “not to damage Hermes’s door” is evidently old 
 
 128
Turkic. The sentence begins with the name Herme in the genitive 
case (Hermi-al “Hermes’s”). Though this form of the genitive case 
of the noun is characteristic of some Caucasian languages, the 
following words and morphological elements are pure Turkic: 
kapzna is Turkic kapısına (“to his door”: kapı “door”, - sı the 
suffix, denoting possession to the third person singular, and – na 
the indicator of the dative case). The next word – slman is old 
Turkic salman “don’t damage”, “don’t attack” (sal “to damage”, 
“to beat”, “to attack”, - man the suffix of negation in old Turkic). 
It is requested “not to damage Hermes’s door” which 
completely conforms to the mythology mentioned above. 
The following part of the text sounds as sekhis kapzna. 
The noun sekhis, which defines kapzna («to [its] door»), is the 
old Turkic saghis/saghish «the end of the world», «the other 
world») [166, 148; 190, 270]. The expression sekhis kapzna 
which, on the basis of the Turkic facts, is interpreted as «to the 
door of the other world», is the logical continuation of the first part: 
«Don’t attack Hermes’s door, the door of the other world». 
The Etruscan text is both lexically and morphologically 
analogical with its Turkic variant - except the genitive case suffix -
al in the word Hermial («Hermes’s): 
   
     Etruscan                                        Old Turkic 
 
hermial kapzna slman                [hermesin] kapısına salman 
sekhis kapzna                               saghis kapısına 
 
 An Etruscan picture describes two fighting warriors, one of 
which is obviously beating the other. The victorious warrior utters 
to his counterpart the phrase enkten, which is completely 
associated with the content of the picture [92, 53].  
We guess its meaning through the old Turkic engdin («you are 
taken aback!», «you became flustered!»). This is completely 
conformable to the situation where the warrior really looks taken 
aback - his arm being speared by the arrow of the winning soldier. 
   
 
 129
 
 
Another thematic group includes the Etruscan texts devoted to 
praising the beauty of a deceased woman. Turkic appellatives 
denoting beauty, elegance, etc. appear to be the dominating 
elements of such texts. 
In several writings of this kind the word thumsa always 
coincides with the Turkic yumshak “soft”, “sweet”, “elegant”: 
sözü yumshak “with pleasant word”, yiligh yumshak “with 
elegant behaviour”. 
The Turkic yumshak (<yumsha) differs from the Etruscan 
thumsa with the pre-positional th~y consonant interchange, 
characteristic of numerous Etruscan~Turkic parallels. The Chuvash 
variant of this word, like the Etruscan thumsa, is told with the 
interdental th: themthe “soft”, “pleasant”. This is the case with 
many Etruscan~Chuvash variants of Turkic words (Etruscan. 
thesan “radiance”, “the goddess of daybreak”, Chuvash. thithen 
“shining”, “beaming”, old Turkic. yashin “ radiance”, “the god of 
thunder”, etc). 
The correspondence of the Etruscan~Chuvash pre-positional th, 
as mentioned above, is an important key to revealing the mystery of 
the Etruscan language. 
 
 130
The Etruscan expression thumsa matan [92, 296], referring to 
a young woman, is interpreted as “pleasant belle” in which matan 
can be compared with a Turkic matan - a dialectism denoting 
“beautiful woman” [162, 237]. 
Another Etruscan sentence, referring to the deceased woman- 
thumsa kilva neri [92, 288], means “a fairy with a sweet tongue”. 
The first two words are Turkic: thumsa - Turkic yumshak, 
Chuvash themthe “sweet”, “elegant”, “pleasant”; kilva-Turkic kil, 
Chuvash (dial.) kêl “tongue” [43, 113]. The etruscan kilva 
structurally coincides with the old Bulgarian chilkhi, the Chuvash 
chelkhe (“tongue”) [43, 113]. 
thumsa kilva is both phonetically (th) and structurally 
consonant with the analogical expression in the Chuvash language: 
themthe chelkhe “sweet tongue”. Only the last word of the line –
neri is not Turkic. It is interpreted through Latin and Greek as 
nereid, nereis (“fairy”). 
Both the Etruscan kilva and Turkic kil (“tongue”) has the same 
derivations with the meaning “to beg”, “to request”: Etr. kle, 
Turk.kile, Chuv.kêle. In the light of the Turkic kile/kêle the 
Etruscan kle, usually used before names of gods, finds its right 
interpretation: kle Vanth “beg Vanth”, “request Vanth” (an 
Etruscan god) [92, 292 ]. 
This expression is observed in a text where we also see some other 
Turkic words all semantically associated with worshipping gods: 
 
hekia aisna kle vanth 
khim enak usil repine tenthas [92, 269] 
 
The verb hekia referring to Aisna, an Etruscan goddess, is the 
old Turkic ök/ögi («to praise») [176, 495]: «praise Aisna». 
The whole line means «praise Aisna, request Vanth». 
heki(a) differs from the Turkic ök/ögi basically with the 
prosthetic h, characteristic of numerous Etruscan words: hinthu – 
old Turkic inchü («heritage»). 
 
 
 131
The prosthetic h is also characteristic of Khalaj, an old Turkic 
dialect: hil – common Turkic  öl «to die», hirkin – common Turkic 
erken «early», etc [24, 185-189]. 
In the second line of the text khim enak, used as an attribute of 
Usil, an Etruscan god of the sun, is evidently interpreted by means 
of the Turkic (Chuvash) khim («sparkle», «radiance») and eŋek 
(«face», «cheek») to emphasize the radiance of Usil: khim enak 
Usil, thus, means «Usil with radiant face». 
In the Chuvash language khem is used in analogical 
combinations such as khem kuth «flaming eye», khemle 
pitthamarti «sparkling face» [200]. 
«Sparkling face» was a usual attribute of the heroes in the 
«Iliad» («Feano with sparkling face»). 
In the line khim enak usil repine tenthas the only unknown 
word is repine, but tenthas is a cognate of the old Turkic teŋ, 
teŋdesh, teŋeshi («equal», «similar», «like» [176, 551-552; 202, 
724], which logically completes the line: «similar to Usil with a 
radiant face». 
The expression khim enak («radiant face») is also used as an 
attribute of Kath, another Etruscan god of the sun: 
 
kathre khim enak «Kath with a radiant face».[92, 296]. 
 
In an Etruscan text we also observe the expression «god-faced», 
widely used in the «Iliad» as an attribute of heroes: god-faced 
Paris, god-faced Ayaks. 
The same expression is found to refer to Kekha - an Etruscan god: 
kekham enak eisna hinthu «Kekha-faced Eisna’s heritage» 
hinthu is the Turkic inchü («heritage»). 
Turkic inchü was used in this meaning in an old Turkic (Avar) 
writing found in Eastern Europe: ana ed inchü «mother’s wealth 
heritage» (ana «mother», ed «wealth» [25, 34]. 
Thus, all the key words of above mentioned texts are Turkic 
words, semantically connected with worshipping, praising, etc: kel 
«tongue», kele «to request», khem «radiance», eŋek «face», ök/ögi 
«to praise», teŋdesh «similar», «equal». 
 
 132
The Turkic equivalents of the texts only differ from the 
Etruscan ones with the absence of the names of the gods: 
 
    Etruscan                                  Turkic/Chuvash 
 
thumtha kilva                        themthe chelkhe «sweet tongue» 
      hekia Eisna kle Vanth           öqi …..       kele … 
      «praise Eisna, reguest           «praise …   request» 
     wanth» 
 
      khim enak usil repine          khem eŋek … -e       teŋdesh 
      tenthas                                  «similar to ... with radiant face» 
 
      kekham enak eisna hinthu    …. eŋek … inchü 
      «Kekha-faced Eisna’s            «face …heritage» 
      heritage» 
 
Thus, we can observe a number of important factors to prove 
the Turkic character of the Etruscan language:  
1. In the vocabulary of the translated Etruscan texts we clearly 
observe systematic consonant shifts between the Etruscan and 
Turkic languages. Simultaneously we observe stable corresponden-
ce of some Etruscan and Chuvash consonants which transparently 
serve as a key to the origin of numerous Etruscan words. This 
correspondence is based on the historical relationship between the 
Etruscans and the ancestors of the Chuvash and Bulgars – the 
Cimmerians, who seem to have dominated the Turkic ethnogeny of 
the Etruscans.   
2. The semantics of some Etruscan words has been interpreted 
by some researchers through the combinatorial method or bilingual 
texts either correctly or closer to their original meaning, but they 
were considered to be of unknown origin. We have discovered that 
these words are of Turkic origin. 
Some of them have  been touched upon in the texts we have 
interpreted. The verb flerth, for instance, was interpreted by  some 
Etruscologists as denoting «to show itself». This is the same Turkic 
belirt («to show itself», «to signify») which differs from the 
 
 133
Etruscan one in the widely spread pre-positional (b-f) and post-
positional (th-t) consonant shifts. 
A vivid example, that we dealt with is the Etruscan thesan 
(«radiance», «daybreak»), which corresponds to the Chuvash 
thithen «shining» (<thith «to shine», the old Turkic yashin). 
There are other examples. The Etruscan kleva, interpreted as «a 
ritual offering» [157] is the same keleu «praying», «supplication», 
used in Turkic ritual texts with this meaning. Both kleva and    
keleu originate from the cognate verbs – the Etruscan kle, the 
Turkic kele «to pray», «to request». We have observed the 
Etruscan kle to be used in ritual texts in the analogical meaning 
before the names of gods. 
The verb hec, interpreted correctly («to add») was considered to 
be of unknown origin [157], while it is, in fact, the Turkish ek 
«addition» (>ek-le «to add») [18, 297]. 
The Etruscan makte, interpreted correctly («to praise») was 
established to be the Turkic makta («to praise» <mak «praise», ta, 
verb forming suffix) [18, 258]. This word is among the Etruscan 
borrowings in Latin (macto «to praise»). 
The Etruscan thapin and tiv, correctly interpreted by 
researchers as «to worship», and «to show», are found to be the 
Turkic words tapin («to worship»), tiv/teg («to touch upon», «to 
describe», «to deal with»). 
The Etruscan gloss thruna, presented in a source denoting 
«power» [112, 353], is the same turun (a high title of feudal 
nobility) in the Old Bulgar language [65, 166]. 
Some Etruscan words used in ritual texts were not interpreted 
correctly being generally associated with the notion of ritual. For 
instance, santi is presented as «a kind of offering», while it is the 
old Turkic sandi («honourable»). Santi is used in a ritual text in 
combination with arvus (old Turkic arvish «conjuration»: santi 
arvus – old Turk. sandi arvish «honourable conjuration». 
3. The Turkic appellatives, discovered in each Etruscan text we 
have interpreted, are not semantically chaotic, but harmonious, all 
 
 134
referring to a definite branch of religious ceremonies: in the texts 
devoted to sacrificing we mostly discovered Turkic words denoting 
names of several sacrificial foodstuffs and semantically related 
verbs; in the texts dealing with ceremonial eating we mostly 
discovered Turkic culinary terms denoting eating, drinking, drinks. 
etc.; in the text dealing with the parting of two persons we observed 
the Turkic words denoting a wish for good journey and health. 
Finally under the picture with the description of a young man 
riding a horse we discovered a transparent Turkic expression with 
the meaning “to ride a horse”.  
4. Finding correspondence between the content of the text and 
the picture that accompanies it appears to be an important factor in 
showing the accuracy of translations. We clearly observed this  
identity in the pictures in which a young woman  is seeing a soldier 
off to his country (ii ulath ilina -Turkic ii ulash iline), a man is 
rapidly driving a chariot joined by horses (athe kufarce - Turkic 
ate kuvardı), and two warriors are fighting  (enkten - Turkic 
enqdin), etc. 
5. We also witnessed the advantage of possessing information 
about the mythology of the old inhabitants of the region, which 
permits us to identify some expressions related to mythological 
views (hermial kapzna slman - Turkic. Hermesin kapısına 
salman). 
All these factors assist the translator with preliminary 
information, foretelling what can be described in the texts. 
6. In addition, the dominating morphological system, including 
most case forms of the noun, and categories of the verb, are 
evidently Turkic; 
Thus, in identifying the origin of early Mediterranean languages 
the Turkic character of the Etruscan writings appears to be a 
dominating factor and is logically consistent with the Turkic 
onomasticon of the region, the substratum of the same origin in old 
Greek and Latin, and with stories from old European sources. 
 
 
 135
Ëèòåðàòóðå  
 
Ûí Òóðêèú ëàíýóàýåñ 
 
1. Aslanov V. Azərbaycan dilinin tarixinə dair tədqiqlər:          
2 cilddə, I c., Bakı: Elm, 2002, 155 s. 
2. Azərbaycan tarixi: I c. Bakı: Azərnəşr, 1994, 687 s. 
3. Azərbaycan tarixi üzrə qaynaqlar / Bakı: Azərbaycan 
Universiteti nəşriyyatı, 1989, 325 s. 
4. Azərbaycan Sovet Ensiklopediyası, 10 cilddə, IV c. Bakı: 
ASEBR, 1980, 592 s. 
5. Erməni şeri antologiyası. Bakı: Azərbaycan Dövlət 
nəşriyyatı, 1954, 477 s. 
6. Əliyarov S. «Kitabi-dədəm Qorqud» əlyazmaları üzərində 
çalışmalar / Azərbaycan filologiya məsələləri. Bakı: Elm, 
1991, №3, s.135-160. 
7. Əzizxan Tanrıverdi. Qədim türk mənbələrində yaşayan şəxs 
adları. Bakı: Nurlan, 2009, 442 s. 
8. Hacıyev T.İ. Azərbaycan dilinin yazıyaqədərki izləri 
haqqında/ Azərbaycan filologiya məsələləri. Bakı: Elm, 
1983, s.25-34. 
9. Homer. «İliada». «Odisseya». Bakı: Yazıçı, 1986, 685 s. 
10. Kalankatuklu M. Albaniya tarixi. Mxitar Q. Alban sal-
naməsi. Bakı: Elm, 1993, 269 s. 
11. Kazımov Q. Azərbaycan dilinin tarixi. Bakı: Təhsil, 2003, 
583 s. 
12. Qaraşarlı Ç. Aralıq dənizi hövzəsinin erkən sakinləri – 
Türklər. Bakı: Elm və təhsil 2009, 280.  
13. Qeybullayev Q. Azərbaycan türklərinin təşəkkülü tari-
xindən. Bakı: Azərnəşr, 1994, 248 s. 
14. Mahmud Kaşğari. Divani Lüğat-it-Türk. IV, Bakı: Ozan, 
2006, 752 s. 
15. Seyidov M. Azərbaycan xalqının soykökünü düşünərkən. 
Bakı: Yazıçı, 1989, 486 s. 
 
 136
16. Yadigar (Veysəlli) F. German dilçiliyinə giriş. Bakı: 
«Təhsil» NPM, 2003, 408 s. 
17. Yusifov M. Türkologiyaya giriş. Bakı: Nurlan, 2001, 200 s. 
18. Ayda A. Etrüskler (Tursakalar) Türk idiler. Ankara: 
Ayyıldız Matbaası A.Ş., 1992, 390 s. 
19. Baştu M.İ. Ş.T.Şan kızı destanı. 882 yıl. İstanbul: Acar, 
1991, 419 s. 
20. Bayat F. Türk boy adlarının etimolojisi. Ankara: Üç Ok 
Yayıncılık, 2005, 176 s. 
21. Bayram S. Kaynaklara göre Güney-Doğu Anadou’da Proto-
Türk izleri. Türk Dünyası Araştırmaları Vakfı, 1988, 126 s. 
22. Donuk A. Eski Türk devletlerinde idâri-askeri ünvan ve 
terimlər. İstanbul: Türk Dünyası Araştırmaları Vakfı, 1988, 
109 s. 
23. Gedikli Y. Bulgar Türkçesinin Anadolu ya kazınan üç 
kelime: çağ, kugar, harani // Türk Dünyası Araştırmaları, 
2004, №149, Nisan, s.67-90. 
24. Gülsevin G. Türk dilinde bir kelime başı ünsürü üzerine // 
Türk Dünyası Araştırmaları Yıllığı, Belleten № 1987, 
Ankara, 1992, s.173-200. 
25. Harmatta Y. Avarların dili  sorununa dair. Doğu Avrupa’da 
Türk oyma yazılı kitabeler. Ankara: Türk Tarih Kurumu 
Basımevi, 1988, 44 s. 
26. Karagöz İ. Mifolojide Doğu Karadeniz. Ankara: İsmat 
Yayınları, 2003, 145 s. 
27. Mirşan K. Proto-Türkçe Yazıtlar. Ankara: Çevre Sokak 8 
a/3, 1970, 301 s. 
28. Mizi-ulu İ. Merkezi Qafqazın etnik tarihinin köklerine 
doğru. İstanbul: Türk Dili Araştırmaları Vakfı, 1993, 141 s. 
29. Sevinc N. Gaziantep’te yer adları ve Türk boyları, Türk 
aşiretleri, Türk oymakları // Türk Dünyası Araştırmaları, 
1983, №26, Ekim, s.1-138.  
30. Togan A. Zeki Veledi. Umumi Türk tarihinə giriş. İstanbul: 
Endirim Kitabevi, 1981, 537 s. 
 
 137
31. Üstüner A.C. Boskır göçebeleri kimmerler ve iskitler // 
Türk Dünyası Araştırmaları, 2001, №135, Aralık, s. 189-
202. 
32. Japarov Ş. Kırqız adam attarı. Frunze: İlim, 1989, 115 s. 
33. Zəkiev M.Z. Tatar xalkı telenen barlıkka kilüe. Kazan: 
Tatarıstan kitap nəşriətı, 1977, 206 s. 
34. Konıratbaev G. Kazak eposı jəne törkoloqiə. Almatı: 
Qılım,1987,365 s. 
35. Ortalık Kazakstannın jer-su attarı/. Jauaptı redaktorı: 
T.Janüzakov. Almatı: Qılım, 1989, 255 s. 
 
Ûí Ñëàâîíèàí ëàíýóàýåñ  
 
36. Абдрахманов А.А. Этимологические исследования 
средневековых топонимов центрального Казахстана / 
Проблемы этимологии тюркских языков. Алма-Ата: 
Гылым, 1990, с. 258-264. 
37. Абрамзон М. Киргизы и их этногенетические и исто-
рико-культурные связи. Л.: Наука, 1971, 402 с. 
38. Агеева Р.А. Происхождение имен рек и озер. М.: Наука, 
1985, 142 с. 
39. Айдаров Г. Язык орхонских памятников древнетюркской 
письменности VII века. Алма-Ата: Наука, 1971, 273 с. 
40. Алиев К. Античные источники по истории Азербайд-
жана. Баку: Элм, 1986, 131 с. 
41. Аполлодор. Мифологическая библиотека. Л.: Наука, 
1972, 214 с. 
42. Артамонов М.И. История хазар, Л.: Изд-во Гос. Эрми-
тажа, 1962, 523 с. 
43. Ахметьянов Р.Г. Обшая лексика материальной культу-
ры народов Среднего Повольжя. М.: Наука, 1989, 200 с. 
44. Байчоров С.Я. Этимология этнонима Ас/Проблемы эти-
мологии тюркских языков, Алма-Ата: Гылым, 1990, 
279-290 с. 
 
 138
45. Баскаков Н.А. Введение в изучение тюркских языков. 
М.: Высшая школа, 1969, 383 с. 
46. Баскаков Н.А. Диалект лебединских татар-чалканцев 
(куу-кижи). М.: Наука, 1983, 233 с. 
47. Баскаков Н.А. Историко-типологическая морфология 
тюркских языков. М.: Наука, 1979, 274 с. 
48. Баскаков Н.А. Историко-типологическая фонология 
тюркских языков. Л.: Наука, 1988, 208 с. 
49. Баскаков Н.А. Тюркская лексика в «Слове о полку Иго-
рове». М.: Наука, 1985, 207 с. 
50. Батманов И.А. Таласские памятники древнетюркской 
письменности. Фрунзе: Илим, 1971, 65 с. 
51. Библия. Книги священного писания Ветхого и Нового 
завета. М.: Синодальное издание, 1991, 1213 с. 
52. Велиев (Бахарлы) М.Г. Азербайджан. Баку: 1921, 302 с. 
53. Велков В., Горева З., Тъпкова-Заимова В. Извори за ис-
торията на Тракия и траките. т.1, София: Бьлгарската 
Академия на Науките, 1981, 330 с. 
54. Вейнберг И.П. Человек в культуре древнего Ближнего 
Востока. М.: Наука, 1986, 208 с. 
55. Гамкрелидзе Т.В., Иванов В.В. Индоевропейский язык 
и индоевропейцы. т.I-II, Тбилиси: Тбилисский 
университет, 1984, 1328 с. 
56. Гарипова Ф.Г. Исследование по гидронимии Татарста-
на. М.: Наука, 1991, 294 с. 
57. Гейбуллаев Г.А. К этногенезу азербайджанцев. т.1, 
Баку: Элм, 1991, 549 с. 
58. Гейбуллаев Г.А. Топонимия Азербайджана. Баку: Элм, 
1986, 191 с. 
59. Геродот. История в девяти книгах. Л.: Наука, 1972, 599 
с. 
60. Гиндин Л.А. К проблеме генетической принадлежности 
«пеласгского догреческого слоя» // Вопросы языкоз-
нания, 1971, №1, с.45-53. 
 
 139
61. Гиндин Л.А. Население гомеровской Трои. М.: Наука, 
1993, 210 с. 
62. Гуревич А.Я. История и сага. М.: Наука, 1972, 198 с. 
63. Данте А. Малые произведения. Л.: Наука, 1954, 527 с. 
64. Денисов П.В. Религиозные верования чуваш. Чебокса-
ры: Чувашгосиздат, 1959, 408 с. 
65. Денисов П.В. Этнокультурные параллели дунайских 
болгар и чувашей. Чебоксары: Чувашгосиздат, 1969, 
176 с. 
66. Десницкая А.В. Албанский язык в истории сравнитель-
ного языкознания / Балканская филология, Л.: 
Ленинградский университет, 1970, с.38-61. 
67. Дёрфер Г. О языке гуннов / Зарубежная тюркология. 
М.: Наука, 1986, с.71-134. 
68. Динков Б. Етруската загадка. София: Бьлгарската Ака-
демия на Науките, 1984, 125 с. 
69. Джумагулов И. Язык сиро-тюркских (несторианских) 
памятников Киргизии. Фрунзе: Илим, 1971, 161 с. 
70. Добродомов И.Г. Тюркизмы славянских языков как 
источник сведений по исторической фонетике тюркских 
языков // Советская тюркология, 1974, №2, с.34-43. 
71. Документы архива хивинских ханов по истории и 
этнографии каракалпаков / Под ред. Тверитинова А.С. 
М.: Наука, 1967, 539 с. 
72. Златковская Т.Д. Мёзия в. I-II веках нашей эры. М.: 
Изд-во АН СССР, 1951, 136 с. 
73. Иванов В.В. Древневосточные связи этрусского языка / 
Древний восток. М.: Наука, 1988, с.208-218. 
74.  Ильинская Л.С. Легенды и археология. М.: Наука, 1988, 
175 с. 
75.  Исмаилов М. Азербайджанцы: к вопросу об этногенезе 
// «Молодость», 1988, №8, 18-23 с. 
76.  История Европы. В 2-х томах, т.I. Древняя Европа. Под 
ред-ей Голубцева Е. С.. и др. М.: Наука, 1988, 703 с. 
 
 140
77.  Калыгин В.П. Язык древнейшей ирландской поэзии. М.: 
Наука, 1986, 128 с. 
78. Каховский В.Ф. Происхождение чувашского народа. 
Чебоксары: Чувашгосиздат, 1965, 484 с. 
79. Коковцев П.К. Еврейско-хазарская переписка в Х веке. 
Л.: АН СССР, 1932, 135 с. 
80.  Кондратов А. Земля людей-земля языков. М.: Детская 
литература, 1974, 191 с. 
81.  Кондратов А.М., Шеворошкин В.В. Когда молчат пись-
мена. М.: Наука, 1970, 226 с. 
82. Кононов А.Н. Грамматика языка тюркских рунических 
памятников VII-IХ вв., Л.: Наука, 1980, 255 с. 
83.  Корнелий Тацит. История ч.II, Л.: Наука, 1969, 370 с. 
84.  Короглы Х.Г. Взаимосвязи эпоса народов Средней 
Азии и Азербайджана. М.: Наука, 1983, 336 с. 
85.  Кравчук А. Троянская война. М.: Наука, 1991, 224 с. 
86.  Кречмер П. Тирренские надписи лемносской стелы. Об 
этрусском языке / Тайны древних письмен. Проблемы 
дешифровки. М.: Прогрес, 1976, с.336-348. 
87.  Кудачина Н. К этимологии «бай» в алтайском языке / 
Советская тюркология, 1980, №5, с.83-86. 
88.  Кузеев Р.Г. Происхождение башкирского народа. М.: 
Наука, 1974, 571 с. 
89.  Латыпов Ф. Элементы морфологии этрусского языка в 
свете пратюркской гипотезы // Вопросы Азербайджан-
ской филологии, вып. III, Баку: Элм, 1991, с.105-117. 
90. Левитская Л.С. Историческая морфология чувашского 
языка. М.: Наука, 1976, 206 с. 
91.  Лукиан. Избранное. М.: Художественная литература, 
1987, 623 с. 
92. Майяни З. Этруски начинают говорить. М.: Наука, 
1966, 333 с. 
93.  Мамедов А. Теоретические проблемы восстановления 
первичных корней в тюркских языках / Вопросы 
 
 141
азербайджанской филологии, вып. II, Баку: Элм, 1984, 
с.5-21. 
94.  Мамедов А. Тюркские согласные: анлаут и комбинато-
рика. Баку: Элм, 1985, 206 с. 
95.  Матвеев К., Сазонов А. Пять жизней древней Сури. М.: 
Молодая гвардия, 1989, 190 с. 
96. Марк Валерий Марциал. Эпиграммы. М.: Художествен-
ная литература, 1968, 487 с. 
97.  Международные отношения в Центральной Азии в 
ХVII-ХVII вв. М.: Наука, 1989, 344 с. 
98.  Мельникова Е.А. Древнескандинавские географичес-
кие сочинения. М.: Наука, 1986, 230 с. 
99.  Мифы народов мира. В 2-х т., т.I, М.: Советская энцикло-
педия, 1980, 672 с. 
100. Моллова М.Р. Ономастические исследования о «ба-
зар», и «басар» //Советская тюркология, 1974, №6. 
с.68-74. 
101. Молчанов А.А., Нерознак В.П. Шарынкин С.Я. Памят-
ники древнейшей греческой письменности. М.: Наука, 
1988, 189 с. 
102. Мурад Аджи. Европа, тюрки, Великая степь. М.: 
Мысль, 1988, 334 с. 
103. Наджип Э.Н. Исследования по источникам тюркских 
языков ХI-ХIV вв. М.: Наука, 1989, 283 с. 
104. Немировский А.И. Античный мир о человеке–лебеде и 
его древнеславянские параллели /Норция (Проблемы 
истории и культуры древнейших обществ Средизем-
номоря). Воронеж: Воронежский университет, 1978, 
с.23-41. 
105. Немировский А.И., Харсекин А.И. Этруски. Введение 
в этрускологию. Воронеж: Воронежский университет, 
1969, 180 с. 
106. Немировский А.И. Этруски. От мифа к истории. М.: 
Наука, 1983, 261 с. 
 
 142
107. Нерознак В.П. Палеобалканские языки. М.: Наука, 
1978, 231 с. 
108. Никитин А. Сатархи становятся явью // «Вокруг 
света», 1984, 4 апрель, с.30-33. 
109. Никулице И.Т. Северные фракийцы в VI-I вв. до н.э. 
Кишинев: Штиница, 1982, 270 с. 
110. Новиков М.Н. Ранние этапы этнической истории 
Швейцарии (до середины I тысячилетия н.э.) / 
Романия и Барбария. М.: Наука, 1989, с.7-24. 
111. Откупшиков Ю.В. Догреческий субстрат. У истоков 
европейской цивилизации. Л.: Ленинградский универ-
ситет, 1985, 259 с. 
112. Паллоттино М. Проблема этрусского языка / Тайны 
древних письмен. Проблемы дешифровки. М.: 
Прогресс, 1976, с.349-3 83. 
113. Письма Плиния Младшего. М.: Наука, 1984, 407 с. 
114. Плетнева С.А. Хазары. М.: Наука, 1986, 92 с. 
115. Плутарх. Срванительные жизнеописания. В. 3-х т., т. I, 
М.: Академия Наук, 1961, 503 с. 
116. Плутарх. Сравнительные жизнеописания, в 3-х т., т.II. 
М.: Академия Наук, 1963, 548 с. 
117. Плутарх. Сравнительные жизнеописания, в 3-х т., т.III, 
М.: Наука, 1964, 546 с. 
118. Публий Вергилий Марон. Буколики. Георгики. 
Энеида. М.: Художественная литература, 1971, 447 с. 
119. Радлов В.В. Из Сибири. М.: Наука, 1989, 749 с. 
120. Райт Д. К. Географические представления в эпоху 
крестовых походов. М.: Наука, 1988, 478 с. 
121. Римшнейдер М. От Олимпии до Ниневия во времена 
Гомера. М.: Наука, 1977, 165 с. 
122. Самойлович А.Н. Тюркология и новое учение о языкe. 
ХLV Академику Н.Я. Марру. М. - Л.: АН СССР. 1935, 
с.113-120. 
 
 143
123. Саттаров Г.Ф. Этнотопонимия Татарии // Советская 
тюркология, 1980, №1, с.32-49. 
124. Серебренников Б.А., Гаджиева Н.З. Сравнительно-
историческая грамматика тюркских языков. М.: 
Наука, 1986, 302 с. 
125. Справочник личных имен народов РСФСР. М.: Рус-
ский язык, 1987, 655 с. 
126. Суперанская А.В. Имя через века и страны. М.: Наука, 
1990, 192 с. 
127. Тараканов И.В. О булгарских заимствованиях в уд-
муртском языке / Проблемы исторической лексиколо-
гии чувашского языка. Чебоксары, 1980, с.127-136. 
128. Тенишев Э.Р. Строй саларского языка. М.: Главная ре-
дакция восточной литературы, 1976, 575 с. 
129. Тенишев Э.Р. Строи сарыг-югурского языка. М.: Нау-
ка, 1976, 307 с. 
130. Тер-Мкртичян Л.Х. Армянские источники о Средней 
Азии VIII-ХVIII вв., М.: Наука, 1985, 190 с. 
131. Тит Ливий. История Рима от основания города. В 2-х 
т.Т.I, М.: Наука, 1989, 576 с. 
132. Тит Ливий. История Рима от основания города. Б. 2-х 
т., Т.II, М.: Наука, 1991, 527 с. 
133. Толстова Л.С. Отголоски ранных этапов этногенеза 
народов Средней Азии в ее исторической ономастике 
(ономастика Средней Азии. М.: Наука, 1978, с.6-17. 
134. Тугушева Л.Ю. Уйгурская версия биографии Сюань – 
Цзана. М.: Наука, 1991, 590 с. 
135. Феокрит Мосх-Бион. Идиллии и эпиграммы. М.: АН 
СССР, 1958, с.326. 
136. Флоренсов Н.А. Троянская война и поэма Гомера. М.: 
Наука, 1991, 145 с. 
137. Фол А. Тракия и Балканите през ранно-еллинискате 
епоха. София: Наука и изкуство, 1975, 270 с. 
 
 144
138. Хакимзянов Ф.С. Язык эпитафий волжских булгар. М.: 
Наука, 1978, 206 с. 
139. Хойслер А. Германский героический эпос и сказание о 
Нибелунгах. М.: Иностранная литература, 1960, 446 с. 
140. Цицерон. Философские трактаты. М.: Наука, 1985, 381 с. 
141. Чичуров И.С. Византийские исторические сочинения. 
М.: Наука, 1980, 215 с. 
142. Шайхулов А.Г. Татарские и башкирские имена тюркс-
кого происхождения. Уфа, БГУ, 1983, 72 с. 
143. Щербаков В. Все об Атлантиде. М.: Общество по изу-
чению тайн и загадок земли. Ларге, 1990, 213 с. 
 
Ûí Ýåðìàí ëàíýóàýåñ  
 
144. Áëåýåí Ú.W. Òðîé àíä Òðîéàíñ. Íåw Éîðê: Ïåíýóèí 
Áîîêñ, 1963. 
145. Áðàíäåíñòåèí W. Äèå Ùåðêóíôò äåð Åòðöñêåð. Ëåèïçèý. 
1937. 
146. Ôîwëåð Ì., Wîëôå Ð.Ý. Ìàòåðèàëñ ôîð òùå Ñòóäé îô Åòðóñúàí 
Ëàíýóàýå. Û-ÛÛ, Ëîíäîí: Ìàäèñîí àíä Ìèëwàóêåå, 1965, 
604 ï. 
147. Ýàíäåâà Ð. Òùðàêèåí óíä äèå Òùðàêåð èí äåð wåðêåí âîí 
Ùîðàç / Ñòóäèà èí Ùîíîðåì. Âåñåëèíè Âåñåâëèåâ. Ñîôèà: 
Àúàäåìèà Ëèòòåðàðóì Áóëýàðèúà, 1978, ï.450-462. 
148. Ýåîôôðåé îô Ìîíìîóòù. Òùå Ùèñòîðé îô òùå Êèíýñ îô 
Áðèòàèí. Ëîíäîí: Ïåíýóèí Áîîêñ, 1968, 373 ï. 
149. Êèòòî Í.Î. Ô. Òùå Ýðååêñ. Ëîíäîí: Ïåíýóèí Áîîêñ, 1957, 
256 ï. 
150. Ìîðàâúñèê Ý. Áéçàíòèíîòóðúèúà, ÛÛ. Ñïðàúùåñòå äåð 
Òöðêâîëêåí èí äåí Áéçàíòèíèñúùåí ãóåëëåí. Áåðëèí: 
Àêàäåìèå — Âåðëàý, 1993, 376 ï. 
151. Ïàëëîòòèíî Ì. Òùå Åòðóñúàíñ. Ëîíäîí: Ïåíýóèí Áîîêñ, 
1975. 
152. Ñúùöòç. Àí Àðìåíî-Êèïúùàê Úùðîíèúëå îí òùå Ïîëèñù — 
Òóðêèñù Wàðñ èí 1620-1621. Áóäàïåñò: Àêàäåìèàè Êèàäî, 
1968, 215 ï. 
 
 145
153. Wåëëàðä Æ. Òùå ñåàðúù ôîð Åòðóñúàíñ. Ýðåàò Áðèòàèí, 2-íä 
åä., 1973, 223 ï. 
154. ùòòï: // ýåîúèòåñ. úîì. /àòùåíñ / úðåòå / 4060/ úîðòóíà. ùòìë. 
155. ùòòï. // ýåîúèòèåñ. úîì / àòùåíñ / úðåòå / 4060/ äåëïùè. ùòìë. 
156. ùòòï: www.ýåîúèòèåñ. Úîì /Àòùåíñ/Úðåòå/4060/ ÚÈÅ 5211. 
ùòìë 
157. ùòòï://ýåîúèòèåñ.úîì/àòùåíñ/úðåòå/4060/äèúòèîíàðèå åòðóñãóå. 
158. ùòòï: // ýåîúèòèåñ.úîì /àòùåíñ/úðåòå /4060/ ïåðóãèà. ùòìë. 
159. ùòòï: //www ôðèåñèåí.úîì / ðîìàíèî. ùòì ïðèíúå 
160. ùòòï: // ýåîúèòèåñ.úîì /Àòùåíñ/Úðåòå/4060/úàïóà.ùòìë 
161. ùòòï: //åí.wèêòèîíàðé.îðý wèêè /Ûíäåõ: Åòðóñúàí» 
 
Äèúòèîíàðèåñ 
   
162. Àëòàéëû Ñ. Àçåðáàéúàí Òöðê÷åñè Ñþçëöüö, 2 úèëòòå, ÛÛ ú., 
Èñòàíáóë: Ìèëëè Åüèòèì Áàñûìåâè, 1994, 1292 ñ. 
163. Àçÿðáàéúàí äèàëåêòîëîæè ëöüÿòè. Û ú., / Ì.Ø.Øèðÿëèéåâ âÿ 
Ì.È.Èñëàìîâóí ðåäàêòÿñè èëÿ. Àíêàðà: Òöðê Äèëè Êóðóìó 
Éàéûíëàðû, 1999, 374 ñ. 
164. Åðåí Ù. Òöðê Äèëèíèí Åòèìîëîæè ñþçëöüö, Àíêàðà: Êûçûëàé, 
1999, 512 ñ. 
165. Êàðøûëàøòûðìàëû Òöðê Ëåù÷åëåðè ñþçëöýö, 2 úèëòòå, Û ú. 
Êîìèñéîí áàøêàíû Åðúèëàñóí À.Á., Àíêàðà: Êöëòöð 
Áàêàíëûüû, 1991, 1183 ñ.  
166. «Êèòàáè-Äÿäÿ Ãîðãóä»óí ëöüÿòè / À.Àõóíäîâóí ðåäàêòÿñè 
èëÿ. Áàêû: Åëì, 1999, 203 ñ. 
167. Òöðê÷å ñþçëöê /Äåíåòëåéåí Ð. Òîïàðëû. Àíêàðà: Òöðê Äèëè 
Êóðóìó, 2005, 2243 ñ. 
168. Æàíóçàêîâ Ò., Åñáàåâà Ê. Êàçàê åñèìäåðè (àíûêòàìà 
ñþçäóê). Àëìàòû: Ãûëûì, 1988, 488 ñ. 
169. Башкирско-русский словарь / Под ред. Ахмерова К.3. 
и др. М.: Госиздат ино. и нац. словарей, 1958, 804 с. 
170. Будагов Л.З. Срванительный словарь турецко-
татарских наречий. В двух т., т.I, Санктпетербург: 
Типография императорской АН, 1869, 810 с. 
 
 146
171. Будагов Л.З. Сравнительный словарь турецко-татарс-
ких наречий. В двух т., т.II, Санктпетербург: Типогра-
фия императорской АН, 1871, 415 с. 
172. Гагаузско-русско-молдавский словарь / Под ред. 
Н.А.Баскакова. М.: Советская энциклопедия, 1973, 
664 с. 
173. Дворецкий И.Х. Древнегреческо-русский словарь. 2-х 
т., т.I, М.: Госиздат ин. и нац. словарей, 1958, 1043 с. 
174. Дворецкий И.Х. Древнегреческо-русский словарь. В 2-
х т., т.II. М.: Госиздат ино и нац.словарей, 1958, 1049 с. 
175. Дворецкий И.Х. Латинско-русский словарь. Л.: Русс-
кий язык, 1986, 844 с. 
176. Древнетюркский словарь /Авт.сост. Т.А.Боровкова, 
Л.Р.Дмитриева, Р.А.Зырин и др. Л.: Наука, 1969, 676 с. 
177. Иллич-Свитыч В.М. Опыт сравнения ностратических 
языков. Сравнительный словарь. М.: Наука, 1971, 369 с. 
178. Иллич-Свитыч В.М. Опыт сравнения ностратических 
языков. Сравнительный словарь. М.: Наука, 1976, 156 с. 
179. Койчубаев Е. Краткий толковый словарь топонимов 
Казахстана /Под ред. Кайдарова А.Т., Алма-Ата: 
Наука, 1974, 275 с. 
180. Конкошпаев Т.К. Словарь казахских географических 
названий. Алма-Ата: АН Казахской ССР, 1963, 185 с. 
181. Кочергина В.А. Санскритско-русский словарь. М.: 
Советская энциклопедия, 1973, 760 с. 
182. Мещанинов И.И. Аннотированный словарь урартского 
(биайнского) языка. Л.: Наука, 1978, 388 с. 
183. Миланова Д.Э. Шведско-русский словарь. М.: Советс-
кая энциклопедия, 1973, 760 с. 
184. Молчанова Д.Т. Топонимический словарь горного 
Алтая. Горно-Алтайск: Алтайский книгиздат, 1979, 397 с. 
185. Наджип Э.Н. Историко-сравнительной словарь тюркс-
ких языков ХIВ века. М.: Глав.ред. вост. лит., 1979, 
479 с. 
 
 147
186. Похлебкин В.В. Словарь международный символики и 
эмблематики. М.: Центрополиграф, 2007,542 с. 
187. Радлов В.В. Опыт словаря тюркских наречий. В 4-х т., 
т.I, Санкт-петербург: Типография Императорской 
Академии Наук, 1893, 1914 с. 
188. Радлов В.В. Опыт словаря тюркских наречий. В 4-х т., 
т.II, Санкт-петербург: Типография Императорской 
Академии Наук, 1899, 1814 с. 
189. Радлов В.В. Опыт словаря тюркских наречий. В 4-х т., 
т.III, Санкт-петербург: Типография Императорской 
Академии Наук, 1905, 2204 с. 
190. Радлов В.В. Опыт словаря тюркских наречий. В 4-х т., 
т.IV, Санкт-петербург: Типография Императорской 
Академии Наук, 1911, 2230 с. 
191. Рыбакин А. И. Словарь английских фамилий. М.: 
Русский язык, 1986, 576 с. 
192. Севортян Э.В. Этимологический словарь тюркских 
языков. М.: Наука, 1974, 477 с. 
193. Севортян Э.В. Этимологический словарь тюркских 
языков. М.: Наука, 1978, 349 с. 
194. Севортян Э.В. Этимологический словарь тюркских 
языков. М.: Наука, 1980, 395 с. 
195. Татарско-русский словарь. /Под.ред. Османова М.М., 
М.: Советская энциклопедия, 1966, 863 с. 
196. Тенишев Э.Р. Уйгурский диалектный словарь. М.: 
Наука, 1990, 200 с. 
197. Турецко-русский словарь / Под. ред. Мустафаева Э.М. 
– Э и Старостова Л.Н. М.: Русский язык, 1977, 966 с. 
198. Туркменско-русский словарь / Под ред. 
Н.А.Баскакова, Б.А.Каррыева и М.Я. Хамзаева. М.: 
Советская энциклопедия. 1968, 832. 
199. Фасмер М. Этимологический словарь русского языке: 
в 4-х т., т.I, М.: Прогрес, 1986, 573 с. 
 
 148
200. Чувашско-русский словарь / Под ред. Скворцова М.И., 
М.: Русский язык, 1985, 712 с. 
201. Этимологический словарь тюркских языков / Под ред. 
Левитской Л.С., М.: Наука, 1989, 292 с. 
202. Юдахин К.К. Киргизско-русский словарь. М.: Советс-
кая энциклопедия, 1965, 973 с. 
203. Якутско-русский словарь /Под ред. Слепцова П.А. М.: 
Советская Энциклопедия, 1972, 605 с. 
204. New English – Russian Dictionary. In 2 vs, v.II / Edited 
under the direction of I.R.Galperin and E.M. Mednikova. 
M.: Russky Yazık, 1988, 1072 p. 
205. Onions C.T. The Oxford Dictionary of English 
Etymology. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1985, 1025 p. 
 
