1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Famous Sons of 
Ancient and Medieval 
AZERBAIJAN
 
 
 
 
 
Chingiz QAJAR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
2 
 
Shirvanshah Firidun ibn-Firiburz. 
 
 
  
3 
 
Contents 
 
PREFACE  
So was Spoken about Zarathustra. ZOROASTER (ZARDUSHT)    
The King of Manne, a State that Became the Cradle of Animal Style in Art. 
ULLUSUNU  
The Amazon Who Defeated King Cyrus the Great. TOMYRIS    
The Man Who Created Azerbaijan 2,300 Years Ago. ATROPATES    
The King of Azerbaijan and Armenia, the Father of Antony and Cleopatra's 
Daughter-in-law. ARTHAVAZD FROM ATROPATENE  
The Ruler of a Country that Professed Zoroastrianism, Christianity and Islam. 
JAVANSHIR    
Mavali-Arabic Language Poet from Azerbaijan. MUSA IBN-BASHSHAR 
SHAHAVAT    
Twenty Years Face to Face with the Caliphate.   BABEK AL-KHURAMI    
The First Azerbaijani Poet to Become Known in the Middle East. QATRAN 
AZERBAIJANI ( TABRIZI)  
The Holy Shirazian From Shirvan. BABA KUKHI BAKUVI    
The Outstanding Disciple of Ibn Sina. BAHMANYAR AL-AZERBAIJANI   
 The Leader of the Arabian Scientists. KHATIB TABRIZI    
The Great Atabey. SHAMS AD-DIN IL -DENIZ    
The Founder of the Sufi Brotherhood, One of the Most Authoritative In the Islamic 
World. SHIKHAB AD-DIN OMAR SUHRAVARDI   
The Philosopher - a Martyr   SHIKHAB AD-DIN SUHRAVARDI    
 The King of Poets. ABUL-ALA GANJAVI  
The Khakan of Poetry . KHAGANI SHIRVANI  
The Creator of Unique Balms. OMAR IBN-OSMAN KAFI AD-DIN  
The Zenith of the Islamic Renaissance. SHEIKH NIZAMI GANJAVI 
(GANJALI)  
The Great Lady of the Sufi Realm. MEHSET1 GANJAVI  
The Sheikh of Engineers. AJAMI NAKHCHIVANI    
The King Renowned for His Herculean Strength. JAHAN PEHLEVAN     
The Sultan of Azerbaijan. GIZIL ARSLAN    
The King of The Kingdom of Science. NASIR AD-DIN TUSI     
The Greatest of the Grand Viziers. FAZLULLAH RASHID AD-DIN    
The Founder of the Gizilbash Mystic Path. SAFI AD-DIN ISKHAK ARDEBILI    
The Sun that Will Never Set Again. SHAMS TABRIZI   
The Head of the Musical System School.   SAFI AD-DIN URMAVI    
The Interpreter of Sufi Mysteries. MAHMUD SHABUSTARI   
The Author of an Outstanding 13th Century Medical Science Book. MAHMUD 
SHIRVANI   
4 
 
The Medieval Physician Who Treated Stress. ABDUL MEJID TABIB    
The Author of the First Persian-Azerbaijani Dictionary. FAHR AD-DIN 
HINDUSHAH NAKHCHIVANI    
The Encyclopaedia of the Economic and Political Life of Azerbaijan in the Epoch 
of II Khans. MAHAMMED IBN HINDUSHAH NAKHCHIVANI    
The Inventor of a Divine Script.   MIR ALI TABRIZI   
The Philosopher who was Executed and Buried in Nakhchivan. FAZLULLAH 
NAIMI    
The Man Who Spent His Life Looking for Monuments and Miracles of the World. 
ABDRASHID SALEH IBN-NURI AL-BAKUVI   
The Great Poet, Theorist and Propagandist of Khurufism. IMAD AD-DIN 
NASIMI     
Unique in his Time, Unequalled in Musical Art. ABDULGADIR MARAGHI     
An Outstanding Physician from Lenkoran. RAMAZAN IBN SHEIKH ALI 
LENKORANI  
A Medieval Linguist from Garabagh. SADALLAKH AL-BARDAI    
The Shah of the Great Shirvan. SHIRVANSHAH IBRAHIM I     
The Power and Glory. SHIRVANSHAH KHALILULLAH I     
The President of the First Chess Club. HAJI ALI TABRIZI AL-SHATRANJI    
A Shah and Poet. MUZAFFAR AD-DIN JAHAN SHAH (HAGIGI)    
The Creator of a Unique Bronze Couldron. ABD AL-AZIZ TABRIZI    
A Prominent Medieval Calligrapher of Azerbaijan. JAFAR TABRIZI    
The Emperor and Empire.   HASAN BEY BAYANDUR-UZUN HASAN    
The World Famous Sufi from Baku. SEYID YAHYA BAKUVI    
The Great Sheikh, Distinguished General, Eminent Statesman and Notable Poet. 
 SHAH ISMAIL    
Son of the Great Shah Ismail and Father of Shah Abbas the Great. SHAH 
TAHMASIB I    
Like the Light of the Sun. USTAD SULTAN MAHAMMED  
The Cavalier Lifting Clouds of Dust. QARAPIRI BEY QAJAR   
The Titan of all Turkic Poetry.   MAHAMMED FIZULI    
The Author of a Medical Treatise Written in Verse.  YUSIF MAHAMMAD IBN 
YUSIF TABIB    
The Author of the Best Histories. HASAN BEY RUMLU   
The Leading Architect of the Great Moguls. AGHA MTJREK MIRZA GHIYAS    
The Faithful Son of Three Countries. MIR SEYID ALI    
A Prominent King of Garabagh. SULTAN IMAM GULU QAJAR    
The Greatest Among The Greats. SHAH ABBAS THE GREAT    
A Star of Great Magnitude in the Constellation of Talents. SADIQ BEY AFSHAR    
The Sheikh of Calligraphers. ALI RIZA TABRIZI    
Azerbaijani Don Juan at the Spanish Royal Court. DON JUAN PERSIAN   
5 
 
A Famous Doctor and Poet RUQN AD-DIN MASUD MASIHI (DOCTOR 
RUQNA)    
The Last Great Classical Poet of Iran and Azerbaijan. SAIB TABRIZI   
The Shah of Persia Elected by the Great Azeri-Turkic Gurultay (Cungress). 
NADIR SHAH AFSHAR   
The Courageous Freedom Fighter. HAJI CHELEBI   
The Great Khan of the Garabagh Khanate. PAN AHALI BEY JAVANSHIR    
The One Who Restored Azeri Iran   AGHA MAHAMMED SHAH QAJAR   
The Life Sacrificed for Azerbaijan  ABBAS MIRZA SON OF FATALI SHAH 
QAJAR   
 One Struggle More, and I am Free. JAVAD KHAN ZIYAD-OGHLU QAJAR    
A Life Spent in Piligrimage. ZEYNAL AB-DIN   SHIRVANI   
The Master of Love Poetry. MOLLA PANAH VAGIF   
The Key to Wisdom. MIRZA SHAFI    
One of the Last Medieval Encyclopaedists of Azerbaijan. MIR MOHSUN 
NAVVAB GARABAGI    
A Virtuoso Tar Player and the Inventor of the Azerbaijani Tar. SADIQJAN 
GARABAGLI    
A Great Master of Qajar Painting. ALLAHVERDI AFSHAR   
6 
 
FOREWORD 
 
or over 2,000 years, the territory of historical Azerbaijan, stretching from 
the Caucasus Mountains to the Sefid-rud River in Iran, was populated by kindred 
peoples and tribes, who spoke a common language and were notable for their 
original habits, traditions and culture. More than 2,300 years ago, the ruler of 
Media Minor, Aderbad (Atropates in Greek), founded a powerful independent 
state: Aderbadagan (Atropatene). With the expansion of Arabs during the 8th and 
9th Centuries, Aderbadagan, as a pail of a Caliphate and half-independent 
province, was called Azerbaijan (in the Arab manner) - a name that has been 
preserved since then. 
Azerbaijan is a land of plenty with a temperate climate and rich natural 
resources, located at the intersection of routes connecting Sumer, Greek, Roman, 
Iranian, Turkic, Indian, Chinese and other civilizations. All things considered, 
Azerbaijan has been notable since ancient times for its high level of manufacture, 
original culture and history. New religions, religious sects and orders, 
philosophical schools, medicine and sciences sprang up and flourished in the 
region. Prominent Oriental poets and painters created their immortal works there; 
the best samples of their artistic activities are kept in famous museums worldwide. 
F 
7 
 
These works include remarkable miniatures, manuscripts, metalwork, and carpets 
and fabric, manufactured in the territory' of Azerbaijan in the past and present. 
The people of Azerbaijan profess Islam. Azerbaijan adopted the religion 
through its previous experience of preceding great beliefs. Azerbaijan is referred to 
as the birthplace of Zoroastrianism and the motherland of Zoroaster, founder of 
this faith, as medieval Muslim scholars believed. Azerbaijan transformed into one 
of the world's first countries to adopt Christianity and Judaism on its territory. 
Traces of these communities have survived in the northern parts of the country. 
It should be noted that statehood has long been typical for Azerbaijan. 
There were such ancient states as Manna, Aderbadagan, Caucasian Albania, 
Shirvan, and other state formations set up by conquerors from Assyria, Urartu, 
Greece and Rome. Following the establishment of Islam, there sprang up huge 
Turkic-Azeri Empires of Atabeys, Ilkhans, Agh Goyunlu, Gara Goyunlu and 
Safavids with capitals in Azerbaijan (Tabriz, Maragha and Nakhchivan). These 
states were headed by highly educated monarchs who were patrons of culture, 
science and art. Worthy of note was that patrons of art and literature were widely 
spread among nobility as well. Patrons of art and literature such as the senior vizier 
of Ilkhan ruler, Fazlullah Rashid, and the nephew of Shah Tahmasib I, Sultan 
Ibrahim Mirza, were famous for their enlightenment activities all over the Near 
East. These states and state formations left their ineffaceable imprint on the ethno 
genesis of Azerbaijani people. Furthermore, their culture and art created the 
necessary economic, legal and cultural prerequisites for men of distinction in all 
the areas of public life, culture and art. 
The life and creativity of these distinguished people proceeded in Baku, 
Ganja, Shemakha, Barda, Tabriz, Nakhchivan, Ardebil, Qazwin and other capital 
towns of Azerbaijan. There were schools and universities, private and public 
libraries, health houses - a sort of present-day clinic - pharmaceutical centres and 
pharmacies, observatories, paper, dye and ink shops, decorative design and 
copying works. Musical and poetic majlises (meetings) were held at palaces with 
the participation of famous poets, composers, musicians and singers. There were 
also sports teams of pehlevans (wrestlers), chovgan (polo) players, horsemen, bow-
shooters and chess players, who competed with each other. Most palace 
arrangements, including sport competitions, were held to the accompaniment of 
music. Also, special buildings called Nagara Khana housed the so-called 
ceremonial orchestras. 
This book contains biographies of scholars, theologians, philosophers, 
literary critics, linguists, poets, painters, calligraphers, musicians, musicologists, 
composers, astronomers, engineers, architects, musicians, statesmen and 
commanders. The biographies are placed in chronological order to enable the 
reader to get an idea of the development of culture and arts in Azerbaijan from 
ancient times to the beginning of the 19th century. 
8 
 
A Postcard 19th century. The Temple of Fire. Surakhana. 
Near Baku. 
Frieze fragment from the 
Baku Bay fortification. 13th 
century. 
So was Spoken 
about Zarathustra 
 
Zoroaster (Zardusht) 
 
For nearly 200 years, scientific debates have 
been under way regarding the birthplace of Zardusht 
(Zarathustra, Zoroaster), founder of the religion named 
in his honour - Zoroastrianism.The problem is far from 
being solved. The birthplace of the prophet has not yet 
been identified. Most medieval Muslim historians 
(Biruni, Balazuri, Qazwini, Yagut al-Hamavi, etc.), 
quoting later Zoroastrian sources, believe that 
Zoroaster was born in Azerbaijan. 
With its numerous fire temples, Azerbaijan 
played an essential role in the creation and 
dissemination of the canonized text of the Zend-
Avesta - the sacred writing of Zoroastrianism. It was a 
place where Zoroastrianism was transformed into a 
world religion. One of the most revered fire temples in 
Persia, Adurhushnaps, was built in Shiz, now Takhti Suleyman (Solomon). 
According to ancient chronicles, Zoroaster lived 258 years before 
Alexander the Great. About 3,000 years ago, a man called Parashaspa lived with 
his wife Dogdo in Azerbaijan 
near the city of Urmiya. They 
lived in a palace on the bank of 
the Daraj River, on mount 
Azbar. They gave birth to a son 
called Zoroaster. A medieval 
manuscript stated that even in 
his childhood, Zoroaster differed 
from other children. He never 
cried and his perpetual laugh 
illuminated his parents' home 
with Heavenly Light. 
Since his early childhood, 
he was notable for his distinct 
wisdom, and all the evil 
magicians' attempts to kill him failed. Ministers of cult raised him, and at the age 
of 15 he began wandering about the world as a minister of cult. When he was 30, 
9 
 
Dakhmas – Towers of Silence. 1. Near 
Yazd. Iran. 2. Gonahkend. Country 
Buluh. 3rd-4th Centuries. Republic of 
Azerbaijan. 3. Kharaba-Gilan. Julfa. 
3rd-4th Centuries. Republic of 
Azerbaijan. 
Zoroaster as a Prophet declared a new religion. He could not find any followers in 
his own country, so he had to preach the new religion. 
Once when he 
passed a sacramental 
river, the Heavenly 
Spirit, Bahman, 
appeared before him 
to take him to the 
throne of God, Ahura 
Mazda. There, 
Zoroaster was given a 
Heavenly Revelation. 
After that, Zoroaster 
went to Hell, where the evil spirit Anghra 
Mainyu (Ahriman) tempted him to leave the 
religion. Zoroaster, however, managed to 
escape the temptation. He returned to the 
earth and declared a new teaching in the form 
of sacred writing under the name Zend-
Avesta. The evil spirits pursued him on the 
earth too, but Zoroaster drove them away 
each time by praying from the Zend-Avesta. 
Having obtained an inspiration from 
Heaven, Zoroaster dressed in white clothes, 
took a sacramental fire and cypress scepter in 
his hand, came to the court of King Vishtaspa 
and converted him to the new religion. As a 
result, the neighboring rulers demanded that 
he return to the religion of their ancestors, so 
Vishtaspa declared war against them. 
Vishtapsa won and Zoroaster's teaching 
strengthened its position in Vishtaspa's 
country.  
Vishtaspa built numerous fire temples 
in Baktria. Zoroaster spent his last days there and was assassinated by either evil 
magicians or hostile warriors. 
Zoroaster's doctrine proclaimed monotheism and the existence of a 
permanent struggle between two principles - good and evil. Ahura Mazda was in 
charge of the good, while Ahriman led the evil. Zoroaster taught that men should 
assist Ahura Mazda in combating Ahriman. After all, according to Zoroaster, 
Ahura Mazda should win this battle and exterminate evil in this world forever. 
10 
 
Zindani Suleyman – formation near Takhti-
Suleyman. 
Zoroaster preached morals, such as good ideas, good words and good deeds. 
He also instructed his followers to be generous, honest and restrained in one's 
desires, and he recommended avoiding cruelty 
and lawlessness. Each person, according to 
this doctrine, should protect the cleanliness of 
fire, water and earth. It was prohibited to 
contaminate earth and fire through bodily 
contact. Therefore, corpses were usually 
placed on an elevated rocky place or on a 
stone structure - Dakhma ("Silence Tower") - 
where beasts and birds devoured it. Bones 
were hidden in special places. 
Zoroastrianism was expounded 
through sacred writing in the Sacramental 
Book "Zend-Avesta". Zoroastrian priests 
preached the idea that Gats - the oldest part of 
the Book - as well as its other parts, were 
written by Zoroaster himself through a 
celestial revelation from Ahura Mazda. In the 
Zend-Avesta, this idea is expressed through a 
repeating phrase: "So Ahura Mazda told 
Zarathustra". Eventually, this new religion 
penetrated not only the East, but also the 
West. Zoroastrianism is the world's oldest 
religion, and it influenced other reli-
gions such as Judaism, Christianity, 
Islam and Buddhism. Zoroastrianism 
became the first state religion. 
As has been noted above, 
contemporary Zoroastrians and early 
Muslims regarded Azerbaijan as the 
birthplace of Zoroaster and 
Zoroastrianism. The coronation of the 
legendary Jamshid and Sassanidian 
Shahinshahs took place in Azerbaijan, 
which was also where the Zend-
Avesta was compiled for the first 
time. Yampolskiy considered Azerbaijan "the papal area" of Zoroastrianism. The 
most revered temples were located in Azerbaijan, where Zoroastrian priests from 
the Azerbaijani tribe of Mag lived. The word "mag" was widely spread in scores of 
languages. In Azerbaijan, the word mag survived under the name of Mughan Duzu  
11 
 
Takhti Suleyman.ca. 2nd Century BC. East Azerbaijan, Iran. 
Iskandar Destroys the Temple of the 
Fire-Worshippers. Iskander-nama. 
Nizami. 1418. Institute of Manuscripts, 
Baku. 
 
 (I loath of Mags) and a large number of settlements (Mughanli, Mughan, 
Mugh-anlo, etc.) scattered all over Azerbaijan and eastern parts of Georgia. For 
Muslims, the word "Mughan" meant "Zoroastrian" or "fire worshipper", so the 
names of the above mentioned villages might be connected with the locations of 
Zoroastrians among Muslims. 
Azerbaijanis have 
preserved many 
Zoroastrian customs. The 
names Zardusht and 
Zoroaster and the word 
"Dakhma" ("hovel") are 
widely used in Azerbaijan. 
Traces of Zoroastrianism 
can been seen during the 
celebration of Novruz 
Bairam ("New Day"), the 
spring equinox and the first 
day of the New Year.  
Traditions during 
this holiday include jumping over a bonfire, 
lighting candles, dyeing eggs and preparing 
traditional dishes. In many regions of 
Azerbaijan, blowing out a candle and putting 
out a bonfire or furnace by water are 
considered to be sins. The sudden blowing out 
of candle or lamp means an affliction for one's 
family in the near future, such as the death of a 
family member. To needlessly make a vow by 
a fire is a serious sin. 
Water is also sacramental: one is not 
allowed to scold it or needlessly swear by it. 
Original Azerbaijani dishes, such as samani 
halvasi, ash and pahlava, still remain as ritual 
meals. Through the Moslem religion, the Zoroastrian rite of five daily prayers with 
the washing of hands and feet has survived. 
12 
 
Fire altars. 7th Century. 
Sasanian Coins (details). 
Private collection.  
Under the influence of Zoroastrianism, religious movements, such as 
Hurramism and Hurufism sprang up in Azerbaijan. It is 
believed that the role of Zoroastrianism in shaping 
Shiism was especially great. The main objects 
worshipped by Zoroastrians were water, fire, haoma 
and Gaush-Urvan (the soul of a bull). The gods of these 
four objects were gods related to various natural events. 
There were gods of the sky, earth, sun, moon, wind, etc. 
Daily worship consisted of offerings and libations to 
fire and water. 
Special temples were built to worship fire (the 
god of Fire was Atur) and water (the goddesses of Water 
and Fecundity were Aredvi-Sura and Anachita). From 
times immemorial, fire played a leading role for 
worshippers in Azerbaijan. In the word "Azerbaijan" 
there are components of odur-adur-atur-azer, which 
always meant fire, though its origin has long been 
forgotten. In fire temples, fire was placed on special 
high pedestals in the form of altars or mounted on the 
roofs of high cult temples. The fire temples were called 
"the place of fire" or "the house of fire". 
Primitive men were impressed with the 
Absheron peninsula and its neighboring islands as an 
ideal place for cults of fire, water, wind and haoma. 
And it's no wonder why, with their ever-burning fires on land and in the sea, 
stormy winds, a great number of lakes filled with unique fish and plantations of 
unusual and delicious grapes. It may be assumed that long before the appearance of 
Zoroastrianism, the Absheron peninsula had been a large cult center, as can be 
witnessed by rock drawings in Absheron and Gobustan. Zoroastrianism and 
Mazdaism found favorable conditions in Absheron to develop and form local cults 
of fire, water and wind. 
The Absheron peninsula was the center of Mazdaism and Zoroastrianism, 
and there are enough arguments to corroborate this point of view. First of all is the 
presence of Pars on Absheron (the self-given name of Persian-speaking Tats). 
Zoroastrians escaped from Persia to India after the victory of Islam and called 
themselves Pars. Most probably, Absheron Parses also fled to escape from 
prosecutions by Muslims. 
Most geographical denotations of Absheron can be explained in Zoroastrian 
terms. Ancient authors dealt with sacramental lands in Albania and eternal fires 
blazing on the islands of the Caspian Sea. Medieval Arabian historians wrote about  
13 
 
  
14 
 
Fire altar. Naqshi Rustam. 9th-6th Centuries BC. 
Iran. 
Albanian fire worshippers. At the end of the 19th Century, there were still 
eyewitnesses who remembered original fire-worshippers. 
They spoke about mosques and churches built on the ruins 
of the fire-temples. 
Medieval Muslims frequently termed 
Zoroastrianism as fire-worshiping, since fire played a 
crucial role in this religion. According to local legends and 
ancient chronicles, Juma Mosque in lcheri Shaher, and 
Albanian church were erected on the place of fire and 
water temples. On the island of Pirallahi there was a 
strongly revered fire temple. An image of bull worshipped 
by Zoroastrians was typical for numerous archaeological 
finds at lcheri Shaher and its vicinity. 
Above the gates of Gosha Gapi (Double Gates) of 
lcheri Shaher, there is an image of 
a bull surrounded by two Safavid 
lions. As is seen, the bas-belief is 
designed to symbolize the 
suppression of last Zoroastrians in 
Baku and Absheron by Shah Abbas 
people. The name of these gates 
goes probably back to the 
deformed Gaush-Gapi (Gates of a 
Bull). 
Azerbaijanian scientists 
have identified that the famous 
tower Giz Galasi (Maiden's Tower) situated in lcheri Shaher was a Zoroastrian 
temple. Some researchers are prone to attribute numerous towers of Absheron to 
Zoroastrian temples. It was medieval Azerbaijanian geographer Bakuvi who also 
stressed that there were such towers in all the villages of Absheron. Obviously the 
defensive nature of some of them do not rule out their use as temples.  
The good outward appearance of the towers can be explained by the revival 
of Zoroastrianism on Absheron after the arrival of Seljuks and Mongols in the Near 
East. In these times, the Persian Zoroastrians fled from prosecution of Muslims to 
the south of Fars, where in the cities of Turkobad and Sharafabad they created a 
new center of Zoroastrianism. At the same time, a probability remains that 
Zoroastrians settled down on Absheron as well. 
The well-known expert in medieval ceramics S.Guseynova, proceeding 
from the analysis of a large number of stamps on ceramic vessels of Azerbaijan 
and, in particular, Absheron and Baku, inferred that some of them, especially in the 
epoch of Nizami, were manufactured to be used for Zoroastrian ritual ceremonies. 
15 
 
Fire temples, or castles 
that were later built in the 
places of the fire temples. 
Baku and beyond. 
1.Baku. (Giz Galasi) 
2.Mardakan I. 3.Ramana. 
4.Mardakan II.  
Zoroastrian temples, just as the ones of other religions, were dedicated to 
certain deities, cults or festivities. 
Zoroastrian calendar numbered 360 days, divided into 12 months, each of 
which consisted of 30 days. Each of the twelve months and each of the thirty days 
of a month were dedicated to some deity and 
were marked as religious holidays. Solemnly 
celebrated were days whose names concurred 
with those of the month. On holidays, all 
people gathered in fire temples to eat, drink 
and thus please God. In total, the Zoroastrian 
priests recognized thirty main deities worthy 
of worshipping. The number of towers 
(temples) on Absheron is close to this figure 
too. The last twenty fifth tower was recently 
discovered in Sabunchi. Outside Absheron, 
there is just one identical tower in the village 
of Saadan, Divichi region. Analysis of 
Absheron toponyms is indicative that the 
names of settlements where towers -temples 
were located end with "han", "khan", "san", "kan", 
"an", "van" and mean a place or house. We have 
already noted that fire temples were also called House 
or Place of Fire and most Absheron toponyms can 
easily be attributed to the Zoroastrian calendar. 
Below shown are names of Absheron 
settlements, most of which undoubtedly originate from 
the names of days, months and feasts of the famous 
Zoroastrian calendar. 
Baku - Baga-van. The seventh month of the 
year - Baga-yadis (month of worshipping God - Mitra) 
and the sixteenth day of each month were devoted to 
Baga (God). 
Sura-khana (village near Baku). Sura -one of 
the names of goddess of water and fecundity. Arcdvi - 
Sura -Anahit. 
Tur-kan (village near Baku). (A) Tur-Kan. Atur 
- the Fire. To Atur was devoted the ninth month of the 
year and the ninth day of each month. In the ninth day 
of the ninth month the Zoroastrian feast Azer-cheshn was celebrated. On this day, 
fire temples were visited to offer sacrifices, kindled home fires. 
16 
 
Chiragh Gala (Fortress of Fire).  5th-
6th Centuries. Divichi.  Photo by Farid 
Mamedov. 
 
Gau-san (village near Baku). Gau-Bull. The Zoroastrian feast of bull 
worshipping was celebrated on the fourteenth day of each month. 
Mashta-gha (village near Baku). Mazda -Zoroastrian supreme deity. In the 
olden times, the name of Ahura Mazda was spelt as Mashda-ku, Mazda-ka and 
Mazdu-ka. The tenth month of the year and the first day of each month and each 
week were devoted to Ahura Mazda. 
Shaban, Shuban (village near 
Baku). Shaban, Aban, Apam - the deity of 
water. The eighth month of the year and the 
tenth day of each month were devoted to 
this deity. There was a temple of fire 
worshippers destroyed recently. 
Marda-kan (village near Baku). 
(M)Arda-Kan (habita-tion,village of Arta). 
(M)Arta-kan and related Shahan (village 
near Baku). Sha-(k)han. (A)Sha-(k)han. 
Arta (Asha) - a divinity of righteousness and 
space order. The second month of the year 
and the third day of each month were 
devoted to this deity. 
Ramana (village near Baku). Ramano was a Zoro-astrian supreme deity of 
Peace and Quiet. This holiday was celebrated very solemnly on the day of autumn 
equinox on the 21st day of the seventh month. 
Fatmai (village near Baku). One of numerous Zoro-astrian fiests - Fatmai-
Edas was devoted to Ahura Mazda and the souls of deceased righteous man. This 
holiday was second to Novruz and celebrated in the last day of the year, on the eve 
of Novruz. And now Azerbaijanians on the eve of Novruz pray for the deceased, 
visit their graves and leave there a samani (a plate with shoots of wheat) and 
holiday khoncha (a plate with ritual meal). 
Saadan (village near Baku). Saada - an ancient Zoro-astrian fiest dedicated 
to fire. Saada was marked hundred days before Novruz (Pars. Saada - hundred) in 
November or December. 
Nuvadi (village near Baku). Nuvad-ruz - holiday celebrated ninety days 
before Novruz (Pars.Nuvad - ninety, ruz-day). On this day, to protect oneself 
against evil spirits it was recomended to eat garlic, drink wine and cook sabzi-
govurma . 
Nov-khana (village near Baku). Nov-ruz - a new day. Novruz was devoted 
to fire and celebrated on the day of spring equinox. It was believed that Zoroaster 
was born on this day . 
Zabrat and Jorat (villages near Baku). Zab-Ratu and Jo-Ratu (Pars.-Place 
of Ratu). Ralu- spiritual God of humanity. 
17 
 
Gobustan Bogustan (The valley near Baku) - (Place of God). 
All the above-stated is illustrative that Absheron since ancient times has 
been a large center of local and Middle East cults, including fire-worshipping, 
subsequently it turned into the center of Zoroastrianism. Pilgrims came here by 
land and by sea. Pilgrims arriving by land were welcomed by temples of Gobustan, 
Shikh, Sabail, Baku and all Absheron. Those arriving by sea were greeted by 
magnificent temples of their favorite deity scattered along the seacoast of 
Absheron. After that pilgrims went round all the temples, making offering and 
libation. 
The routs of pilgrims could easily be traced by the location of caravan-
saraies and ovdans on Absheron and on the approaches to Baku. The origin of a 
pilgrim group (caravans) may be established through the analysis of caravan-
saraic's names. All the data reaffirm that pilgrims arrived from India, Iran, Central 
Asia and Armenia, where from ancient times there have been professed 
Zoroastrianism. For many years scientists have been making attempts to learn the 
secret of these caravan-saraies and ovdans located far from trade caravan ways. 
This mystery may be explained through recognizing the existence of the pilgrim's 
caravan ways. This route was to cross Gobustan, Shaban, Sabail, Baku, Sura-
khana, Mastagha, Mardakan, Shahan, Absheron (village), Turkan to Pirallahi. The 
second route might be laid via Gau-san and Turkan. 
 
The King of Manne, a State 
that Became the Cradle 
of Animal Style in Art 
 
Ullusunu 
 
During the 9th through 7th Centuries B.C., the state of Manna arose and 
developed in the territory that later became Atropatene, and then medieval 
Azerbaijan. A king with heritable authority led the country, which was divided into 
a number of provinces (Surigash, Messi, Uishdish, Arsiyanshi and others). During 
the period of its peak, Manna was one of the largest countries in the Near East. Its 
rise occurred during continuous wars with Assyria and Urartu. 
Manna reached its highest point of power during the time of King Iranzu 
and his son Ullusunu. Until recently, only a few authorities on ancient history 
knew about the existence of this country. In the middle of the 20th Century, an 
amateur archaeologist found a number of treasures in Azerbaijan - in Marlik, 
Hasanlu and Zivie. Among the findings were sets of gold, silver and bronze 
handiworks. The style of some of these antiques was very similar to the so-called 
"Scythian animal style". 
  
18 
 
Gold cup escavated in Marlik. Manna, Iran. llth-12th Centuries BC. 
 
 
  
19 
 
Plaque decorated in Scythian animal style.  
(Museum of Historical Jewellery, Kiev). Gold.  
4th Century BC. 
 
Golden hair-fillet. 1st Mil. B.C. Manna. 
Jafar Abad. (Khalkhal, East Azerbaijan, 
Iran). Azerbaijan, Museum, Tabriz, Iran. 
The history of the discovery and study of one of these treasures is very 
interesting. American archaeologist Robert Dayson led an expedition in the 
Urmiva Lake region in southern 
Azerbaijan, near the fortress of 
Hasanlu in the territory of ancient 
Manna. His group found traces of 
conflagration in one of the 
archaeological layers. In this layer, 
they found a gold bowl of extra-
ordinary beauty. This find was 
significant in the scientific community 
for two reasons. The first was the bowl 
itself which showed a highly technical 
and artistic level. Experts identified on the bowl a scene of a sacrifice being made 
to gods, as well as scenes portraying ancient myths of tribes that lived in this 
region in the second millennium B.C. 
The second reason for the bowl's 
importance was that it enabled 
archaeologists to put together historical 
events regarding the nearby fortress with 
surprising accuracy. During the siege, 
which destroyed the fortress three 
warriors were instructed to rescue the 
most prized possession of the fortress - a 
sacred gold bowl. By the time these men 
got to the second floor, the fire had 
already spread through the entire building, and the floor collapsed beneath them. 
The first warrior fell with his iron and gold sword. The second warrior fell on his 
right side, bearing the bowl in his right hand and extending his left hand out against 
the wall. The third warrior fell on him and they were all crushed under fragments 
of the collapsed builing. 
Experts agreed that these treasures were among the products of Manna's 
people. Art experts and collectors began to talk about Manna. At last, the origin of 
Scythian art - together with the arts of Media and Persia - was found. Further 
findings have confirmed this idea. For example, the art of metal crafting was so 
amazing that art collectors and connoisseurs have focused on Azerbaijan for 100 
years. 
Iranian art connoisseur V. Lukonin wrote in his book dedicated to the art of 
ancient Iran, or more correctly the art of Manna, Media, Atropatenc and Iran, "The 
works of art, about which there is speech, represent art developed here in the 
20 
 
Above and below. Gold cup escavated in 
Hasanlu. 8th-7th Centuries B.C. Manna, 
East Azerbaijan, Iran.  
Manna Musician. Brass vessel. 
Manna, West and East Azerbaijan, 
Iran. 8th Century B.C. 
 
period of the 10th through 6th Centuries B.C. At this time, in the whole outlined 
territory, there were some state formations, among which was Manna in 
Azerbaijan. The kings of Manna's state 
accepted active participation in policy and 
interfered in the struggle of Assyria, Urartu 
and Elam. Later, Media power grew here, 
according to Herodotus, in the middle or at 
the end of the 7th Century B.C. Scythian 
tribes and their chiefs strengthened, so that 
after 28 years, they were "lords of Asia". 
The art of this territory was the base on 
which the art of the Scythians, Medians and 
Persians was formed. This stage, submitted by 
articles of virtue of Zivie, is particularly 
interesting on the one hand, because in these 
articles we notice a final stage of the 
development of a recently opened civilization, 
and on the other hand, because they are directly 
connected to the initial stage of Scythian art and 
the first monuments of Persian art". 
Manna's history is poorly investigated, 
and much of it is known only from Assyrian and 
Urartu sources, which do not always recount events 
objectively. After the death of one of the great Manna 
kings, Iranzu, in about 716 B.C., authorities transferred 
power to his son Aza. He continued his father's policy of 
trying to unite with Assyria in its struggle against Urartu. 
A number of Manna's rulers, however, openly opposed this 
policy. In particular, Metatti, Telusina and Bagdattu 
regarded Assyria with hostility, and as a result, they killed 
Aza and his brother. 
Ullusunu mounted the throne and was compelled, 
against his will, to adhere to Urartu orientation. He even 
conceded some areas that bordered Assyria to 
Urartu. Assyria, indignant by such a turn of 
events, invaded Manna. Assyrian King Sargon 
II arrested Bagdattu and ordered him to be whipped to death. Bagdattu's corpse 
was exposed to set an example for the people of Manna. The Assyrians set fire to 
Izirtu, the capital of Manna, and conquered a number of fortresses. 
21 
 
Ruler from Manna. 
Brass vessel. 
Manna, West and 
East Azerbaijan, 
Iran. 8th Century 
B.C. 
Archer from Manna. 
Brass vessel. Manna, 
West and East 
Azerbaijan, Iran. 8th 
Century B.C. 
 
Ullusunu threw himself at the victors' mercy. A message from Sargon II 
states that Ullusunu came forward to him "together with great patriarchs, advisers, 
seeds of his kind, vicegerents and rulers, governed by his country", but he also 
"sent a senior son with a presentation and testimonial 
donation" to Sargon II. 
Sargon II forgave Ullusunu and left him on Manna's 
throne. In 714 B.C., Sargon began a campaign against Urartu, 
and the two kings agreed upon a treaty. The kings met in an 
agreed place, where Ullusunu gave horses and cattle to 
Sargon's army. Sargon promised Ullusunu that he would take 
territories lost by Manna from Urartu. In honour of Ullusunu, 
the king of Assyria arranged a feast. Ullusunu sat at a higher 
place than his father Iranzu had in his time. Sargon said, 
"Before Ullusunu, king and the lord, 1 set the table of honor, 
his throne higher than his father Iranzu". I. Diakonov wrote 
that it was equivalent to the recognition of Manna as an 
allied power. 
Sargon II continued in the struggle against Urartu. 
Ullusunu helped his ally in every possible way, and the 
Urartu Army suffered a crushing defeat. Sargon returned 
Manna's fortresses to Ullusunu. Sargon's army seized Urartu, 
destroyed many cities and seized an enormous amount of 
loot. Urartu King Rusa I, could not stand the shame of defeat 
committed suicide. Sargon returned to Ullusunu 22 fortresses 
and two fortifying cities. After the defeat of Urartu, Ullusunu 
successfully reclaimed areas that had been seized from 
Manna, and the stated reached the high point of its power. 
Assyria recognized Manna as its equal partner. During 
the time of Sargon II`s successors, Ullusunu even managed to 
seize some areas of Assyria. During Ullusunu's rule in 
Manna, he re-edified fortresses and the city with large 
temples and palaces, and the art of handicraftsmen was 
developed. I. Diakonov wrote that "Manna, and possibly 
even more northern Urmia areas located in territories of 
future Atropatene, rose to higher economic levels than a 
large part of the territory of East Media". 
One of the Manna vessels from the 8th Century B.C. portrays a Mannean 
playing a musical instalment that strongly resembles the ancient Azerbaijani 
instruments saz or tanbur. The pose of the musician and his manner of touching the 
strings suggest that the musician is from Azerbaijan and that musical traditions 
22 
 
Tomb of Cyrus the Great.Pasargada, Iran. 
 
have been saved in this region since ancient times. The history and culture of 
Manna is only the beginning of the study, and it is necessary to study many more 
histories to discover the interrelationship of its culture and language with more 
ancient countries. 
 
 
The Amazon Who Defeated 
King Cyrus the Great 
 
Tomyris 
 
Often called "the father of history", Herodotus was the first of the Greek - 
and European -historians. His "History" is divided into nine books and is devoted 
to the description of the Greco-Persian Wars and to the events that took place 
during these wars. Herodotus is considered to be one of the most outstanding 
historians in the world, although the events and facts described by him were, in the 
tradition of his time, on the verge of fantasy and myth. 
One such half-mythical historical episode, narrated by Herodotus in the first 
book of his "History", concerns the 
events connected with the killing of 
the Persian king, Cyrus, in 529 BC, 
when he tried to take over the 
empire of Massagetae. At that time, 
this empire existed in the territory 
of modern Azerbaijan and was 
located north of the river Araxes. 
Herodotus wrote the 
following: 
"The Massagetae are a 
numerous and brave tribe and they 
live behind the river Araxes 
opposite the Issedons. Some 
believe them to be Scythians. In their dress and way of life, the Massagetae 
resemble the Scythians. They fight both on horseback and on foot; neither method 
is strange to them. They use bows and lances, but their favourite weapon is the 
battle-axe. Their arms are all of either gold or brass. For their battle-axes, they 
make use of brass; for headgear, belts and girdles, they use gold. So too are their 
horses caparisoned: they give them breastplates of brass, but employ gold about the 
reins, the bit, and the cheek-plates. They use neither iron nor silver, having none in 
their country; but they have brass and gold in abundance. 
23 
 
Battle between the Athenians and Amazons. Delphi Museum, Greese. 
 
"The following are some of their customs: each man has but one wife, yet 
all the wives are held in common" for this is a custom of the Massagetae and not of 
the Scythians, as the Greeks wrongly say. Human life does not come to its natural 
close with these  people; but when a man grows very old, all his kinsfolk come 
together and offer him up in sacrifice, offering at the same time some cattle. After 
the sacrifice, they boil the flesh and feast on it; those who end their days thus arc 
reckoned the happiest. If a man dies of disease they do not eat him, but bury him in 
the ground, bewailing his ill fortune that he did not come to be sacrificed. 
"They sow no grain, but live on their herds and fish, of which there are 
plenty in the Araxes. Milk is what they chiefly drink. The only god they worship is 
the sun, and to it they offer the horse in sacrifice; under the nation of giving to the 
swiftest of the gods is the swiftest of all mortal creatures". 
The heroine of Herodotus' narration was Tomyris, who had mounted the 
throne at the death of her husband, the late king. Herodotus wrote that Cyrus sent 
ambassadors to her, with instructions to court her on his part, pretending that he 
wished to take her as wife. Tomyris, however, was aware that it was her kingdom - 
and not herself - that he wanted to court. She forbade the men to approach. Cyrus, 
therefore, finding that he could not succeed with this deceit, marched towards the 
Araxes and openly displayed his hostile intentions. He began construction on a 
bridge on which his army might cross the river, and he began building towers on 
the boats that were to be used in the passage. 
24 
 
While the Persian leader was occupied with these labours, Tomyris sent a 
herald to him, who said, "King of the Medes, cease pressing this enterprise, for you 
cannot know if what you are doing will be of real advantage to you. Be content to 
rule in peace your own kingdom, and cry to see us reign over the countries that are 
ours to govern. As, however, I know you will not choose to hearken to this 
counsel, since there is nothing you less desire than peace and quietness, come now, 
if you are so mightily desirous of meeting the Massagetae in arms. Leave your 
useless toil of bridge making, and let us retire three days. March from the 
riverbank, and come across with your soldiers. If you like better to give us battle 
on your side of the stream, retire yourself an equal distance". 
At this offer, Cyrus called together the chiefs of the Persians and requested 
them to advise him on what he should do. All the votes were in favour of his letting 
Tomyris cross the stream and having a battle on Persian ground. 
But Croesus the Lydian, who was present at the meeting of the chiefs, 
disapproved of this advice. He said, "My counsel, therefore, is that we cross the 
stream and push forward as far as they shall fall back, then seek to get the better of 
them by stratagem. I am told they are unacquainted with the good things on which 
the Persians live and have never tasted the great delights of life. Let us then prepare 
a feast for them in our camp; let sheep be slaughtered without stint and the wine 
cups be filled full of noble liquor. And let all manner of dishes be prepared. Then 
leaving behind us our worst troops, let us fall back towards the river. Unless I am 
very much mistaken, when they see the good fare set out, they will forget all else 
and fall to. Then it will remain for us to do our parts manfully". 
When the two plans were thus placed in contrast before him, Cyrus changed 
his mind; preferring the advice that Croesus had given him, he returned to tell 
Tomyris that she should retire, and that he would cross the stream. She therefore 
retired. Cyrus gave Croesus into the care of his son Cambyscs - whom he had 
appointed to succeed him on the throne - with strict orders to pay him all respects 
and to treat him well if the expedition was successful. Cyrus sent them both back to 
Persia, and then he crossed the river with his army. 
After having advanced a day's march from the river, Cyrus did as Croesus 
had advised him: he led the worthless portion of his army into the camp and drew 
off with his good troops towards the river. Soon afterwards, a detachment of the 
Massagetae - one-third of their entire army led by Queen Tomyris' son Spargapises 
- fell upon the group that had been left behind by Cyrus, and put them to the sword. 
Then, seeing the banquet prepared, they sat down and began to feast. When they 
had eaten and drunk their wine and 
had sunk into sleep, the Persians under Cyrus arrived, slaughtered many, 
and imprisoned even more. Among these last was Spargapises himself. 
When Tomyris heard what had befallen her son and her army, she sent a 
herald to Cyrus, who thus addressed the conqueror: "You bloodthirsty Cyrus! Pride 
25 
 
not yourself on this poor success: it was the grape-juice, which, when you drink it, 
makes you so mad, and as you swallow it down brings up to your lips such bold 
and wicked words. It was this poison wherewith you didn't ensnare my child. Now 
hearken what I advise, and be sure I advise you for your good. Restore my son to 
me and leave the land unharmed, and triumph over a third part of the host of the 
Massagetae. Refuse, and I swear by the sun, the sovereign lord of the Massagetae, 
bloodthirsty as you are, I will give you your fill of blood". 
Cyrus did not pay attention to the words of this message. As for 
Spargapises, when the wine had worn off and he saw the extent of his calamity, he 
asked Cyrus to release him from his bonds. When his wish was granted and the 
fetters were taken from his limbs, he killed himself as soon as his hands were free. 
When she found out that Cyrus had paid no heed to her advice, Tomyris 
collected all the forces of her kingdom and waged a battle against him. Of all the 
combats in which barbarians have engaged among  themselves, this could have 
been the fiercest. The following was the manner of it: first, the two armies stood 
apart and shot their arrows at each other. Then, when their quivers were empty, 
they fought hand-to-hand with lances and daggers. Thus they continued fighting 
for a length of time, neither choosing to give ground. At length, the Massagetae 
prevailed. The greater part of the Persian army was destroyed and Cyrus himself 
fell, after having reigned for 29 years. 
By order of the queen, a search was made among the slain for the body of 
Cyrus. When it was found, she took the skin and filled it full of human blood, and 
then dipped the head of Cyrus into it, saying, "I live and have conquered you in 
fight, and give you your fill of blood". The first king of the Persian Empire - con-
structed on the base of Great Media, which he destroyed - was killed so 
disgracefully by a woman. 
 
The Man Who  Created 
Azerbaijan 
2,300 Years Ago 
 
Atropates 
 
n October 1, 331 B.C., near the ruins of the ancient capital of Assyria-
Nineveh at the township of Gaugamela, a battle occurred which affected the fates 
of many people of Western Asia. The battle between Alexander the Great and the 
King of Persia Darius Achaemenid ended in complete victory for Alexander the 
Great and the final destruction of the gigantic Achaemenids Empire. Into the hands 
of Alexander fell Darius' wife, mother and two daughters, as well as many riches. 
This battle was significant to historians because it was the first time that a 
Media ruler ("satrap") was mentioned in historical accounts. Modem historians 
O 
26 
 
Parthia. Artabanes III (10-38 
AD). Drachma (detail).Silver. 
AT (Atropatene). 
Arabian Caliphate. Azerbaijan. 
168 AH. Dirham. Silver. 
Arabian Caliphate. Azerbaijan. 
105 AH. Dirham. Silver. 
 
 
believe that Atropates conquered almost all of the 
territory of what later became medieval Azerbaijan, 
as well as part of Great Media. After the battle, 
Atropates did not present himself in an offer of 
obedience to Alexander. Alexander, therefore, 
removed Atropates from his position as satrap of 
Media, and he appointed an Oxodat to the throne. 
Alexander, however, was not satisfied with this new 
leader, and he restored the position of satrap to 
Atropates in 328 B.C. 
Atropates understood the futility of his 
struggle against Alexander, so he chose to pursue 
diplomatic negotiations with the leader. As a result, 
part of Media's territory was saved from the 
conqueror's invasion. This territory was called Small 
Media, then Atropatene Media and, finally, 
Atropatene. 
Alexander studied Zoroastrianism and 
proclaimed to be the Son of God and successor of the 
Great King in the grace of Ahura Mazda. He made 
successful crusades in Central Asia, East Iran and 
India, thus creating a great empire, which became 
increasingly difficult to rule. He dreamed of 
creating a new aristocracy of "Hellene-Persians", 
which could successfully rule over this colossal 
empire. In every possible way, Alexander 
encouraged mixed marriages between the 
representatives of Persian and Macedonian royal 
houses and aristocracy. 
The first steps in this direction were the festivities in Susa, which were 
celebrated over a period of several days in honor of the mass wedding between the 
representatives of these two countries. Alexander simultaneously married two 
Persian princesses - Satire, daughter of Darius, and Parisatidas, daughter of 
Artaxerxses III. On that day, 80 Greeks and Macedonians married representatives 
of local aristocracy. Expensive gifts were given to the 10,000 warriors who married 
Persian women: each of these warriors received a gold bowl. Actors, musicians and 
jugglers from Greece performed at the celebration. 
At these Susa festivities, Atropates did not miss his opportunity to 
consolidate his position as independent ruler of Media. He married the daughter of 
the head of the Macedonian cavalry Perdikka, one of the nearest companion-in-
arms of Alexander. 
27 
 
The Bier of Iskander the Great. Shah-name. Firdowsi. 
1330-1336. Tabriz. Freer Gallery of Art, Washington 
DC. 
 
At the end of 324 B.C., Bariax announced himself King of Persia and Media 
and crossed swords with the conqueror. Atropates suppressed Bariax's rebellion, 
seized him and sent him and his men to Alexander, who executed them. 
Alexander regularly visited the different parts of his empire. During one 
such trip, he visited the Nisay fields, located on the border with Atropates' satrapy, 
where famous horses were bred. Atropates went there and stayed for some time as 
part of Alexander's entourage. During these trips, as well as every other possible 
opportunity, Alexander organized 
grandiose festivities. At one of 
these festivities, Atropates 
brought for Alexander's 
entertainment a group of 
horsewomen, dressed in the I 
clothes of horsemen, with spears 
instead of axes and easy boards 
instead of the usually accepted 
heavy ones. Ancient authors 
considered these horsewomen as 
legendary "Amazons", who were 
located in the "mountains in 
Albania". 
On June 13, 323 B.C., 
Alexander died in Babylon, the 
prospective capital of his state. 
Immediately following his death, 
satraps assembled in Babylon for the division of the satrapies. Atropates, confident 
of his authority in Small Media, did not attend the meeting. The regency of power 
went to his son-in-law Perdikka. Per-dikka's aspiration to save the state from 
disintegration caused counteraction of the contracting parties, and as a result, he 
died in 321 B.C. Following his death, the second division of satrapies was held. 
Atropates' satrapy was not included in the division. Academician Igrar Aliev noted 
that from that time, Small Media could have been considered as an independent 
state. Small Media was then transformed into an independent state, and later named 
Atropatene (Aderbadagan or Azerbaijan), and Atropates accepted a royal title. 
Two-and-a-half centuries after the kingdom of Manna had fallen, an 
independent state rose again in its territory. Within the boundaries of this territory, 
origins of various states were formed, preserving state and ethnic continuity. Due 
to the wise and far-seeing policy of Atropates, Small Media became the first 
Eastern state that sought independence from Macedonian conquerors. Small Media 
was, in fact, the most independent of the satrapies up to the death of Alexander. 
28 
 
Greek geographer Strabo wrote: "Media was divided into two parts: Great Media 
and Atropates Media. The second part received its name from the warlord 
Atropates, who would not admit that the country was dependent of Macedonia as a 
part of Great Media. Actually, after mounting the throne, Atropates made his own 
decision that his country was independent. Also, it is rather significant from a 
military point of  view that the country could offer 10,000 horsemen and 40,000 
infantrymen..." 
The population of Atropatene was very mixed ethnically. The names and 
geographical names were mostly Zoroastrian. After accepting Islam, they became 
Arabic. Consequently, the determination of the ethnic origin of Atropates and the 
population of Atropatene is very difficult, as even Zoroastrian names have reached 
us mostly in their Greek interpretations. So, even the accepted name of this country 
- Atropatene - is Greek. The Zoroastrian (Mcdes) name of this country was 
Aderbadagan, Aderbaijan in Arabic (Azerbaijan). 
We still do not know by what name these people called themselves and their 
country. What we do know, however, is that over the centuries and millenniums 
conquerors and various faiths and languages came and went, but the borders of 
Azerbaijan created by Atropates have remained virtually unchanged. Within these 
borders, people distinguished from neighboring people by their original customs, 
character and culture, have lived for 2,300 years. 
 
The King of Azerbaijan and Armenia, 
           the Father of Antony and 
Cleopatra's Daughter-in-law 
 
Artkhavazd from Atropatene 
 
In the 1st Century' B.C., the Parthian and Roman Empires struggled for 
authority in West Asia. In 38 B.C., the Parthian Empire suffered a crushing defeat 
by the Romans near the city Gindary. The Roman army struggled under the 
command of Marcus Antony's warlord Publiy Ventilia. After the battle, Antony 
demoted Ventilia, and he took the lead of the huge army himself. 
Antony's marriage to Cleopatra, the Empress of Egypt, in 36 B.C., made 
him an autocrat of a large country and installed reliance in the practicability of his 
plans to create a great Asian Power like that of Alexander the Great. Antony, on 
account on this, named his son born to Cleopatra, Alexander, and he prepared a 
new campaign against Parthia. 
The Parthian army waited for Antony in Euphrates, but he moved north 
through Armenia with the armies of the Kings of Armenia and Pont, in hopes of 
passing through Atropatcnc Media and attacking the Parthian army from the rear. 
29 
 
Bust of  Cleopatra. British 
Museum, London. 
 
Bust of Mark Antoni, 
Kingston lacy. 
 
The hilly relief of Atropatene, according to this plan, should have weakened any 
opportunities of the famous Parthian cavalry. 
Understanding the critical nature of the 
situation, the Parthians ended all civil strife and 
rallied around the Parthian King Fraat IV. The 
Parthian leader gathered about 40,000 soldiers, while 
Atropatene King Artha-vazd mobilized more than 
10,000 troops. 
Seizing with large difficulties part of 
Atropatene, Antony admitted a large tactical error. 
He kept a train, consisting of 300 heavy carriages, to 
transport siege-guns and machines led by Oppius 
Statsian, and he went on ahead with his main forces. 
Antony hoped to approach unexpectedly Fraaspa. the 
capital of Atropatcnc, seize it and capture the family of the King Arthavazd of 
Atropatene, who were there. However, when Antony approached Fraaspa, the city 
appeared to be perfectly prepared for a long defense. 
While Antony was preparing for the siege, the Parthians and Atropatenians 
destroyed the Roman train. Oppius Statsian died, Pont's 
King was handed over in captivity, and the King of 
Armenia receded back into Armenia. The siege-guns were 
destroyed, and the army of Antony was blocked at Fraaspa. 
The Parthians and Atropatenians refused battle and 
disturbed Antony's army with daily attacks. 
The coming winter compelled the Romans to leave 
Atropatene and to leave Armenia through the mountains. 
The Roman losses were huge: it is believed that more than 
35,000 Romans died in Atropatene. Inspired by Cleopatra, 
Antony's massive expedition into Azerbaijan ended in 
complete failure. 
As the scholar Igrar Aliev wrote, "The King of 
Atropatene won a great victory. The victory was especially significant, as he won a 
lot of treasure, including roman ensigns that had belonged to Oppius Statsian. 
Furthermore, he had the King of Pont, Polemon, in captivity. All this promoted the 
growth of the authority of Atropatene and its King Arthavazd". 
After these events, Arthavazd wanted to use these victories to neutralize 
Parthian presence in Atropatene. Arthavazd had a quarrel with Parthian King, Fraat 
IV, the formal pretext of which was the dividing of the booty. In 35 B.C., King 
Arthavazd of Atropatene sent Polemon, King of Pont, from captivity to Antony, 
with the offer of peace and union. It changed all of Antony's plans, and he decided 
30 
 
to continue his campaign against Parthia. This decision shows that the authority 
and military power of Arthavazd's army were at very high levels at this time. 
However, before setting off against the Parthians in union with Atropatene, 
Antony decided to settle 
accounts with the King 
of Armenia, and so he 
moved to Armenia. 
Here, Arthavazd 
returned to Antony the 
ensigns of Oppius 
Statian. The King of 
Armenia was captured, 
put in chains and sent as 
a souvenir to Cleopatra, 
and the capital of 
Armenia was seized. 
After this, Antony went 
back to Alexandria, where he celebrated his triumph over Armenia. 
Antony ordered the marriage of his and Cleopatra's son Alexander to the 
daughter of Arthavazd Iotana. In connection with the engagement, he announced 
the son to be King of Parthia, Atropatene and Armenia. The characters of Antony 
and Cleopatra can now be seen as the parents of Alexander and as the participants 
of a joint struggle with an aggressive neighbour.  
At last, in the spring of 33 B.C., Antony moved through Armenia from the 
east. However, disturbing messages from Italy had started to reach him, and his 
war with Oktavian began. After that, Antony kept for Arthavazd a small army, 
transmitted to him a part of the Armenian territory and left him. Arthavazd 
remained alone with the allied armies of Parthia and Armenia. Due to the help of 
the Roman armies, Arthavazd for the first time successfully resisted the allies. 
Afterwards however, Antony withdrew the armies for his war against Oktavian, 
and Arthavazd suffered a defeat in the war against the Parthians and was captured 
and held in captivity. Soon, however, he found the possibility to run, and in 31 
B.C., according to Plutarch, the King of Atropatene sent an auxiliary detachment to 
help Antony in his battle at Share against the Oktavian army. 
In a desperate situation, Cleopatra had the King of Armenia executed and 
sent his head to Arthavazd in Atropatene in hopes of aiding Atropatene in its 
struggle against Oktavian. Antony and Cleopatra, however, suffered a complete 
defeat in the battle against Gaius Caesar of Oktavius, future ruler of the Roman 
Empire (Augustus). 
31 
 
Augustus of Oktavian, taking into account the merits of Arthavazd of 
Atropatene and desiring to neutralize the Parthians' acts by his patronage, returned 
to him the Armenia territory, as well as Iotana, the bride of Alexander. 
The dreams of Arthavazd had come true: he had become the ruler of two 
empires, Atropatene and Armenia. However, it did not last long. In 20 B.C., his 
son Ariobarzan II came to power in Atropatene. Ariobarzan had lived in Rome for 
more than 10 years, had a good  
Roman education and was very friendly to Rome. Therefore, it is not 
surprising that the Romans handed to him the throne of Armenia. After the death of 
Ariobarzan, Augustus put his son Arthavazd on the throne. In honour of 
Arthavazd, a silver coin with the image of Augustus and the inscription on the back 
"King Arthavazd the Great" was made in Rome. 
 
―Imp(eratore) Domitiano Caesare 
Aug(usto) Germanic(o) L.Julius 
Maximus > leg(ionis) Ful(minatae)‖ 
 
―The age of Domitian Caesar Augustus Germanicus. Latius Julius Maxim 
centuriaon of the 12th instant legion‖. 
 
The Ruler of a Country  that 
Professed Zoroastrianism, 
Christianity and Islam 
 
Javanshir 
 
İn the 4th Century AD - possibly earlier - the state of Albania was 
established in the territory of the modern republic of Azerbaijan. Albania actively 
participated in events that occurred in the Caucasus and in Asia Minor. Many 
ancient authors wrote about this state. 
In the 7th Century, Caucasian Albania experienced difficulty for several 
years. Sassanian Iran came from the South, trying to restore Zoroastrianism in 
Albania, which practiced Christianity; from the West, Byzantium aspired to take 
the Alban church under control; and the Turkic-Khazars broke through the 
Caucasus from the North. The Arabs came from the South, bearing the new and 
all-winning doctrine of Islam. 
A young Albanian prince named Javanshir played an important role during 
the final battles against the Arabs. On the side of Sassanian Iran, Javanshir was the 
son of Varaz Gregor Mehranid, ruler of the feudal possession Gardman, which was 
situated on the Gardman River. Meh-ranids, who had escaped from Iran, inhabited 
32 
 
Stone Figure. 5th-6th 
Centuries. Aghdam 
region, Caucasian 
Albania. 
 
Javanshir. 7th Century. 
Caucasian Albania. 
Hermitage. St. 
Petersburg  
 
Gardman. Mehranids were Zoroastrians, and they managed to distribute their 
influence to almost all of Albania in a rather short time, and they transferred their 
capital to Barda. The stabilization of the situation in the 
country had already prevented Iran-Byzantium wars for 
many years. Albania, however, turned into an arena of 
wars between these states. 
In 623, the Byzantium army of Emperor Irakli and 
troops of its ally, Khazars Kagan, invaded the territory of 
Albania. This Byzantium-Khazars army seized 
Nakhchivan, Tiflis and other cities in the Caucasus. In 
Gazaka they destroyed a famous temple of fire-wor-
shippers. The Khazars consolidated in Albania and had 
their administrative centre in Gabala. After the rout, many 
Khazars remained in Albania. 
In 628, Iran and Byzantium reached a peace 
agreement, under which Armenia fell under the authority 
of Byzantium, Georgia became independent, and Albania 
remained dependent on Sassanids Iran. Emperor Heraclius 
(Irakli) came to Gardman with his army, baptized Varaz 
Gregor, and in every possible way promoted the 
construction of churches throughout the entire country. 
Georgian chronicles state that Emperor Heraclius 
baptized not only Varaz Gregor, but also "all his people". 
Varaz Gregor was the first of the Mehranids to receive the 
title of king over all of Albania. Weakened by wars with 
Byzantium, Iran could hardly withstand the onrush of the 
Arabs. Albanian troops fought in battles against the 
Arabs, led by the son of Varaz Gregor, Javanshir. 
Albanian historian Musa Qalankatli noted that Javanshir 
and his group of soldiers fought for seven years in these 
wars against the Arabs. During this time, Javanshir 
proved to be a brave soldier and a talented warlord. 
In 636, the Arabs won an important victory in their 
battle against the Persians, which occurred near the 
ancient capital of the Sassanids Empire, Medain. Under 
the command of Sassanids warlord Rustam, 80,000 troops from Atropathene 
fought in the battle against Javanshir and his troops, rhe Persian army suffered a 
defeat, and  Javanshir's army departed.  
Historical chronicles have described brighter victories for Javanshir's troops 
after this battle. Shah-in-Shah of Iran Iezdigerd especially recognized the merits of 
33 
 
Stone capital with Albaian script. 5th-6th 
Centuries.  Caucasian Albania. Museum of 
Azerbaijani History, Baku. 
 
Javanshir and "gave him a banner and loud pipes, two gold spears and a gilded 
board which he had always carried before. 
He esteemed him above all and gave him a 
gold belt, decorated in pearls, and a sword 
with a gold handle. He also gave to him 
bracelets for his wrists and put on his head 
a perfect diadem. He gave him garters, 
decorated in pearls, and he hung many 
strings of pearls around his neck". 
After taking part in several more 
battles, Javanshir understood that the sands 
of the Sassanids Empire were running out, 
and that same year, he returned home. An 
Albanian historian wrote: "In the continuation of seven years, brave Javanshir 
fought in these burdensome wars. Being 11 times badly wounded, he took leave of 
them". 
When those defeated by the Arab Sassanids troops invaded the country in 
639, Javanshir, in union with Georgia and the ruler of Suniq (Zangezur) levied war 
on them. One historian wrote about the courage displayed by him during these 
battles: "He personally struck Gegmazi, the leader of the army. By taking many 
prisoners of war, 
horses, mules and a 
lot of riches, they 
came back. In the 
mountains, they 
confronted them once 
again, and this time, 
the victory went to 
him". 
The Persians seized and held in captivity natives of Javanshir and again 
invaded Albania. Eventually, however, Javanshir finally  overwhelmed the 
Persians. Afterwards, Javanshir married the daughter of Suniq's ruler. However, 
Javanshir could not preserve the independence of Albania. 
In 654, the Arabs invaded Albania under the command of Salman ibn 
Rabiya, commander of the Caliph Osman. Some of their troops even reached 
Gabala, Shaki and Derbent, but past Derbent, Khazars blocked the way. When the 
Arabs arrived outside Derbent, the people of the city locked the gates, and "the 
Khazars Khakan met them with cavalry", killing 4,000 Arabs. As expert historian 
of Albania Kamilla Trever wrote: "The Arabs were probably especially interested 
in the submission of Albania, taking into account its strategic position between 
34 
 
Red earthen candlesticks with 
inscription in Albanian (Caucasian) 
language. 5th-6th Centuries. Azerbaijani  
History Museum, Baku. 
Caucasian Albania. 
Imitations of Hellenistic 
coins (3rd Century AD.) 
 
Khazars in the north and Atropathene (which had still not been subordinated) in the 
south. Its position also included trade-ways from Asia Minor in the Northern 
Caucasus, and mineral resources in Volga 
and in the Russian steppes. 
At Caliph Ali, internal wars strongly 
weakened the Caliphate, and Javanshir took 
advantage of this. Khazars and Byzantium 
now directly threatened the independence of 
Albania, and Javanshir was compelled to 
search for ways of rapprochement with 
Byzantium. He exchanged letters with 
Byzantium Emperor Constantine II and met 
with him a few times as well. Javanshir 
offered to accept the Albanian people under 
his protection, and the Byzantium Emperor accepted this 
offer with great pleasure. He sent Javanshir a precious gift 
on behalf of the Byzantium court, and he named Javanshir 
ruler of Gardman and king of Albania. An Albanian 
historian wrote: "He sent him gifts of magnificent 
souvenirs - silver thrones with cut-out gilt backs, clothes 
made of gold-yarn fabrics, and a sword sprinkled in pearls 
from his own belt... He gave him all the villages and 
regions of the kings of Agvan". The policy of 
rapprochement with Byzantium at that time was clearly 
justified. Its borders, as wrote Qalankatli, now reached 
from "Iberia up to the gates of the Khons and up to the 
river Araks". 
Two years after the conclusion of the treaty with 
Byzantium, Albania was faced with the invasion of 
Khazars. The Khazars reached Kura, where Albanian 
troops defeated them and forced them to retreat from 
Albania. A few years later, the Khazars suddenly made 
another raid, but this time they reached Araks. Javanshir 
was compelled to enter into negotiations with Khazars. 
On the coast of Kura, he met with the Khazars ruler. The 
meeting ended in a peace contract, under which Khazars returned captives, and 
Javanshir married a daughter of Khazars Khakan. Byzantium eased off its struggle 
against the Arabs, which allowed Javanshir to be released from dependence. 
In 667, Javanshir made a move toward negotiations and went to the capital 
city of the Caliphate. The Caliph met him with solemnity and officially recognized 
35 
 
Yezidabad Fortress. 7th 
Century. Nakhchivan. Photo 
by Farid Mamedov. 
 
Stone fiqure. 5-6th 
centuries. Aghdam Region 
CaucasusAlbaniya. 
Republic of  Azerbaijan. 
 
him as king of Albania. The diplomatic talents of Javanshir, as well as his personal 
qualities, allowed him to open up friendly relations with the Caliph. Three years 
later, Javanshir received an invitation from the Caliph 
to be the intermediary in his negotiations with the 
Emperor of Byzantium. Javanshir agreed and carried 
out the task perfectly. Both parties were satisfied with 
the results of the negotiations. 
Javanshir returned home with expensive and 
outlandish gifts, including palace weapons, expensive 
clothes, an elephant and parrots. The establishment of 
friendly relations with the Muslim Caliphate became a 
landmark in the history of Azerbaijan and the process 
of Islamisation in the country. This event was probably 
a reason for the organization of a conspiracy among 
Christian feudalists against their ruler - Javanshir died 
in 669 of serious wounds, inflicted on him by one of 
the participants of the plot. 
Javanshir was an outstanding commander and a 
wise state personality. He was an important figure in 
Azerbaijan's history, as he was able to restore and keep 
independence of the country. He was also a talented 
diplomat and knew how to solve problems peacefully 
and, therefore, established mutual relations with the 
Arabians, Byzantines and Khazarians. Javanshir 
contributed significantly to the development of the 
material and spiritual culture of Albania, which, to a 
large degree, was connected to his friendly relations with 
the Caliphate and Byzantium. 
An outstanding Albanian historian named Musa 
Qalankatli mentioned above wrote "A History of Alba-
nia" under the instruction of Javanshir. Unlike the works 
of historians before him, materials from the palatial 
archives were given to him to be used. For example, he 
cites Vachagan's letters to bishops, Javanshir's letter to 
Byzantium Emperor Constantine, a letter from Constan-
tine to Javanshir, and others. He also cites the elegy of 
the courtier poet Davtak, who wept for Javanshir after his murder and damned the 
murderers. In the conclusion of his poem, he wrote: "He was to us the lamp of the 
true world, a man at the wheel, the tamer of heavy waves, brave Javanshir,  
  
36 
 
Rekonstruction of Javanshir Fortress in İsmayilli. By J. Giyasi. 
 
  
37 
 
Javanshir fortress in İsmayilli. 
6th Century, Republic of Azerbaijan.  
Photo by Farid Mamedov. 
 
 
disseminating host of enemies!" 
Musa Qalankatli wrote that 
Javanshir built many palaces and 
temples in Barda and in other cities. 
Soon after the death of 
Javanshir, Albania obeyed the 
Arabs and the people of its lowlands 
accepted Islam. The Islamization of 
the mountain regions, which had 
kept Christianity until then, was in 
due course delayed, and the 
population of upland Garabagh, by 
accepting the Armenian language as 
the language of the church, partially 
underwent Armenization. 
                                                                                           
 
 
Mavali-Arabic Language 
Poet from Azerbaijan 
 
Musa ibn – Bashshar Shahavat 
 
By the 7th to 9th Centuries, Islam had spread throughout vast territories, 
stretching from Spain to North and West India. Arab, Turkic and Persian peoples 
largely contributed to the dissemination of Islam, the establishment of state 
formations and the so-called "Muslim culture". 
In the first centuries of Islamic dissemination, it was the Arabic language 
that served major means of communication in all the Muslim countries. Persians 
and Turks made a significant contribution to the development of Arabic. It was no 
mere coincidence that a galaxy of outstanding poets arose from Azerbaijan called 
"mavali", who wrote their works in Arabic. In his famous book "Ash-Shir va-sh-
shuara", ibn Qutayb ad-Dinavari - quoting Abul Yazgan - wrote as follows: "There 
is no poet among mavalis in Medina who does not come from Azerbaijan". 
Further, he referred to Ismail ibn Yassar, his brother Musa Shahavat and Abul 
Abbas. It should be noted that in due course Arabic gave way to other languages, 
though it remained a means of spiritual culture. 
Persian and Turkish had to fight heavily to survive as languages. Turkish 
especially had to compete with such highly developed languages as Persian and 
Arabic, which had century-long written literature traditions. Moreover, these 
languages served two major religions - Zoroastrianism and Islam. 
38 
 
A group of Greek 
Philosophers. Mukhtar əl-
Hikam (selection of Wise 
Sayings). 11th century 
(copy). Topkapi saray 
Museum, İstanbul. 
It may then be supposed that long before the adoption of Islam, the Turks 
had maintained close relations with Persian-speaking tribes, had worshipped Ah 
Lira Mazda and, to an extent, had known one of the 
Persian languages or dialects. Therefore, when the 
language of Farsi began combating Arabic, Turks gave 
their preference to the former. Famous Persian-
language poetic schools were established in Central 
Asia and Azerbaijan. Simultaneously, Turkish 
literature arose, inferior to that of neither Arabic nor 
Persian. In nearly all the territories from Baghdad to 
Delhi, Turkish was used as the spoken language of 
nobility and military regulations until the 17th to 19th 
Centuries. Nevertheless, Azerbaijani scholars and 
poets still used Arabic and Persian, as well as Turkish. 
One of the most outstanding Arabic poets from 
Azerbaijan was Musa Shahavat, who wrote in the late 
7th and early 8th Centuries. His father's name was 
Bashshar. There are different views on the origin of 
the poet's pen-name. "Shahavat" is translated from 
Arabic as "greedy" and simultaneously as "sweets". 
According to one version, Musa was engaged in re-selling sweets. According to 
another version, he was very greedy and on seeing somebody wearing expensive 
clothes, eating tasty food or galloping on a horse, he began tearfully to beg for all 
of it. According to historical chronicles, Musa often visited Azerbaijan, his 
motherland, from where he brought back sugar and sweets for resale. In all 
probability, his penname "Shahavat" was attributable to this line of occupation. 
Musa Shahavat's quniya was abu Mahammed. Thus, his full name was abu 
Mahammed Musa ibn Bashshar Shahavat. Regretfully, a collection of verses 
(divan) of Shahavat has not yet been discovered. A few of the poet's well-known 
verses were identified in various collected stories of Tazkire authors of a different 
epoch. For this reason, most of them are of a panegyrical nature. It was basically 
Musa Shahavat's verses that provided scanty biographical information. 
One of the most popular verses by Shahavat was a panegyric in honor of 
emir Said ibn Khalid ibn Abdallah ibn Khalid ibn Asid. Musa Shahavat fell in love 
with a slave, so he decided to marry her. However, the girl's owner demanded 
10,000 dirhams from Musa as ransom. Musa asked his friends to help him, and by 
joint efforts he managed to collect 4,000 dirhams. To get the remaining 6,000 
dirhams, he asked his close friend and cousin Said ibn Khalid al-Osmani, but was 
refused. Then Musa saw his cousin Said ibn Khalid ibn Abdallah ibn Khalid ibn 
Asid, who lent Musa 6,000 dirhams and, even better, presented him with another 
2,000 dirhams for wedding expenses. After that, as the well-known Shahavat 
39 
 
researcher Malik Mahmudov points out, Shahavat wrote a panegyric that brought 
him fame as a wisecracker and poet. 
Using the fact that the names and patronymics of both of his cousins 
coincided, Musa Shahavat was successful in designing his verse so that a panegyric 
to one cousin was replaced by a satire of another. Infuriated by the satire, Said ibn 
Khalid al-Osmani complained to Caliph Suleyman ibn Abd al-Malik. Musa came 
to the Caliph and explained his verse as follows: "Since their names and 
patronymics are identical, I decided to present them under their mothers' names to 
avoid confusion, so 1 did not write a panegyric to cousin Said al-Osmani, and he 
was angry about it". The Caliph was very pleased with the poet's answer, so he let 
Musa go. 
Another well-known work by Musa Shahavat was his laudatory ode 
dedicated to Khamsa ibn Abdallah Mobed, a famous singer of the period. He sang - 
at Shahavat's request - the ode to Khamsa during a grand rally. The singer won a 
prize worth 400 dinars and shared it with the poet. The song was later included in 
the anthology of the 100 best songs of that period. Apparently, as soon as Mobed 
learnt about Guteyb ibn Muslim's seizure of five towns in Central Asia, 
heexclaimed, "My five songs cost more than five towns seized by Guteyb ibn 
Muslim". Among these five songs was the above-mentioned ode by Musa 
Shahavat. 
Another one of Musa's poems included information that in 712, Musa got 
married for the second time to the daughter of Maulana, named Khamida. 
It has to be kept in mind that a number of Musa Shavat's verses came as a 
response to injustices administered by governmental officials and theologians. 
Malik Mahmudov points out that Shahavat's verses were so popular that people 
cited them in everyday life and at court. It was not surprising that individual 
expressions and fragments from Shahavat's verses became current as aphorisms, 
proverbs and sayings 
 
Twenty Years Face to Face 
with the Caliphate 
 
Babek al-Khurami 
 
Azerbaijan was one of the main places of Zoroas-trianism, and the most 
esteemed Zoroastrian temples were located here. That is why one of the primary 
goals of the peasants' rebellion, led by Babek in the beginning of the 9th Century, 
was to banish Islam and restore the ancient beliefs. 
The exact date of Babek's birth is not known, but most scientists believed it 
to be 798-800. The purely Arabic name of his father (Abdulla) indicates that he 
was a Muslim. However, it is possible that Babek's father, like many others, only 
40 
 
Arabian Caliphate. 
Arran. 89 AH. Dirham. 
Silver. 
 
Two warriors of Fatimid Egypt. 11th 
Century. 
 
formally accepted Islam to avoid taxes. Abdulla lived in Azerbaijan and made his 
living by selling oil. He married a woman from the Bilalabad village who gave 
birth to their two children - Hasan (who would later 
accept the name Babek) and Abdulla. 
After robbers murdered Abdulla, his elder son 
Hasan started to baby-sit in order to make a living for his 
mother and little brother.  When Hasan turned 10, he 
became a shepherd. Arab Historian Mahammed Ibn Ishak 
described an interesting fact from this period of Hasan's 
life: Once, Babek's mother went to look for her son who 
had not returned home on time. She found him sleeping 
naked under a tree, and there was blood all over his body. 
When he woke and stood up, the blood changed color and 
disappeared. Babek's mother understood that her son would be engaged in great 
deeds and there would be a lot of blood spilt. 
Several years later, Hasan started to drive 
camel cattle. He traveled a lot with a caravan 
through all of Azerbaijan. Later, his good 
knowledge of the land would help him in a war 
against regular Arabic troops. Afterwards, Hasan 
moved to Tabriz, where, for the first time, he was 
introduced to the Hurramits doctrine. Here he 
understood that the Islamization of Azerbaijan by 
Arabs was fatal. When Hasan turned 18, he 
moved back to Bilalabad, and at this point in his 
life he finally accepted the name Babek. 
In Bilalabad there was a Hurramit 
organization led by a wealthy man Javidan ibn 
Sukhrak who lived in the Baaz fortress. Javidan was engaged in a conflict with his 
neighbour feudal Abu Imran, which kept him constantly ready for action. Once 
Javidan was returning home from Zanjan and stayed for the night in Babek's house. 
Javidan was impressed by Babek. He had not expected to meet such a bright and 
intelligent young man in a poor peasant's house. He invited Babek to join his 
detachment. First, Babek refused as he did not want his mother to stay alone, but 
Javidan promised to pay his mother 10 dirhemmes each month. The next morning, 
Babek left with Javidan for the journey to the Baaz fortress. 
The location of this fortress is still a subject of numerous arguments. 
According to the scholar Bunyatov Baaz, the fortress was situated between the 
rivers Araks and Akhar by the city of Ordubad in the Garabagh district. 
41 
 
Panorama of the Fort of Babek. East  Azerbaijan, Iran. Photo by Khanali Siami. 
 
  
42 
 
Babek worked as the manager of Javidan's estate. Everybody - including 
Javidan's wife - was fond of him. When Javidan was killed in a fight against Abu 
Imrah in 816, his wife gathered warriors by her husband's corpse and declared his 
last will: "Pass my message to my people: my soul will transfer from my body to 
Babek's, who will become very powerful with your help. He will defeat all our 
enemies and restore the doctrines of Mazdac. The most contemptible and worthless 
of you will respect him under his leadership". As Mahammed Ibn Iskhak reported, 
the warriors wondered why Javidan had not told them, to which she replied: 
"Everybody left for their own homes and he couldn't send messengers to you since 
he feared the Arabs would learn about the accident. So I am the one telling you his 
last will: "I will die tonight and my soul will transfer to Babek's body. I am 
delegating my power to him. I'll curse anybody who goes against my will". 
The warriors agreed and Javidan's wife gave orders to kill a bull, to skin it 
and to put a glass of wine and bread on the skin. Everybody put a foot on the skin, 
soaked a piece of bread in wine and ate it, saying, "I believe in you, Babek's spirit, 
as I used to believe in Javidan's spirit". Afterwards, everybody kissed Babek's 
hand, and a feast began. After Babek succeeded Javidan, he became the leader of 
the Hurramitcs community in Baaz and accepted his non-Muslim name, Babek. 
Long before the appearance of Babek, the Hurramites were fighting the 
Arabs and their policy of Islamisation. During Javidan's rule, Azerbaijan turned 
into one of the most severe confrontation places, with Baaz as the Hurramite 
capital. The Hurramites' religion was based on the Mazdakism and Zoroastrianism 
doctrines. It preached the existence of a constant conflict between good and evil, 
and between light and darkness. All his life Babek fought against the Caliphate and 
tried to restore the ancient Zoroastrian and Mazdakism beliefs. 
Muslim historians wrote about the Hurramites from a subjective point of 
view: they described incest among the Hurramites, the lack of a family institution 
and polygamy. According to Muslim historians, Hurramites were constantly 
engaged in drunken fiestas. As Abu Muzaffar Isfarain reported, "Babekitcs of both 
sexes gathered on a hill to engage in all kinds of wrong deeds. Then they turned off 
the lights and every man spent the night with a woman he had won". 
After becoming the Hurramites leader, Babek started to take some serious 
actions: his goals were to banish the Arabs, abolish Islam and restore ancient 
beliefs. A rebellion against the Arabs took place throughout all of Azerbaijan and 
then moved further into the North [Arran] and into the South [Jabil and Khorasan]. 
Babek always destroyed all fortifications and killed Arab soldiers and civilians. 
Also, the local feudal lords who acted against Babek were exterminated. In almost 
20 years, more than 250,000 people were murdered and about 10,000 were 
captured. 
The success of Babek could be explained in favourable circumstances. One 
of them was a conflict between two brothers, Emin and Mamun, who were suc-
43 
 
cessors of their father Caliph Kharun ar-Rashid. Mamun won the conflict, after 
which he changed his policy dramatically in favour of the Arabs, although his 
mother was Persian. In 819 the capital was moved from Khorasan to Baghdad. 
Mamun used regular troops against Babek. However, Babek's army grew much 
stronger and there were several battles that neither side won. Mamun changed his 
commanders several times, but this did not help. 
The first battle took place in 819. The Arab army was commanded by 
Yahya ibn Muaza Ibn Muslim who was later substituted by Isa Ibn Mahammed Ibn 
Abu Khamed, ruler of Azerbaijan and Armenia. Babek won the battle against Abu 
Khamed, and he gradually transformed his poorly equipped detachment into a 
well-organized and trained army. 
After Mamun realized that the situation was getting worse, he appointed 
Mahammed Ibn Khumayda at-Tusi as chief of the army. Under the leadership of 
this talented warrior, Babek was forced to return to Baaz. Khumayda's army 
surrounded the fortress in June of 829, and a battle began which Babek won, using 
his reserved detachments. Babek's victory had a great effect on the whole Arabic 
population. Mamun was going to continue the war against Babek, but he had to 
postpone it as the Caliphate became involved in a war with Byzantine. The 
Hurramites rebellion also involved such places as Isfahan, Fars Kuhistan and 
Khorasan. 
Pre-Arabic customs and ways of life were practiced in Baaz. Women had 
equal rights to men. They did not have to cover their faces, they could choose their 
husbands, and they could socialize with other men. There were always sounds of 
music and singing in Baaz. 
During this peaceful period, Babek started to feel undefeated, and he 
changed his battle strategy. His first wife was Javidan's widow. Then he was 
married to the daughter of Prince Sunik Vasak. According to legend, he had other 
wives as well. Some sources indicated that Babek had seven sons and three 
daughters, while others said it was 17 sons and 23 daughters. 
In 833 Caliph al-Mamun died, and his brother Al-Mutasim succeeded him 
as the new Caliph. In his last will, al-Mamun wrote: "Regarding the Hurramites, 
send against them the most cruel man, and supply him with a lot of money, armor 
and troops. If this man isn't able to defeat the Hurramites, you yourself must fight 
against them". 
The first thing that Mutasim did after becoming Caliph was to reorganize 
the Arab army. He hired a lot of Turks who were known as brave and skillful 
soldiers. It was the Turkish detachments that later played the key role in defeating 
Babek's army. 
The capital was moved from Baghdad to Samarra. The first battle against 
Babek took place near Khamadan. Here Babek changed his traditional battle 
technique and fought in a field. Arabic troops led by Iskhak ibn Ibrahim ibn Musab 
44 
 
won this battle. Thousands of soldiers in Babek's army were killed, and the rest 
escaped. Babek returned to Baaz and started to form a new army. This defeat 
strongly damaged Babek's image, and many of his followers started to question his 
divine origin. Meanwhile, Mutasim ordered one of his emirs, Abu Saids 
Mahammed, to surround the Baaz fortress and to stop the supply of food and 
armour. Several chief detachments of Babek were defeated. 
Afterwards, Mutasim formed a new army and appointed a noble Iranian 
(Turkic by birth) Heydar ibn Kaus el-Afshin, who was known as one of the most 
talented warriors, as its chief commander. 
Afshin was also appointed as ruler of Azerbaijan, Armenia, Arran, Munan 
and Jabal. Afshin was formally a Muslim. However, later events indicated that 
Afshin was following Zoroastrianism and that he wanted to liberate country from 
Arabic rule. 
Afshin was acting slowly in his war against Babek. Many medieval and 
modern historians have interpreted his strategy as an attempt to choose the right 
moment for starting a war against the Caliphat in alliance with Byzantine and 
Babek. In the spring of 836 Afshin reached Baaz and surrounded the fortress. 
Babek remembered the bad experience of the battle near Khamadan and decided to 
stay in the fortress. Afshin waited patiently for Babek to leave the fortress. Finally, 
Afshin made a tactical move: he pretended that his army was leaving. One of 
Babek's groups of soldiers tried to chase away the army and was defeated. 
Another time, one of the prominent Arabian generals, Buga al-Kabir, 
engaged in a battle against Babek, which the latter won. This didn't stop Buga and 
he kept waiting for another opportunity to beat Babek. 
At one point, a detachment of several thousand of Buga's soldiers stopped to 
spend the night in the mountains. Babek's armv was able to kill almost all of the 
Arabians. Afshin's brother was seriously wounded, and Buga could hardly escape. 
At the end of the winter Mutasim sent another 9,000 Turkish soldiers under 
the leadership of Itakh and Jafar ibn Dinar. Babek wrote in his letter to Roman 
Emperor Phiofil: "The king of the Arabs has sent against me almost everybody 
including those living in the palace. If you decide to attack this country now, 
nobody will stop you". After receiving this message, Phiofil started a war against 
the Caliphate. However, despite the difficulties of the war against the Romans, 
Mutasim transferred none of his soldiers from Azerbaijan. After winning the war 
against the Romans, Mutasim wrote to Afshin: "Allah made the Romans escape 
when they saw our army. You must finish with Babek as soon as possible". Afshin 
decided to surround the Baaz fortress. Babek sent Adsin one of his most skillful 
commanders with a detachment of 10,000 soldiers to stop Afshin. 
Adsin's detachment was defeated and he had to return back to Baaz. Babek's 
other attempt to stop Afshin also did not work. Afshin, therefore, was able to sur-
round the Baaz and to establish a camp as Afshin was planning for a long siege. 
45 
 
Gold cup. Early 11th Century. 
Azerbaijan. British Museum. London. 
 
Normal life was continuing to pass inside the fortress. During the nights the 
Hurramitc troops left the fortress but most of them were beaten. However, when 
Jafar ibn Dinar was not able to attack the 
fortress successfully, Babek became hopeful, 
and he decided to take a new courageous 
action. In the event of success, this would 
have completely destroyed Afshin's army. 
Before the next attack of Arabs, Babek sent 
almost all of his soldiers led by Adsin to hide 
in the forest on a mountain. However, Afshin 
learnt about this move and at night three of 
his detachments surrounded the forest, and 
Jafar's army attacked the fortress. On the next day Adsin's army was completely 
destroyed and he himself was killed. 
Babek watched the battle from the fortress. He understood that this war was 
ending. When the Turkish detachment rushed into the fortress, Babek decided to 
win some time and asked for official forgiveness in written form from the Caliph. 
Afshin sent messengers to the capital. Babek used this opportunity and escaped to 
Arran hoping to get from there to 
Byzantium. When Afshin learnt about the 
escape, he ordered the ruin of the fortress. 
Afshin concealed a large amount of booty 
from the Caliph and sent most of it to his 
homeland. Later a historian wrote, "This 
wealth would be a foundation for the 
establishment of an independent 
Maverannahr, where Afshin would be king, and his closest friends would be the 
heads of provinces". 
When the Caliph finally sent the letter of forgiveness, Afshin asked Babek's 
son to take it to Babek. The son refused, and none of the captives agreed to do it 
either. They said, "O, Amir, none of us would ever agree. You don't know Babek 
as we do". After all of that, Afshin made one of the prisoners take the letter to 
Babek. Babek cut the prisoner's head, saying: "Who are you that you bring me a 
message from a dog?" 
Babek and five of his fellow travelers - his brother Abdulla, his mother, his 
wife, his commander-in-chief Muaviya and his servant were trying to reach 
Byzantium. After a long journey they reached the area where Babek's close friend 
Sahl ibn Sumbat lived. This man invited Babek to stay at his castle and assured 
him of his loyalty. 
46 
 
Silver dish with repousse 
figures. Iran, probably 
8th Century. British 
Museum, London. 
 
By that time, however, Sahl ibn 
Sumbat had already received a letter from 
Afshin promising million dirham award for 
the capture of Babek. Therefore, he sent one 
of his men who knew Babek into the castle. 
Sahl wanted Babek to be arrested outside the 
castle so that he wouldn't understand who had 
betrayed him. Babek and his brother were 
captured while they were hunting. Sahl 
received his award and other gifts, and also 
was freed from paying taxes. M. Tomara 
wrote, "Beginning from this time Sahl's luck 
began, and the legendary man from Palestine 
founded a kin that later gave kings to 
Armenia, Abkhasia and Georgia". The 
scholar Bunyatov, however, wrote that Sahl 
ibn Sumbat was the descendant of Albanian 
King Zarmikh and by this refused the hypoth-
esis about his Armenian origin. 
Afshin and the prisoners started to move towards the capital. He was met by 
his son Motasim-Garun and by noblemen. They awarded Afshin and the last act of 
a tragedy started. 
Babek and his brother were taken to the capital in 
rich clothes riding an elephant and a camel. There were 
a lot of soldiers in fancy clothes along the road, and 
Babek kept repeating, "What a shame that I wasn't able 
to kill all of these dogs!" Finally, they reached the 
Caliph's palace. M. Tomara described this event: "All 
buildings were decorated with fancy carpets. A hundred 
lions were chained in the palace yard. The Caliph's per-
sonal guards with fancy weapons were there, as well as 
7,000 white slaves. Walls were decorated in expensive 
arms. The prisoners were taken into the palace. They 
passed through a famous room with a tree, which had eighteen golden branches 
and golden birds with gems instead of eyes, and then they reached the Caliph's 
hall. Mutasim was waiting for them with a chief on his left side and Chief Kadi 
Akhmcd ibn Abi Duad on his right side. A skin of torture was laid on the floor and 
an executioner stood by it. Executions took place according to an ancient custom 
on this piece of skin in the presence of the Caliph. Afshin was seated close to the 
Caliph". 
47 
 
Babek had an executioner named Nudnud who was brought to the capital 
with other prisoners. He was supposed to kill Babek and his brother. First, Babek 
was named. Then Nudnud cut Babek's right hand and slapped Babek's face several 
times with it. He did the same with Babek's left hand. Then he cut both legs. 
Babek lay in a bloody pool. Then Nudnud took out Babek's stomach and 
after that he cut off his head. Babek's body was crucified and exposed in Samaria. 
This place since then was called "Babek's cross". Babek's head was put on the main 
bridge of Baghdad and after that was sent to Khorasan as a warning to the local 
people who were going to rebel. Babek's brother was executed the same way in 
Baghdad. 
Afshin was at the peak of his glory. The best poets honored him in their 
poems. He received 20 million dirhams from the Caliph. Afshin's son Hasan 
married Utruju, the daughter of the most prominent Turkish general, Ashnas. The 
Caliph himself brought his bride to the wedding. 
However, Afshin's mounting strength started to disturb the Caliph. He was 
accused of a secret relationship with Babek, of worshiping idols and of designing a 
plot with the aim of destroying the Arab empire and restoring the one that existed 
during Khosrof's reign. He was condemned, but the Caliph didn't want to execute 
him since he was afraid of Afshin's popularity among the people. Afshin died from 
natural causes in prison. 
Babek's rebellion covered a vast territory equal to the territories of the 
modern European states. Over the period of 20 years, Babek, due to his brilliant 
military talent, led a huge peasant state where he tried to make his people happy 
and free. Every time Azerbaijani people stand to fight for their independence and 
liberty, the name and deeds of their great ancestors show them the right way. 
 
The First Azerbaijani Poet to Become 
Known in the Middle East 
 
Qatran Azerbaijani (Tabrizi) 
 
One of the first poets in Azerbaijan to become famous throughout the 
Middle East was Qatran Tabrizi. He was born in 1010 near Tabriz in the town of 
Shahbad. His full name was Abu Mansur Qatran Jili Azerbaijani. He went to 
school in Shahbad, and then continued his studies in Tabriz. At that time in 
Azerbaijan, one of the most authoritative and advanced states was the state of 
Shaddadids, with its capital city in Ganja, which from the time of the flowering of 
the Arabian Caliphate, became the cultural centre of the north of the Muslim 
world. In Ganja there were universities, schools, private and public libraries, 
observatories and medical centres. From there, Muslim culture was spread to 
neighbouring Christian countries. Scientists, poets, architects, and handicraftsmen 
48 
 
from many Eastern countries gathered there. Qatran moved there after finishing his 
studies. In Ganja he was soon linked to the court of Shaddadids, where he became 
a major influence. 
The majority of Qatran's verses of that period were devoted to Abdulhasan 
Lashkari, the country's ruler, and to events connected with him. Because of this it 
is possible to determine the time Qatran spent in Ganja. Qatran wrote about the 
visit of a governor of the state of Ravvadids, Abu Mansur Vahsudan, to Abdul 
Hasan Lashkari's court in Ganja. This visit, as researchers of the poet consider, 
could have taken place between 1035 and 1040. In 1042 Qatran was already in 
Tabriz and was the witness of a terrible earthquake, which demolished a large part 
of the city. Hence, Qatran returned to Tabriz before this tragic event, though some 
researchers think that Qatran went to Ganja after the earthquake. The possibility 
that Qatran returned repeatedly to Ganja is not excluded. 
Qatran met the well-known Iranian poet and philosopher Nasir Khosrov in 
Tabriz in 1046. In his famous book "Safar-nama" (The Book of Trips), Nasir 
Khosrov wrote about meeting a magnificent poet called Qatran. 
From then on, Qatran was in Nakhchivan in the Palace of the local 
governor, and then went back again to Tabriz. Qatran Tabrizi acquired large 
popularity in many countries after his death as a talented poet, scientist and wise 
philosopher. He was well known and loved in Khorasan and Iraq. Qatran wrote 
such famous writings as "Kovs-nama", "Gush-nama", "Vamik and Azra" and 
"Divan", consisting in the main form of qasids. Rashid Vatvat, a 12th Century 
Central Asian poet, wrote that he knew only one true poet, Qatran Tabrizi. 
Qatran began to write poetry from an early age and had great success. A 
large part of his work was devoted to qasids, eulogizing different rulers. To the 
modern reader they are interesting for their objective valuation of the Palace's 
political climate and events, in which heroes of the qasids participated. For 
example, information, brought by Qatran Tabrizi about several campaigns of the 
Oguzs in Azerbaijan, is very interesting. His verses about the earthquake in Tabriz 
have brought him glory and are still read today with excitement: 
 
Make your way to Tabriz, learn how God's mighty had cast 
                                                                                    it down,  
Make your way to Tabriz, learn the tale of that most tragic town.  
The city through the centuries raised its head to the sky.  
Through the centuries men raised its walls up on high.  
The town where men stretched out their hands for a star,  
The town that raised lowers to Saturn on far, 
 Lost its pride and was crushed in the space of one hour,  
Death took a great toll in the span of one hour.  
Many women of beauty, like Kashmir's most fair,  
Died in gardens of paradise - still they lie there.  
The departed, entombed, shall rest evermore 
49 
 
Abu-Mahammed Abdul Kayum 
Tabrizi, 1370. Water colour, ink 
And gold on  Paper. Jelayerids 
state.  
 
In once lovely homes in the earth's ghastly maw.  
Men whose homes were once filled with rich goods of all kinds.  
Men whose stores were once tilled with rich goods of all kinds.  
Have been felled by misfortune and roll in the dust.  
They perforce sold their sons for the sake of a crust.  
People starve though the city is bursting with bread.  
People thirst though the waters have everywhere spread. 
In penury people put value on wealth. 
But, death being near, on life and on health... 
 
Azerbaijani scholars, on the basis of the analysis of  medieval sources, have 
shown that Qatran Tabrizi was the first in the history of Persian lexicography to 
compile an explanatory dictionary of the Parsi language. Many scholars wrote 
about Qatran's work, including Asadi Tusi, a poet who compiled the Persian 
language diction ary, "Logate" (9th Century); 
Mahammed bin Hindushah  (13th  Century),   the  
author  of another  dictionary Sikhakhul-furs", and 
Nakhchivani. 
In his work "Safar-name", the well-known 
Iranian poet Nasir Khosrov Alvi describes the  
process of the ere- ation of Qatran's dictionary: 
"In Tabriz I met with the poet known as 
Qatran. He recited perfect verses, but his Persian is 
a little poor. He brought and read to me "Divan'"s 
by Dagigi and Man jikin and asked me to explain 
some unintelligible words to him. Then he wrote 
their interpretation and read me his verses". 
Most experts believe this idea of Nasir 
Khosrov can be explained by the fact that Persian 
(Dari) was not Qatran Tabrizi's mother tongue and 
that he was the first Azerbaijani poet writing in this 
language. 
For the most part, medieval authors called the dictionary simply "Logate 
Qatran", (The Dictionary of Qatran) or with a similar meaning "Farkhange Qatran" 
or with a similar meaning "Farkhange Qatran". Later his dictionary was called 
"Tafasir fi lugatil-furs", or subsequently in an abbreviated form "Tafasir". Qatran 
Tabrizi has undoubtably made an appreciable mark on the   development   of  
poetry and lexicography in Azerbaijan and Iran. 
Qatran Tabrizi died in Tabriz in 1080 and was buried in the Suhrab quarter 
in the famous cemetery of poets. 
 
 
50 
 
Khanaghah. Pirsahat, Shirvan. 13th-15th Centuries. 
Azerbaijan Republic. 
 
The Holy Shirazian From Shirvan 
 
Baba Kukhi Bakuvi 
 
Far from Baku in Shiraz there is a grave, which is very popular among the 
local population and for numerous pilgrims. This tomb has numerous legends of its 
history. According to one of them, the great Persian poet Hafiz received a poetic 
inspiration after praying all night at this grave, the grave of his teacher. According 
to another legend, a daughter of Shirvanshah was buried near this esteemed grave, 
as if she arrived here to look after his grave and to serve pilgrims who came here 
from all countries of the Muslim world. The person, who was deserving of so much 
respect during his life and so deeply esteemed for almost 1,000 years, was a native 
of Shirvan named Baba Kukhi 
Bakuvi. 
The first mention of his 
name in modern sources can be 
found in the work of 
Bakikhanov, "Gulistani-lrem": 
"Sheikh abu Abdullah Ali bin 
Mahammed from Baku, 
according to many historians, 
was notable in secular and 
spiritual sciences. From an 
early age he learnt from famous 
contemporaries such as Sheikh 
Abdull-Khafif and Sheikh 
Abul-Qasim-Kesheri. He had a scientific dispute with the well-known Sheikh Abu 
Sayid Abu Khayr and a long-term connection with Sheikh Abul-Abbas from 
Nigavend, who highly appreciated his knowledge. Towards the end of his life he 
retired from society and lived in a cave near Shiraz where the most literate people 
in the East visited him. He died in 1051". 
Information about Baba Kukhi Bakuvi can be found in the book, "Essay on 
the History of Medieval Baku", by Sara Khanum Ashurbeyli: "Some people think 
that he was Sufi. I do not intend to judge so quickly this old and, for a long time, 
confused question. I shall only remind you that Bakuvi never called himself Sufi, 
but directly considered Sufism as a hostile ideology. He was Kalandar, which had 
some differences to Sufism". 
Baba Kukhi Bakuvi wrote the philosophical treatises,   "Akhbar-al-Arifin",   
"Akhbar   al-Gafilin" and  "Badayat khal al-Khallaj", in Arabic, and a collection of 
verses "Divan" in Parse. Krimskiy wrote this about "Divan": "It is sometimes 
difficult to decide whether it is an allegorical hymn about the ardent love of 
51 
 
Shiraz, Iran. Baba Kukhis living and 
burial place. 
 
mystics to God or a burning sensual song of brave, passionate descent towards 
earthly and flirtatious women": 
 
"My heart has tormented, but my sweet has no business up to it.  
I suffered in separation, but my sweet does not desire to cure me.  
From my eyes tears flowed, more plentifully than pearl rain from clouds.  
But her mouth laughs, and she does not want to bind up  
The wound of my heart". 
 
The history of one of the oldest manuscripts of "Divan", is very interesting. 
The Iranian scientist Khabibullah Imad found a chest hidden in the wall whilst he 
was renovating his house, in which among other manuscripts was "Divan", by 
Bakuvi. 
There is much uncertainty regarding the biography of the poet. So far some 
researchers, including the outstanding scholar Zakir Mamedov, have considered 
that the author of the treatises was Baba Kukhi, but "Divan" was written by 
Mahammed Bakuvi. The spelling of "Divan" 
relates to a later term. The dispute is not resol-
ved yet; therefore, the biography of Baba Kukhi 
Bakuvi will be stated here, basically, according 
to the book "The World Outlook of Baba Kukhi 
Bakuvi", by Solmaz Rzakulizade. This book 
completely investigated, for the first time, the 
thinker's creativity, and it considered that both 
of the mentioned works belonged to one person: 
Baba Kukhi Bakuvi. 
Bertels wrote, "It is my deep belief that 
"Divan" by Kukhi really belongs to a scholar 
and sheikh, known also by the name ibn 
Bakuya. We also completely contribute this belief, and on the base of recognition 
of the identity of Baba Kukhi and ibn Bakuya, we shall state the thinker's 
biography". 
Baba Kukhi was born in Baku in 933 or 934. It is believed that he was the 
brother of known thinker and vizier of Shirvanshah Minuchihr, Pir Husein 
Shirvani. His grave, which is in the village of Navahi on the river Pirsaghat, is still 
there and is often visited by his devotees. He lived for more than 100 years and 
died in 1074. His full name was abu Abdallah Mahammed ibn Abdal-lah ibn 
Ubaydullah ibn Bakuye. Nisba Shirazi, or Nishapuri, is frequently added because 
Kukhi lived in Nishapur and Shiraz for a long time. 
52 
 
Khamsa of Nizami: Iskandar  
visiting a Hermit. Atributed to Mir 
Musavvir. 1535-1540. British 
Museum, London. 
Initially, Baba Kukhi was educated by his 
father who was a theologian. He displayed his 
independent character and love of travel from an 
early age. After a quarrel with his brother, he 
moved to the lowlands of the river Pirsaghat, and 
then to the region of the sacred mountain 
Babadagh (a number of researchers believe that 
this mountain was named in honour of Baba 
Kukhi). After that, he travelled around 
Azerbaijan, Iran and other countries, meeting 
scientists and visiting sacred places. It is thought 
that he returned to Shirvan some time around 
988-990. 
In his youth Baba Kukhi dreamed of 
becoming a Muhadis, a composer of a collection 
of hadises. However, to write new hadises, it was 
necessary to meet with other Muhadises and 
travel extensively around different cities and 
countries. Bakuvi wrote many hadises. Abd 
Allah Ansari wrote that according to Bakuvi, he 
succeeded in writing 30,000 hikayats and 3,000 hadises. 
Bakuvi lived in Shiraz for many years with his teacher abu Abdallah ibn 
Khafif. Under his influence, Bakuvi became a follower of Sufism in 981-982. 
When abu Abdallah ibn Khafif died, it is believed that Bakuvi started traveling 
again. He visited centres of science, including Baghdad. Then he went to Nishapur, 
a centre of the distribution of the Sufi doctrine in the 10th and 11th Centuries. 
Solmaz Rzakulizade wrote about this period of Bakuvi's life: "Here, on the one 
hand, disciples of Sheikh Bayazid al-Bistami were calling for "ecstasy" and 
preaching the need to "be in trance by God", and intoxication (Ar.-Sukr) by divine 
love. On the other hand, the disciples of Sheikh Juneyd al-Baghdadi, believing in 
"ecstasy", confused danger for Sufi. The disciples of Juneyd thought that the 
unique faithful way for Sufis was a condition "of sobriety and quiet sober prayer". 
Ancient sources tell us about the friendship of Bakuvi and the Khorasans 
Abu Abd ur-Rahman Sullami and abu al-Qasim Kushayri, and about their 
discussions with abu Abbas Nekhavendi (in which he recognised the superiority of 
Bakuvi in the end). They also tell us about his direct contacts with abu Said ibn 
Abul-Khayr, a Sufi Sheikh who was popular at that time. 
Bertels wrote this about the Nishapur period of Bakuvi's life: "It is possible 
to admit that in Nishapur the theological beliefs of Kukhi underwent essential 
changes. The credo of the Khorasan school of Sufism disagreed with the doctrines 
of the Iraqi school. It was that moment when the Khorasan Sufis began to diverge 
53 
 
from the influence of Iraq and have the concepts of Sufism stated in numerous 
theoretical works, such as Kushayri, Sarraj, Jullabi and Sulami. Thus, Kukhi was 
involved in an area which must have caused him serious internal struggles". 
After the death of Sulami, the control of Sufi Khanaka was passed to 
Bakuvi, which testifies to his large influence at that time. However for some 
obscure reasons he left Nishapur and moved to Shiraz. Near Shiraz,  in the 
mountains at the town of Jafarabad, there were caves. Bakuvi settled down in one 
of them and never left it; he spent his last years in persistent labour and prayers. 
The main works of Baba Kukhi were written there. The scholar was popular 
throughout the East. People traveled to him from all over the region to worship and 
receive advice. 
The region were Baba Kukhi was buried was named in his honour, 
according to the geographer N. Keremov. Famous poets such as Nizami Ganjavi 
("Iskender-name"), Saadi, Hafiz, Abd ur-Rahman Jami, Nasimi, Seyid Azim 
Shirvani and many others wrote verses about Baba Kukhi Bakuvi. Right up to the 
present day, people in Shirvan have kept legends and songs connected with the 
memory of the great Shirvanian. The outstanding Azerbaijani traveller and 
geographer Zeynal ab-Din Shirvani visited the mausoleum of Baba Kukhi at the 
beginning of the last century. He paid the expenses for the reconstruction of the 
mausoleum and the nearby territory. 
 
The Outstanding Disciple 
of Ibn Sina 
 
Bahmanyar al-Azerbaijani 
 
Abu-1-Hasan Bahmanyar ibn al-Marzban al-Azer-baijani was one of the 
most eminent Azerbaijani philosophers and an outstanding representative of the 
philosophical school of peripatetism. 
The time of Bahmanyar's birth is not known. The date of his death was 
given in the 12th century author Ali ibn Zayd al-Paykhani's work, "Tatimmat sivan 
al-khikma". In this work, he wrote, "The Philosopher Bahmanyar Sage, a disciple 
of Abu Ali [ibn Sina], a fire worshipper, did not have a good command of Arabic 
and came from Azerbaijan. Among Bahmanyar's books are "Cognition", "About 
Music" and a set of treatises. Bahmanyar died in 458 (1065-1066), 30 years after 
the death of Abu Ali". 
Professor Zakir Mamedov looked at the following facts and legends in order 
to determine Bahmanyar's date of birth. Stories told that once, when ibn Sina was 
at a smithy, someone went there and asked the blacksmith for a fire. The  
blacksmith said to him: "Bring me a shovel and I shall give you some coal". The 
applicant then tapped on the ground and said to the smith, "Put some coal in this 
54 
 
Aristotle (left). The description 
of Animals, by Ibn Bakhtishu. 
Early 13th Century. 
 
Socrates in discussion with 
his pupils. Seljuk manuscript. 
13th Century. Topkapi 
Palace Library, Istanbul. 
 
shovel", ibn Sina was so amazed by the intelligence of the young man that he 
offered him a place as one of his students. That young man was Bahmanyar. 
Bahmanyar mentioned in one of his stories 
that he was among the pupils of ibn Sina. "One fine 
day the other pupils of ibn Sina and 1 had a lesson on 
Saturday. We very lazily participated in the dis-
cussed theme so the teacher said, "Your break has 
obviously passed without benefit". My friends and 1 
answered that during our break we went to take a 
walk and consequently could not complete our task. 
In reply to this, the teacher sighed and with tears in 
his eyes said, "The equilibrist by daily exercise 
reaches such a degree of perfection that amazes even 
an expert in everything. Why were none of you wise 
enough to prefer schoolwork to inactivity?" 
Ibn Sina wrote that Bahmanyar was closer to him than a son and that he had 
brought him up and had given him a good education so that he could be an 
outstanding scientist. From all this information, it 
follows that Bahmanyar must have been 10-15 years 
younger than ibn Sina and, therefore, he must have 
been born at the end of the 10th Century. A number of 
works by medieval authors and several polemical 
works of ibn Sina, such as "Al-mubakhasat" ("Joint 
Discussions") and "At-Alikat" ("Explanations"), were 
created from discussions with Bahmanyar about 
questions of physics, metaphysics, psychology and 
logic. 
Fortunately, for the history of science, 
"Explanations" was saved in Bahmanyar's own library. 
Two letters, based on conversations between 
Bah-manyar and ibn Sina, are stored in St. Petersburg 
and Tashkent. Bahmanyar's work was very popular 
and had a wide circulation throughout the East. His works were rewritten and 
stored in many universities and palatial libraries. Among Bahmanyar's most 
popular works were "At-tahsil" ("Knowledge"), "Az-zina" ("Ornament"), "Al-
bajava-saada" ("Pleasure and Happiness") and "Fil-musika" ("About music"). 
Manuscripts of his books have been rewritten and distributed up to the present day 
and are stored in almost all large libraries in the world. Since the last century, his 
books have been translated into European languages. Some of Bahmanyar's works 
were translated into Persian almost immediately after being written. "At-tahsil" 
55 
 
was translated into Russian by the outstanding orientalist A. Sagadeev and and was 
published in Baku in 1983 in three volumes. 
Bahmanyar created a new school of philosophy. His scientific and teaching 
activity has played a major part in the development and distribution of scientific 
and philosophical ideas in Azerbaijan and the East as a whole. 
Among his disciples was the outstanding philosopher and poet Abul Abbas 
al-Lavkaki of Khorasan. Through al-Lavkaki and Abulfat ibn Khayyam (another 
disciple and philosopher), researchers of Bahmanyar have been able to trace a 
connection between the scientific schools of Bahmanyar and Nasiraddin Tusi. 
The well-known enlightener and historian of Muslim cultures Shihab ad-
Din al-Marjani, when speaking about the history of philosophy, placed Bahmanyar 
among the four most prominent philosophers from the East. He said, "The greatest 
among them were Abu Nasr al-Farabi, Abu Ali ibn Sina, Kadi Abul Valid 
Mahammed ibn Ahmad ibn Rushd and Bahmanyar ibn al-Marzban". 
 
The Leader of the Arabian 
Scientists 
 
Khatib Tabrizi 
 
In the middle of the 11 th Century, 
Azerbaijan was still included in the Arabian 
Caliphate. Although the Caliphate had 
already begun its decline, intensive 
development of science, poetry and art, 
which had begun during the rule of the first 
three Caliphs, continued. Academies 
("Homes of Wisdom"), universities (mad-
rasah), schools, public and private libraries 
and observatories were functioning in the 
cities. Knowledge spread among the 
prosperous city-dwellers as well as the com-
mon people. 
A young man with a khurjin (valise) 
on his shoulder traveled along the dusty way 
from Tabriz to Syria. In his khurjin was a 
little meal, and his other arm held books. 
The young man was named Khatib and he was from Tabriz. He was heading for a 
small town called Maara an-Numan, where a philologist, known in the East as the 
scientist Abul-Ala al-Maariya, lived. 
56 
 
At school, Khatib look a great interest in the theory of Eastern poetics, and 
he collected and read many books on this theme. A talented young man at the age 
of 20, he had questions that local scientists could not answer, and one of them 
advised Khatib to seek help from a known linguist living in small Syrian town. 
When Khatib reached his place of destination, the books he had been 
carrying on his shoulders were drenched in perspiration flowing down from his 
shoulders. This episode was from the life of a young man who would later become 
a great scientist. In fact, these books were exhibited in a mosque during the last 
farewell to this sound scholar. 
An Arabian scientist recognized the great Azerbaijani scientist, litterateur, 
linguist, poet and commentator as the "leader of literary, grammatical and lexico-
graphical sciences". He was also described as "a wise sheikh, the leader of Arabian 
sciences, gonfalon of literary criticism, a source of wisdom, the leader of all writ-
ers". The scholar G. Arasli named him "the greatest person raised by Azerbaijan in 
the 11th Century". 
Yahya bin Ali Khatib Tabrizi was born in 1030 in the capital city of 
Azerbaijan, Tabriz. Details of Khatib's childhood and adolescence are unknown to 
us. All chroniclers began his biography from his arrival in the small Syrian town 
Maara an-Numan. 
Abul-Ala al-Maariya, who Khatib came to learn from, was one of the 
greatest representatives of Arabian literature and an experienced connoisseur of 
Arabian linguistics and philology. Khatib Tabrizi later wrote that there could 
hardly be found any word spoken by Arabs that Abul-Ala did not know. The 
scientist was blind and had a phenomenal memory. 
One story tells about his incredible ability to recite from memory: "In 
Neman, in the mosque of Maar, I was sitting before him (Abul-Ala) and reading 
something to him from books. I had been with him for two years and had not seen 
a single person from my country. But suddenly I saw one of my neighbours 
entering the mosque to offer prayers, and I knew him at once. I felt an immense 
pleasure. Abul-Ala said to me, "What has happened to you?" I answered him that 
in two years I had not met anybody from my country, and that I had just seen one 
of my neighbours. He said to me, "Go and have a talk with him". I said, "Let's 
round off a lesson", to which he replied, "Stand up, I shall wait for you". 
I rose and spoke with the neighbour at some length in Azerbaijani. I 
returned and sat before him (Abul-Ala). He asked which language it was. I 
answered, "This is the language of the population of Azerbaijan". He said, "it is a 
language I do not know and do not understand. However, 1 memorized all of your 
conversation". After that, he repeated our entire conversation word for word. My 
neighbour was very surprised and said, "How could he learn it if he didn't 
understand it?" 
57 
 
An ancient chronicler wrote that after ending his studies with Abul-Ala, 
Khatib continued to study in various countries and cities of the Middle East with 
the most famous scientists of that time. The professor Mahmudov, however, has 
shown that before departing on his trip, Khatib went back to his motherland Tabriz. 
It was probably just after the death of his teacher in 1057, or little bit earlier. 
Khatib stayed in Tabriz for only a short while. 
The plan to study again attracted him and soon he was in Syria again. He 
went to different cities there to have lessons in theology, lexicography and poetics 
from well-known Arabian scientists at that time - Ali Raggi, ibn Dakhan, ibn 
Burkhan and Salim Razi. 
In 1064 Khatib went to Damascus, where his friendship with famous 
historian Khatib Baghdadi (1002-1071) began. Baghdadi happened to be not only a 
good teacher and friend, but also a rich maecenas. He helped Khatib Tabrizi 
financially and helped him with his purchase of writing materials and paper. 
After this, Khatib went to Egypt, where he studied Arabian grammar with 
the noble scientist Takhir ibn Babashaz. 
On September 22, 1067, a significant event occurred in the cultural life of 
the Middle East. A university opened in Baghdad that would become well known 
throughout the East. It was opened by the Seljuk Turk hakims and was named 
Nizamiyya in honour of the Persian Nizamimulk. 
This university differed from others, not only because of the size, 
equipment and large group of scientists and teachers assembled from all over the 
Middle East, but also because of the administrative system. This was the first 
known state university. The teachers and students were here completely under state 
funding. The educational program, determined also by the state, was aimed at 
orthodox Islam. Despite this, the university continued teaching secular subjects, 
such as history, linguistics, astronomy, mathematics and others, and it played a 
huge role in the development of the various sciences. Seljuk hakims personally 
selected the teachers. From the first day of the university's opening, and up to the 
final days almost 40 years later, Khatib Tabrizi taught philology there and was the 
organizer and chief of its famous library. 
Scientists from all over the East were assembled in Baghdad at that time, 
and in order to be approved among them, it was necessary to have significant 
scientific authority. Khatib Tabrizi had the opportunity to use the huge library at 
the university, and he constantly filled up with the necessary literature and 
organized lectures and disputes with the participation of the university teachers, as 
well as a large number of scientists, who were attracted to Baghdad by the glory of 
this educational establishment. 
On 3 January 1109, the great scientist died. Khatib Tabrizi was buried in 
Baghdad in the cemetery called Bab Abraz. 
58 
 
Literary criticism was the primary focus of Khatib Tabrizi's creative 
activities. He wrote about 20 treatises on this theme. Khatib Tabrizi wrote 
comments on the Koran in four books, literary works and a number of treatises 
devoted to lexicography, grammar and theory of Arabian poetics. 
Mahammed Ali Tarbiyet analyzed the significance of Khatib Tabrizi's 
works in the Arabian literary field, and he named Khatib Tabrizi the "mother" of 
the Arabian language. The professor Mahmudov considered that his works could 
be divided into four groups: the comments on poetic works, linguistic treatises, 
theological research and works on problems of poetics. 
Of Khatib Tabrizi's comments on poetic works, the largest interest is 
presented in the comments on the work by Arabian poet Abu Tammam (796-843) 
called "Khamasa" ("Heroism"). The history of the creation of this work is very 
interesting. Coming back from Khorasan in Iraq, he stayed in Khamadan at his 
friend Abul Vafa Salam's home. Although he had not planned to stay in 
Khamadan, a strong snowfall compelled him to remain at his friend's for some 
months. Due to his good memory and his friend's very rich library, Abu Tammam 
created an anthology of Arabian poetry and called it "Khamasa". It included the 
works of more than 600 poets over 300 years. 
As soon as he had written it, the anthology became so popular that the Abu 
Tammam's own creativity remained apart. About this, Khatib Tabrizi wrote, "Abu 
Tammam in "Khamasa" displayed himself more as a poet than in his own poetic 
creativity". Hereinafter, similar things happened with the comments of Khatib 
Tabrizi. His comments, due to brevity and the clarity of exposition, became more 
popular than "Khamasa". 
Khatib Tabrizi returned to this theme three times. The first included short 
comments on the contents of I separate verses, and the second explained separate 
bits. I Finally, the third set of comments appeared, and these were the most 
extensive and complete. Only his second set of comments has reached us, bringing 
the scholar eternal glory. 
This work was published in Europe in four large books in 1850 in Latin and 
in 1828, 1873 and 1938 in Arabic. It is interesting that on his way to the place of 
his teacher Abul Ala al-Maariya, Khatib went to Mosul, where one local scientist 
rewrote Abu-Tamam's book. 
In 1082-1083 Khatib Tabrizi, the first of Arabian scientists, wrote 
comments on his teacher Abul Ala al-Maariya's book called "Sagt-az-zand" ("The 
First Sparks, Beaten out from Silicon"). 
Already in old age, Khatib Tabrizi began his last work "Kitab al-Kafi fi-1-
aruz va-1-Kafavi" ("The results of science about aruz and rhyme"). The work was 
devoted to a theory of Arabian poetics and soon became very popular. Many 
generations of students, even up to the present, have used the book as a textbook 
on the theory of poetics. Many scientists of theory of Middle East poetics refer to  
59 
 
Punishment of a book thief. Safavid Miniature. The Majalis al-Ushshaq. ca. 1560. 
Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris. 
  
60 
 
this book. In order to simplify the text to make it easier for students to commit it to 
memory, poet Ahmad Fulji (who died in 1425) rewrote the book in verses. 
European scientists began to show interest in this book in the beginning of 
the 19th Century. Many lists of the treatise "Al Kafi..." are now found in different 
storehouses all over the world, and critical texts of this essay are prepared and 
published. Azerbaijani scientist Galey Allahverdiev, who comprehensively 
investigated the essay for the first time, wrote: "Kitab al-Kafi fi-1-aruz va-1-
Kafavi" presents the entire doctrine on the theory of literature, poetics, orator and 
stylists". 
The manuscripts of Khatib Tabrizi are kept in many known museums and 
libraries. The most worthy of them is the manuscript of the comments on the 
anthology "Mufadaliyyat" by the poet Mufadala Dabi, which is stored in Tunis' 
National Library. 
 
The Great Atabey. 
Shams ad-Din Il-Deniz 
 
Shams ad-Din Il-Deniz, a talented 
commander and wise political personality, was the 
founder of the Atabey's state of Azerbaijan, also 
called the state of Ildenizids (Ildegezids). In the 
11th Century, Oguzs and other Seljuk Turkic 
tribes occupied almost all the territory of the 
Arabian Caliphate, including its capital city 
Baghdad. At this point, secular authority was 
passed into the hands of the Seljuk Sultan, but 
spiritual authority remained with the Arabian 
Caliphs. 
The territory of the Seljuk state was divided 
into independent Sultanates, which were controlled by Seljuk crown princes. After 
some time, however, Atabeys ("Ata-bey" or "the father-ruler") became the rulers of 
these new state formations. Control of the state and army was also moved from the 
Sultans, as all political and administrative authority passed to the Atabeys. 
The Caliphs and Sultans, however, were not happy about this, and they 
continuously plotted conspiracies with the purpose of regaining authority. The 
Atabeys, in return, turned all their efforts toward keeping the monocracy. This 
lasted for nearly 100 years. 
The state of Azerbaijan arose from one of these Sultanates. A scholar 
named Z. Buniyatov wrote the history of this state and the biography of its founder 
  
61 
 
Stucco figure of a 
Seljuk warrior. 12th 
Century.The figure 
would originally 
have been painted. 
New  York. 
Metropolitan 
Museum of Art. 
 
Il-Deniz. He based his work on a large number of manuscripts that he discovered 
and investigated. 
In ancient times, there existed the practice of purchasing 40 slaves and then 
receiving one free of charge. One merchant in Iraq received as his free slave the 
ugly and rough slave named Il-Deniz. This merchant's cara-
van, containing goods and slaves, was traveling in the 
direction of Iraq. Because of severe heat, they only traveled 
at night, and the sleeping Il-Deniz fell out of the cart three 
times. Twice he was picked up, but the third time his owner 
decided to leave him in the road. At this point, he showed 
his determined character, and to everybody's surprise, he 
chased down the caravan and asked them to take him back. 
After arriving in Iraq, the merchant sold his slaves to 
Sultan Mahmud's (1118-1131) vizier, Sumayrami. The vizier 
took all of the slaves except Il-Deniz, who cried and 
eventually persuaded the vizier to accept him. The vizier 
agreed and Il-Deniz soon proved his worth through his 
"dexterity and gumption". 
The vizier was assassinated and Il-Deniz went into 
service for Sultan IVlahmud, who ordered the slave to be 
educated. Il-Deniz studied languages, divinity and other 
sciences, and he eagerly practiced equestrianism and 
archery. He was soon nominated as the chief of the Sultan's 
kitchen (al-khivan salar). While Il-Deniz was serving on this 
post, Sultan Mahmud died. 
The new Sultan, Toghrul II (1132-1135) transferred Il-Deniz to his group of 
personal warders (mamluks). Under the benevolence and good advice of the 
Sultan's wife, Momine-Khatun, Il-Deniz quickly advanced in his service and soon 
reached the position of emir. When the position of Atabey (tutor) for the Sultan's 
young son needed to be filled, Toghrul II chose Il-Deniz. 
Sultan Toghrul II died and was succeeded by Sultan Masud (1135-1152). Il-
Deniz married the late Toghru`s wife, Momine Khatun, and together they had three 
children: two sons called Jahan Pehlevan and Qizil Arslan, and a daughter whose 
name is not known. 
In 1136, Sultan Masud appointed Atabey Il-Deniz to be governor of Arran. 
Il-Deniz moved to the capital city Barda, where he tried to carry out independent 
politics and be removed from the palace's interests. He attracted many small rulers 
to his side and gradually subordinated neighboring territories. 
At this time, Azerbaijan was governed by Qara-Sun-kur, Atabey of Sultan 
Masud's nephew. Qara Sunkur died unexpectedly in 1140 or 1141, and the control 
of Azerbaijan passed on to Il-Deniz. During these years, Il-Deniz successfully 
62 
 
Fritware dishes with underglaze painting. 
12th Century. Atabey's State of Azerbaijan. 
Azerbaijani History Museum, Baku. 
 
Shamkir 
minaret. 12th 
Century. 
Atabey's State 
of Azerbaijan. 
 
helped Sultan Masud kick out all traces of feudalism. The strength of Shams ad-
Din Il-Deniz as a statesmen and commander grew. All of Azerbaijan, as well as 
Arran, Ganja and Ardebil, fell under the authority of Il-Deniz. 
After the death of Sultan Masud, a 
fierce struggle for authority began among 
the potential successors. In the end, 
Sultan Mahammed came into power. 
Suddenly, with a large army of allies, he 
attacked Azerbaijan. 
Il-Deniz met Mahammed in the 
lowlands of the Araks. The battle lasted 
for a few days and ended in the defeat of 
Il-Deniz, who was to give up Azerbaijan 
but keep Arran. However, Sultan 
Suleyman had been weakening over the 
past few years, and Il-Deniz took posses-
sion of Azerbaijan and frightened 
Suleyman. Il-Deniz and his followers proclaimed Il-Deniz's 
stepson (Togh-rul II`s son), Prince Arslan Shah, to be the 
successor to the throne. As a result of the plot, Suleyman was 
overthrown and killed, and Prince Arslan Shah was chosen by 
the conspirators as the new ruler. 
In November of 1160, Atabey Il-Deniz brought Prince 
Arslan Shah to the Sultanate's capital city, Hamadan. They 
were accompanied by 20,000 troops. Rulers from almost all of 
the Sultanate's areas and neighboring countries attended the 
coronation ceremony. Arslan Shah was officially proclaimed to 
be the Sultan of Iraq Sultanate, and Shams ad-Din Il-Deniz was 
named "The Great Atabey". Jahan Pehlevan, his oldest son and 
brother of the new Sultan, was chosen to be Emir-Hajib of the 
Sultan. Il-Deniz's other son, Qizil Arslan, was appointed to be 
the supreme commander-in-chief of the Sultan's army. 
Additionally, Il-Deniz assigned all of the emirs to high 
positions. Presented at the coronation, these emirs offered 
homage to Sultan Arslan-Shah and to the Great Atabey. Il-
Deniz became the actual governor of the entire country. Such 
centralization of authority worried the Caliph of Baghdad and other rulers of large 
areas, who did not want to lose their privileges or any of their independence. The 
caliph renounced Arslan Shah's coronation and began to gather together a coalition 
of other disgruntled emirs, who promised to place a faithful Seljuk prince on the 
throne. 
63 
 
Eastern Azerbaijan, Iran. Stone 
mosque of  Tark-Maineh  
Ilkhanid-Qajarid period (13th-
18th Centuries). Photo by 
Mizbani. 
 
Il-Deniz moved quickly to avoid this coalition of emirs by raiding and 
crushing their troops on their territories. Il-Deniz won brilliant victories in 
Hamadan, Rey and Qazwin, which frightened many rulers of other areas into 
quickly recognizing the new government. The gov-
ernor of Rey, Inanj, was forced to marry the 
daughter of Jahan Pehlevan, the Great Atabey's son. 
Bunyatov wrote: "Thus, Atabey Shams ad-
Din Il-Deniz subordinated under his authority a 
huge amount of territory, which extended from the 
Caucasus to the Persian Gulf. Il-Deniz's territory 
stretched from the gates of Tiflis up to Mecran. To 
him belonged Azerbaijan, Arran, Shirvan, Jibal, 
Hamadan, Gilyan, Mazandaran, Isfahan and Rey. 
Vassals of ll-Deniz produced coins with his name 
on them. They also mentioned his name in Khutba 
(Friday prayers) after the names of the caliph and 
the Sultan. These vassals included Atabeys from 
Mosul, Germany and Fars, and governors of 
Shirvan, Khuzistan, Khilat, Arzan and Maragha. 
Il-Deniz stabilized the situation on the 
borders of the Sultanate rather quickly. It was, 
however, considerably difficult to cope with 
aggression from Georgia and Khorezm. After 
several of Georgia's attacks on Ani, Dwin and Ganja in 1161, Atabey Il-Deniz 
raised troops against Georgia. Governors of many areas sent troops to help him. Il-
Deniz collected a total of 50,000 soldiers, and in 1163, these allied forces began a 
campaign against Georgia. Il-Deniz won back Dwin and presented the king of 
Georgia, George III, with a crushing defeat. 
One participant in this campaign wrote: "The Georgians had a very 
inglorious defeat. So much plunder was taken from them that it could not be 
described or counted. Among the looted goods were a manger made of silver from 
the imperial stables. The cellar was also raided, and everything in it - including 
large silver barrels - was taken. One of these barrels was sent to the Sultan, and it, 
together with one other barrel just like it, needed a whole cart for transportation. 
The second barrel was seized by Turkomans and was broken into pieces. The 
Sultan sent cups made of gold and silver to Hamadan's mosque, so the people 
could use them to drink water. Muslims seized a lot of booty and killed many 
people. The king of Abkhazia took flight and disappeared into a dense forest. 
Shah-Annan took three separate packs. One contained gold and silver 
vessels. The second contained an imperial chapel with gold and silver crosses and 
different precious stones, decorated with gold and jewels of invaluable cost. The 
64 
 
Fritware bowl with minai 
decoration. Early 13th 
Century. Atabeys state of 
Azerbaijan.Freer Gallery 
of Art. Washington DC. 
 
third contained an imperial treasury with gold, silver and jewels, whose costs could 
not be estimated". 
Not focusing on this huge defeat, Georgia continued its raids on cities in the 
territories of the Sultanate. Il-Deniz and his troops, however, won the battles with 
variable success. Only after a crushing defeat of the Georgians in 1175, conditions 
on the western border were stabilized and old borders were restored. About this 
battle, chronicles state, "The Abkhazians were defeated and the Muslims gained a 
victory similar to none that anyone could recollect". 
In the east of the Sultanate, the country's borders 
were always under threat of the powerful Khorezm Shah 
Il-Arslan. The core of discord was Nishapur, coterminous 
with Khorezm. Il-Deniz decided to keep Nishapur in 
vassal dependence, as long as its governor did not go over 
to the Khorezm Shah's party. The governor of Rey, Inanj, 
refused to pay the annual tribute and decided to transfer 
Rey and its district to the possession of Khorezm Shah. 
After learning about this, Il-Deniz went there with his  
army and defeated I the joint army of Emir Inanj and 
Khorezm Shah. 
Inanj, hiding out in a fortress in Rey, sent negoti-
ations to the Great Atabey via the Atabey's vizier. II-1 
Deniz, however, refused to negotiate and said to his 
vizier, "You believe that Inanj will offer me peace, and then you and he will live in 
Rey. It will never be so! You can choose one or the other: either you will I stay 
with him in strange lands, surviving but suffering losses, deprivation and poverty; 
or you will help me organize the destruction of him and stay | with my son 
Pehlevan and have authority over Rey, Isfahan and Azerbaijan. I will give you my 
word in sacramental assurance". 
The vizier accepted the latter, ordered slaves to kill Inanj, and became the 
governor of Rey. 
In 1175, Toghrul IPs widow and Il-Deniz's wife, Momine Khatan, died. 
This great woman, who did so much to help Il-Deniz rise to power and create the 
Atabey's state of Azerbaijan, is remembered in a mausoleum. Ajami ibn abu Bakr, 
a great Azerbaijani architect, constructed the mausoleum over her grave. The 
construction of the mausoleum was begun by the Great Atabey, who died later that 
year. It was finally completed in 1186 by Il-Deniz's son Jahan Pehlevan. The Great 
Atabey Shams ad-Din Il-Deniz was buried in Hamadan. 
65 
 
The Founder of the Sufi Brotherhood, 
One of the Most Authoritative in the 
Islamic World 
 
Shikhab ad-din Omar Suhravardi 
 
Prominent Sufi thinker Shikhab ad-Din Abu 
Hafs Omar Suhravardi was born in 1145 in the 
Azerbaijani city of Suhravard, near Zanjan. He was the 
founder of Suhravardiyya, one of the most authoritative 
Sufism brotherhoods in the Muslim world. Many 
scientists believe that the brotherhood began under his 
uncle, Diya ad-Din Abu-n-Najib as-Suhra-vardi (1097-
1168), who had a significant influence on Shikhab ad-
Din. When he was young, Diya ad-Din as-Suhravardi 
left his native Suhravard and went to Baghdad to study. After finishing his studies, 
he studied at Nizamiyya, the famous university in Baghdad. Then he went - as it 
was accepted in Sufism - to be a disciple (murid) of the great Sheikh Ahmad al-
Gazali, who became his preceptor (murshid). 
There he conducted the lonely life of a hermit in a Sufi cell (ribat) on the 
banks of the Tigris River. His fame spread throughout the entire Middle East, and 
many people wanted to become his preceptor. Among his preceptors were Sufis, 
such as Abu Mahammed Ruzbikhan Bakli Shirazi (d. 1209), Ismail al-Qasri (d. 
1193) and Ammar al-Bidlisi (d. 1200). His disciples became the preceptors of the 
great Khorezmi Sufi Najm ad-Din Qubra, who founded the Sufi brotherhood 
Qubraviyya. 
Diya ad-Din as-Suhravardi wrote a manual for training Sufis called "Adab 
al Muridin" ("The Adepts' Etiquette"), which became widely popular. It was one of 
the earliest guides of its kind. Continuing family traditions, Shikhab ad-Din wrote a 
manual for spiritual preceptors called "Awarif al Ma'arif ("Gifts of Deep 
Knowledge"). 
Shikhab ad-Din's first school was his uncle's ribat. He received higher 
education at Nizamiyya, where his uncle taught. This university differed 
considerably from many similar educational establishments known during the 
middle Ages. The university was established in 1067 under the initiative and 
funding of Seljuk Turk hakims. It was created in honour of their great vizier 
Nizami and was named after him. The university's education was funded entirely 
by Seljuk hakims. On average, they spent about 600,000 dinars annually on 
housing and food for the students, teachers' salaries and special uniforms for the 
students and teachers. 
66 
 
The university played a noticeable role in the development of science and 
culture throughout the Middle East. Its authority is difficult to estimate. The best 
scientists in the East were invited here to teach subjects, such as theology, history, 
logic, linguistics, astronomy and mathematics. The Seljuk hakims selected the 
teachers. Many scientists believe this was the first modern university in the East, 
and that teachers there were called professors. The Azerbaijani scientists who 
participated in the creation of this university taught there. Nizamiyya produced a 
galaxy of bright scientists from Azerbaijan. From its first days, philology was 
taught at the university. Also, Khatib Tabrizi managed its rich library. Eminent 
scientists, such as Abdulmanakib Zanjani, Mahmud Zanjani, Amin ad-Din Varavi, 
and Abulfaz Ardabili, studied or taught there. 
After finishing university, Suhravardi quickly gained wide popularity 
among scientific and philosophical Sufis in the East. Shikhab ad-Din was not 
ascetic and was retired from the world, but he was a great Sufi sheikh. Like most 
well known scientists in those times, Suhravardi was attracted to the political and 
cultural life of large and small-sized hakims. He did not become an ornament of 
the palatial crown, but he was actively connected to the political life of the court. 
In his scientific self awoke a great diplomat. Suhravardi took the post of adviser to 
the Caliph an-Nasir li-Dinillakh (1180-1225), and he conducted a responsible 
diplomatic service, remembering the responsibilities of a sheikh. 
On behalf of the Caliph, he conducted diplomatic negotiations in Syria and 
Egypt, in the cities of Haleb and Eyyubids. One of his contemporaries wrote about 
Suhravardi's stay in Haleb, where he participated in discussions with scientists: "In 
the palace of al-Malik az-Zahir, Suhravardi made a speech, which was not only 
rhetorically modern, but also so impressive that the hearts of the students became 
obedient, and tears appeared in their eyes". 
In 1217 and 1218, Suhravardi conducted diplomatic negotiations with 
Khorezm Shah Mahammed. Also, for one year, he went on a diplomatic mission to 
Anatolia, to the Seljuk hakim of Konya, Al ad-Din Keykubad. 
The authority of Shikhab ad-Din as a Sufi preceptor, political personality, 
scientist and orator was so high that the Caliph had a special ribat constructed for 
him, which was more like a palace. It contained a complex of buildings with a rich 
library, a bath and a garden for the Caliph and his family. There, Shikhab ad-Din 
could work, read public lectures and organise disputes. 
His lectures assembled many students. People came from all over the 
country to listen to his lectures. He also regularly gave public lectures at the 
famous university "Abu-n-Najid". Suhravardi was distinguished by exclusive 
rhetorical talent and deep philosophical thinking. For a short time, his lectures and 
disputes received such popularity that there were always a large number of stu-
dents, arriving from different countries and districts, who attended them. 
67 
 
During the reign of Caliph an-Nasir, a knightly order of handicraftsmen and 
aristocracy operated; it was called Futuvva. The initiation into Futuvva was carried 
out by putting on a belt. As envoy of the Caliph and leader of the ceremony, the 
Great Murshid Shikhab ad-Din Abu Hafs Omar Suhravardi put on the belt, 
representing dignity. There are records of the description of the initiation ceremony 
of Sultan Izza ad-Din Qey-Qavus I and beys into the brotherhood, which was 
accompanied by sacral dancing. Suhravardi, arriving at the sultan's palace as the 
Caliph's ambassador, also participated in dancing with the murids, despite his 
advanced age. 
The English scientist J. Spencer Trimingham writes about Suhravardi: "He 
was a great sheikh and teacher, and his influence was distributed not only through 
his pupils, but also through his work "Avarif al-Marif, which all Sufi preceptors 
have read, down to our days. Sufis from nearly the whole world came to him to 
learn". 
The Arabian author ibn Khallikan, a contemporary of Suhravardi, wrote: 
"I met the people who listened to his lectures and stayed in his khalva, 
where they exercised under his mentoring, as it is accepted among Sufis. They told 
me what strange sensations they experienced when it was possible for them to 
reach the ecstatic condition (akhvall). He arrived in Irbil as the envoy of authorities 
from Baghdad and arranged assemblies for discussing religious questions, but it 
was not possible for me to see him, as I was too young. He frequently made 
pilgrimages to other countries and sometimes lived near Qaaba. Many of his 
contemporary Sufi sheikhs corresponded with him, asking him for help in 
decisions of difficult questions, and they looked for his advice in the form of 
fatva". 
Shikhab ad-Din had many followers, and the spiritual order Suhravardiyya 
had many various branches. Among them, it is necessary to name the brotherhoods 
of his son, Imadd ad-Din Muhammed (d. 1257), and Shiraz's Sheikh Najib ad-Din 
Buzgush (d. 1279). They followed the mystical way of Suhravardi. In "Bustan", the 
great Persian poet Saadi Shirazi (1208-1292) wrote: 
 
"Here is taricat! Go invariably  
On it, declining of a humble head. 
 
Sheikh, who all night in prayer stands, 
For Dervishes in the morning, a tablecloth spread. 
Not Saadi, Suhravardi the learning, 
That valour of person, on way of working". 
 
Later among sheikhs, prominent people, such as Nur ad-Din Abd as-Samad 
an-Natanzi, Abdarrazak al-Kashani (d. 1329), and Said ibn Abdallah al-Fargani (d. 
1300), reckoned themselves among the order of Suhravardiyya. However, ranking 
68 
 
oneself in this order was not always safe. It is quite different in India, where 
Suhravardiyya could openly exist as an independent school of mystical direction. 
One of the founders of this school, existing in India then and now, was the famous 
disciple of Suhravardi, Nur ad-Din Mubaraq Gaznavi. In Delhi, his entombment 
was saved by all who honoured him. If you arc in Delhi, don't fail to visit this 
entombment and pray for the Great Teacher and his disciple. Suhravardi died in 
1234 or 1235 in Baghdad. 
 
The Philosopher – a Martyr 
 
Shikhab ad-Din Suhravardi 
 
Shikhab ad-Din Abul Fatuh Yahya ibn Khabash 
Suhravardi, one of the most outstanding philosophers in 
the East, founded the philosophy of Ishrakism (al-
ishrag - irradiation). He was born in 1154 in the 
Suhravard city near Zanjan. V. Gordlevsky wrote that 
he belonged to Azerbaijani Turks, was in large favour 
with Seljuk Sultan Qizil Arslan (he devoted a lot of his 
work to Qizil Arslan), and that he was a fan of ritual 
Sufi dancing. Initially, he was educated in Maragha 
under the well-known philosopher and expert on 
Muslim law, Jem Mejadin, and then he continued his education in Isfahan under 
Zahir Farisi. Shikhab ad-Din traveled a lot in Azerbaijan, the Near and Middle 
East, and he met outstanding scientific and political personalities. 
He presented the simplicity of his new ideas at disputes and discussions, 
and he did not always look for supporters. One time he preached his own doctrines 
in Anatolia in the courts of Seljuk governor Kilich Arslan II and his son. 
In 1183 Shikhab ad-Din Suhravardi went to Syria and in in the city of 
Haleb, he participated in disputes held at the famous university, Khalaviyya. His 
political and religious views, penetrated by the Sufi spirit, differed from most 
orthodoxy, and he was eventually arrested and held in the fortress of Haleb. He 
was condemned and executed by the ruler of Haleb, al-Malik al-Zahir, under the 
order of Sultan Sala ad-Din, at 38 years of age. His contemporaries wrote that he 
was executed because of his "deviation from faith" and "infidelity". 
He came into the history of Eastern philosophy under the name of "Martyr 
Philosopher" ("Al-feylasur al-mak-tul"), or more often "Martyr". Shikhab ad-Din 
Suhravardi kept a rich heritage. First of all, it is necessary to note the works 
devoted to the philosophy of Ishrakism: "Khayakil an-Nur" ("Statues of Light"), 
"Hikmet al-Ishrag" ("Philosophy of Irradiation"), and others. There were also many 
other works devoted to Sufism, logic and metaphysics: "At-Talvikhat" ("Remark"), 
69 
 
"Ruzi ba Jamaat-e Sufian" ("One Day With Sufis"), "Lugate Muran" ("Language 
of Ants") and many others. His poetic writings are also known. 
The philosophy of Ishrakism influenced the 
development of Eastern philosophy for many centuries. 
Professor Zakir Bagirov compared Shikhab ad-Din to 
prominent philosophers of the East such as Aynalkuzat 
Miyaneji and ibn Rushd. In the book "Three Muslim 
thinkers" by Iranian philosopher Seyid Nasr, the world 
outlook of Suhravardi is investigated parallel to the 
ideology of world scientists such as ibn Sina and ibn al-
Arabi. He wrote, "Thanks to the tireless efforts of 
Suhravardi and ibn al-Arabi, the placid life of Muslims was 
enriched by new, intelligent content, achieved at the of the 
Sefevid period". 
The works of Shikhab ad-Din Suhravardi were translated into many 
languages and published in Baku, Istanbul and Tehran, as well as in many Western 
countries. The known French researcher of Suhravardi's creativity, Korben, wrote, 
"Suhravardi was not only a Sufi and a khakim simultaneously, but also a person 
who comprehended the essence of perfect philosophy. As a philosopher, he had 
theoretical knowledge and spiritual vision". 
Some researchers of his creativity have found the influence of 
Zoroastrianism in his doctrine. For example, the philosophy of Ishrakism asserts 
that the entire material world consists of light and shadows, and light and darkness. 
Suhravardi considers the material world, on the whole, as eternal. The reason for 
movement is light. Interrelation exists between light and darkness. Shikhab ad-Din 
Suhravardi wrote, "Light arises from each irradiation as movement and is prepared 
by each movement for other light. Thus, the renewal of lights is proceeded by the 
renewal of movements, and the renewal of movements is proceeded by the renewal 
of lights". 
Shikhab ad-Din Yahya Suhravardi had many followers. Among them were 
Shahrazuri (d. 1250), ibn Qammuna Israili (d. 1277), Gutb ad-Din Shirazi (1236-
1311), Vadud Tabrizi (d. 1524) and Sadr ad-Din Shiraz (d. 1640). 
 
The King of Poets 
 
Abul – Ala Ganjavi 
 
In the 11th and 12th Centuries, after the arrival of the Seljuk Turks in Azer-
baijan, there were favorable social and economic conditions for great scientific and 
cultural development, which had been saved during the entry of the country into 
the Arabian Caliphate. Universities and schools, as well as private and public lib-
70 
 
raries, opened in the cities. There were centres for manufacturing paper and copy-
ing and binding books. At this time, observatories and public hospitals were also 
functioning. The cities of Shemakha, Ardebil, Tabriz and, especially, Ganja were 
blossoming. 
More than 500,000 people lived in Ganja, 
and it was possible to hear many different 
languages, such as Turkic, Arabic, Persian, 
Albanian, Judaic, Georgian and Armenian. Not 
without reason, Ni-zami named Ganja "My 
Babylon". Merchants, scientists, poets and 
handicraftsmen from many countries gathered in 
Ganja. 
In the middle of the 11th Century, the 
outstanding Azerbaijani poet Qatran Tabrizi 
became popular. In Ganja, he was invited to the 
court of Shaddadids, where he soon won large 
authority among palatial poets and scientists. 
The successor of Qatran Tabrizi's poetic 
traditions, Abul-Ala Ganjavi, was born in Ganja at 
the end of the 11th Century. After ending his 
studies, he went to the city of Khilat, the capital of 
the Muslim state of Armenshahs, where he wrote "Verses at a court yard of 
Armenshahs" under the assumption of the academician Krimskiy. Abul-Ala did not 
stay there long, and he moved to Shemakha, where due to his poetic talent and high 
scholarship, he soon went into service for a great patron of poets. Shirvanshah 
Manuchekher I | (1120-1149). 
Analysis of the poet's writing shows that Abul-Ala had versatile knowledge 
in poetics, philosophy, astronomy and medical sciences. Abul-Ala's poetry differs 
by academism and verbal refinement. In the palace, he surrounded himself with 
clever youth and received the official title of "King of Poets" ("Malik Ashshura"). 
He founded the famous Shirvan School of Persian language poetry. Among his 
pupils were men who became famous poets throughout the East, such as Khagani 
and Feleki.  
Abul-Ala played an especially large role in the fate of Khagani. He first 
noticed the talented young man and entrusted him in the palace of the Shirvanshahs 
to the post of courtier poet. Under the Shirvanshah's own suggestion, Abul-Ala 
proposed that young Khagani replace his name with the pseudonym "Khakaiki". 
The talent of Khagani had already been noticed by the Shirvanshah, who by Turkic 
tradition named himself Khagan, and the acceptance of a pseudonym "Khagani" by 
the poet flattered both the Shirvanshah and the poet. Abul-Ala wrote about it: 
 
71 
 
I prepared careful training of you. 
1 opened a way to poetry to your language. 
When you became a genuine poet. 
I took you out to Khakan (Shirvanshah 
Manuchekher). 
1 have given you the nickname "Khagani". 
 
Before this, Abul-Ala had also shown special benevolence to the poet and 
astronomer Jalal ad-Din Feleki (d.1181). According to legend, Abul-Ala had even 
promised his daughter in marriage to Feleki. However, after the talented beginner 
made an appearance in court, the "King of Poets" changed his mind, and Khagani 
received his daughter. In order to console the broken-hearted Feleki for this loss, 
Abul-Ala gave him 20,000 dirkhem together with this message: "My son, for such 
money you will buy 50 Turkestan girl slaves more beautiful than my daughter". In 
his work about Khagani, Gafar Kandli denied the fact of the marriage of Khagani 
to the daughter of Abul-Ala. 
Despite all the privileges of the "King of Poets", the life of Abul-Ala in the 
palace remained full of intrigue. Ill-wishers and open enemies surrounded him. 
Even his favourite pupil Khagani soon passed to the camp of the enemies. An 
intensive poetic skirmish between the teacher and the pupil began. During the final 
period of his life, Abul-Ala wrote: 
 
O, illustrious Allah! Fifty to me and five yet of years, 
Six tens are beyond, but, as barling, I was bended from mischief. 
Crooked I, as if I am changed, and the crowd, as well as in sounds 
                                                                                               of  him,  
From me, except the complaints, does not hear anything now. 
 
In the infinity of a century, the people I judged on businesses,  
But have not met such, who would be both correct and direct. 
 
Everyone envies me; I see everywhere thousands of enemies, 
 They build thousand of intrigues, prepare an iron fetter. 
 
Am 1 acute - and those who envy blasted a repose – 
How could not acquire such scientific enemies now? 
 
Although "Divan" of Abul-Ala's verses has still not been discovered, and 
we know about the poet's creativity only from medieval readers, his name will live 
in the history Azerbaijani literature as the name of a great poet and teacher, one of 
the founders of the glorified Shirvan school of Persian literature. 
 
 
 
 
72 
 
Incense burner of cast 
brass in the form of a 
theatrical mask. Early 
centuries AD. Lachin. 
 
The Khakan of Poetry 
 
Khagani Shirvani 
 
Afzaladdin Ibrahim ibn AH Khagani Shirvani, one of the greatest Eastern 
poets and philosophers, was born in approximately 1126 in Shemakha,  the capital 
of the Shirvanshahs state, located in the north of Azerbaijan. The word "Bedil" 
("The Successor") was I frequently added to his name, as many believed that he 
was the successor of the Sanai class of Persian poetry. 
Ibrahim's father, Ali Najar ibn Osman Shirvani, 
was a carpenter, and his grandfather, Osman, was a 
weaver. Osman's father was called Ibrahim. All of them 
were from Shirvan. Ibrahim's uncle, Omar Kafi ad-Din, 
named his own son Osman, and his brother Ali Najar 
named his son Ibrahim, after Ali Najar's grandfather. The 
tradition of this kind of choice of names has been pre-
served in Azerbaijan until now. 
Speaking about his humble origin, Khagani frequ-
ently referred to the Biblical patriarch Moses (Ibrahim), 
whose name he had and who was also the son of a car-
penter. Ibrahim's mother, Nestorian Rabiya, was a cook. 
In Shirvan she joined a group of slaves. Ibrahim respect-
ed his father, which he often wrote about. However, for 
certain reasons his father left the child and the boy was 
brought up by his uncle, Omar Kafi ad-Din, who became 
the primary figure in Khagani's life. 
Omar Kafi ad-Din's reputation as a scholar spread 
far beyond Azerbaijan. He knew many languages; he had a good command on 
philosophy, divinity, astronomy, mathematics, medicine and pharmacology; and he 
taught in a university. His merits in the development of medicine in Azerbaijan are 
especially great. Omar Kafi ad-Din create near Shemakha, in the Melgam village 
Medical Academy, where physicians were invited to work. At the academy, 
physicians attended medical practice, produced medicines and were instructed in 
the practice of medicine. Omar Kafi ad-Din was a perfect practitioner, surgeon and 
pharmacologist. In order to produce an effective cure for a disease, he applied over 
ten kinds of fungus. (Now fungi are used in the production of antibiotics). 
The tutoring of the small Ibrahim began with studing of the Arabic 
alphabet, laws penmanship and reading of the Koran. These were the typical 
subjects to study at that time, as were divinity, linguistics, mathematics, astronomy 
and astrology.  
73 
 
Nizami and Khagani. Detail of a 
Lacquer Cover for an Album. 
1822. Tehran. Lacquer on 
papier-mache. Inscription by 
Nastalig: By the order of the 
world emperor [i.e., Fath-Ali 
Shah], Ahmad, a slave's son of 
the king of kings, has signed it. 
 
Kafi ad-din's son, Vahi ad-Din Osman, strongly supported his father in 
Khagani's education. Osman had encyclopedic knowledge, and he was a good 
doctor, pharmacist and surgeon. He was known as an eminent philosopher and 
poet. Furthermore, he was a talented musician and 
musicologist. He read theories of music and was a 
master at playing the ergcnun, the predecessor of 
the modern organ. It is quite possible that Osman 
educated Ibrahim in music. 
As a result of his uncle's tutoring, and then 
his studies at the madrasah, Ibrahim acquired a deep 
knowledge, which he further deepened unaided in 
his uncle's large library. It is possible to recognise 
his high level of scholarship in his casid "To 
Byzantine Caesar", where he wrote that he knew 
Christian dogmas better than any bishop and could 
understand its features. He also wrote that he 
understood Orthodoxy and had even penetrated into 
the secrets of Zoroaster's religion through the ins-
truction of Zend-Avesta. 
To begin his career as a poet, Ibrahim had to 
choose a penname (takhallus), as it was required at 
that time. Ibrahim was a follower of the known poet 
Sanai. Experts believe that other such followers chose the penname "Khakaiki" 
("The finder of eternities"), under the influence of the book "Hadinat al-Khakaik" 
("A Garden of Eternities") by Sanai. 
After Kafi ad-din's death, Ibrahim obtained a new patron - Shirvanshah 
Manuchehr's Court poet Abul-Ala, known as the "king of the poets". Abul-Ala 
came from Ganja and moved to the palace of Shirvanshah. He noticed Ibrahim's 
talent and placed him in the position of courtier poet. Under the insistence of Abul-
Ala, and - according to some versions of the story - under the prompt of 
Shirvanshah Manuchehr himself, Ibrahim, who had recently accepted the takhallus 
"Hakaiki", took on the new penname "Khagani" in honor of the Shirvanshah. In 
Turkic tradition, this represents the title of a potentate, "Khaqan". 
Khagani was the second pupil of Abul-Ala who would become known far 
beyond Shirvan. The first was Shamakhanian Jalal ad-Din Mahammed Feleki (died 
in 1181), who was a poet and astronomer. He was, for the most part, in Abul-Ala's 
good grace and, according to one legend, Abul-Ala even offered his daughter's 
hand in marriage to Feleki. However, Khagani's poetic talent and personality 
allegedly overpowered Feleki's talents, and the "king of the poets" married his 
daughter to Ibrahim. 
74 
 
Ewer in the form of a cow suckling 
her calf with a lion crouching on her 
back. Work of Ali ibn Muhammad 
ibn Abu al-Qasim, a decorator. 
Muharram 603 |August 1206]. 
Shirvan. Hermitage, St. Petersburg. 
 
Dispute in the Library. 
Medievel Miniature. 
 
Abul-Ala consoled the broken-hearted Feleki by giving him 20,000 dirhem. 
Abul-Ala told him, "Dear Son! For a such price you would be able to get 50 
Turkestan slaves more beautiful than my 
daughter!" Such a turn of events wholly 
satisfied Feleki. The scholar Krimskiy 
ironically writes, "After that, all of them - the 
"king of the poets" Abul-Ala, his son-in-law 
Khagani, and his disciple Feleki - could 
amicably and safely be eulogize Manuchehr". 
Further, Krimskiy noted an example of 
panegyric by Khagani in loose translation: 
"Your hand, Manuchehr, is opened only to 
distribute generous bounteous gifts, and is 
clasped barely then, when a goblet with red 
wine accepts from the cupbearer. Anything 
existing in creation cannot complain of your 
injustice, with the exception of the written cane kalam, whose head you cut, while 
it pled not guilty to you". 
However, notes of protest and discontent also resounded in the poet's 
verses. He wrote verses convicting the despotic spirit of the Shirvanshah's court. 
Enemies used these verses, as well as Khagani's Sufi 
views, to defame him in the eyes of the Shah. 
Azerbaijani scientist Gafar Qandli-Kherischi 
wrote "Khagani Shirvani" on the basis of careful 
analysis of Khagani, his contemporaries and his 
correspondence. Gafar Qandli introduced a lot of 
new ideas in the traditionally known poet's 
biography. Primarily, he denied that Khagani had 
married the daughter of Abul-Ala, as had been 
described by his biographers for almost 800 years. 
Gafar Qandli supposed that Khagani had three wives. 
The first of them was a rural girl from Shirvan. She 
lived somewhere on the coast of Kura or Khazar, as 
Khagani wrote: "In that village, the seafarer 1,000 times invoked me". In author's 
opinion, Khagani married in approximately 1151-1152 and was 12 years older than 
his wife. 
His favourite and most unforgettable wife died after his second trip to 
Mecca. They lived together for 25 years and had two daughters and two sons. His 
two sons were named Rashid ad-Din Rashid and Amir Abdulmejid. Rashid died in 
Shirvan at the age of 20. His father took this irreparable loss very hard and devoted 
75 
 
Bracelet. 12th Century. 
Shemakha, Shirvan. Silver. 
Niello. Inscription by Kufi: Glory 
and Happiness. Hermitage,  
Oriental Department. St. 
Petersburg 
 
an elegy to him. Experts consider that, in terms of the depth of mourning and 
intensity of emotions, this elegy is unsurpassed by anybody since Firdowsy. 
In Tabriz Khagani married a widow. After the death of this wife, Khagani 
married for the third time. 
It is impossible to read the lines devoted to his favorite, first wife without 
excitement, as they have a modern sound: 
 
After you I rush in different fields, 
Without you. unbearable becomes the world for me. 
What are for me storms of the universe and the rage of thunderstorms 
In the storm of this separation and grief and tears? 
Sometimes 1 plunge into my soul, 
Only you I find in there, only you I recognize. 
0, while it is fated to me, while I am alive - 
Not left me! Your soul I call - 
You said: "You can yet come to love...'1 
But you know it cannot be. 
Without you it is impossible to me 
I would not find it in daydreams. 
I would not find it in my sleep. 
 
Manuchehr died in 1150, and Akhsitan I came to the throne. He ruled for 
almost half of a century and became famous as a patron of poets, as well as "cruel 
and malicious". Courtier poets exalted Akhsitan, his kinsfolk and the inhabitants of 
his harem to the skies. The great Nizami devoted the poem "Leyli and Mejnun" to 
Akhsitan in 1188. 
During this time, Khagani's poetic skill rose 
to a great height. His poetry differed by grace, 
melody and sonority; moreover, in the tradition of 
that time, his poetry also differed by complexity of 
text, by casuistry, and by the presence of 
understanding difficult scientific terminology. In a 
competition among the courtier poets, he surpassed 
the leaders, which strained his relations with Abul-
Ala, previously recognized as the "king of the 
poets". His success also affected his relations with 
other poets, all the more so that "his majesty 
Khagan had a habit of paying for laudatory ode 
with a thousand gold dinars". 
The initial stages of Khagani's break with Abul-Ala occurred at 
Manuchehr's court, and their quarrel grew into a poetic war at Akhsitan's court. 
The tone of epigrams and satires became more and more bitter and sharp. The 
language of these polemics was so crude that modern scholars frequently prefer to 
76 
 
print the verses in French only. It is clear that the poetic rivalry was the only 
occasion for quarrel. The roots of the disagreements would be looked for more 
deeply. 
Under the influence of Khagani's enemies, Akhsitan also changed his 
friendly attitude towards the poet. Life for Khagani at the court became intolerable. 
He could not live in the stuffy atmosphere of platitude, hypocrisy and prying. The 
following lines express how he felt: 
 
And if a step I take in calm 
Or sigh from the depth of my soul, 
The enemies' noose will take this sigh. 
And will deform it and denounce it to the Shah. 
 
He survived his own usefulness in Shirvan and compared himself with last 
year's calendar: 
 
My hair plate has passed of a year, 
As numbers of an old calendar; 
You see, with a new year it does not coincide: 
A calendar begins a new year. 
And an old calendar, the whole one, 
From the library is carried away from there. 
And together with dust, it will give it back. 
That was so now my fate, 
That old calendar, o, my friend, it is I. 
 
The idea of leaving Shirvan emerged within Khagani. At first, he was intent 
on going to Khorasan, and by I 1151 he had succeeded in only reaching Rey. The 
governor of Rey did not allow him to continue on his trip, and the poet returned 
home. After this, Khagani went on a pilgrimage to Mecca, in order to seek the 
Shah's sanction. Khagani received formal permission in 1156 and then made the 
trip, keeping an appreciable trace in his mind. He visited some countries of Asia 
Minor, the cities of Ardebil, Isfahan, Baghdad, Damascus, Mosul, Mecca ( and  
Medina.  He met scientists and statesmen and became acquainted with the public 
life of these countries. 
A pilgrimage to Mecca plays a significant role in the' lives of educated 
Muslims. The pilgrimage frequently helps them to be lifted up to an even higher 
level of creativity. Pilgrims become acquainted with new countries, meet 
prominent scientists and politicians, and participate in scientific disputes among 
eminent philosophers and religious personalities. Frequently, those on a pilgrimage 
to Mecca have formed impromptu groups according to their interests and have had 
disputes along the way. Within one or two years of the pilgrimage, the person is 
able to schedule a program for their further life and creativity. The positive 
77 
 
Silver dish representing a 
Nereid on a hippocampus.  
2nd Century AD. 
Shemakha, Shirvan. 
 
 
Dish. Silver. 7th Century. 
Shirvan. Hermitage, St. 
Petersburg. 
 
changes in the destiny of the person after the pilgrimage could be interpreted by the 
influence of celestial forces, but the founders of the pilgrimage to Mecca certainly 
understood the salutary influence of such trips on the 
development of society. 
Khagani's pilgrimage gave him a breath of fresh 
air for his creativity. Scholars of the poet even divide his 
creativity into two periods - before and after his pil-
grimage to Mecca. 
The exact route of Khagani's pilgrimage to Mecca 
is unknown, but Gafar Qandli came up with a fairly deta-
iled estimate of his journey. He considers that Khagani 
passed through Hamadan and came to the headquarters 
of Seljuk Sultan's hakim, Mahammed ibn Mahmud. 
Khagani wrote that at the Court of the Sultan of Maham-
med, the palace composer wrote music to his poetry. In Hamadan, the poet met a 
group of local scientists. In "The Gift of Two Iraqs", Khagani mentions a meeting 
in Hamadan with the head of the local university. 
From there, he went to Baghdad through Mosul. 
Baghdad - the capital of Muslim culture - met the poet 
with a warm welcome. The organizer of meetings, the 
vizier of Mosul's hakim Jamalad-Din Mahammed 
Isfahani. was a great admirer of Khagani's creativity. The 
poet was introduced to Caliph al-Mugtafi, upon which 
Khagani had an unusually warm acceptance. Only people 
closest to the Caliph attended that reception. The poet 
was allowed to kiss the hand of the Caliph, which, 
according to etiquette of that time, was almost never 
done. Khagani was offered the honorable post of the 
Caliph's secretary, which he politely refused: 
 
1 the Sun - what for to me  
Suddenly becomes a star?  
Cap, taken in the debt, for me  
Not honour - humiliation.. 
 
The poet was delighted with his stay in Baghdad, but he missed Shirvan and 
wrote about it in his poetry. In Baghdad, Khagani wrote a famous elegy "Medain" 
("Ctesiphon"), devoted to the ancient Sasanidian capital. Khagani said that the 
greatness of Zoroastrian Ctesiphon was as valuable as the greatness of Muslim 
Mecca. The poet described his trip from Baghdad to Mecca in the poem "Khavassi-
Mecca". 
78 
 
Fragment of a pilgrimage 
certificate. 12th Century.  
Mecca and Madina. 
 
 
From Mecca he went to Medina, where he visited the graves of Mahammed 
and the first two caliphs. At the grave of Mahammed, he swore off drinking and 
made a vow to constrain his emotion and greed. From there Khagani went directly 
to Mosul, where he was accepted by Jamal ad-Din Mahammed, whom he would 
afterwards recall a number of times in his poetry. 
After he had returned back to Shemakha, 
Khagani avoided the Court, explaining his absence by 
his vow to not drink wine in sacred places. He 
appeared in the palace only during state meetings or 
official receptions. He wrote verses in which he 
criticized palatial living. To continue such play with 
fire is very dangerous, and Khagani left for Derbent at 
the end of 1157. 
There, Khagani was met by the intelligentsia 
of Derbent, who were very familiar with his 
creativity. He was also met by its hakim Seyf ad-Din 
Arslan Muzafar, a man of great worship who gave 
Khagani a house. Khagani had a lot of friends in 
Derbent. He became acquainted with the cultural life of the city, explored the old 
city and its surroundings and wrote a casid devoted to Seyf ad-Din. It is not known 
how long the poet stayed in Derbent; what is known, however, is that he was in 
Ganja by 1159. 
In Ganja, Khagani was received by his close friend from Shemakha, Nasir 
ad-Din Bakuvi. He was the head of Arran and Shirvan's Sutls and a well-known 
philosopher and imam, who had been exiled to Ganja by the Shirvanshah. 
Shirvanshah Manuchehr wrote a letter asking Khagani to return to 
Shemakha: "In Shirvan a political heat is on the increase. Your fast arrival here, 
whenever possible, is extremely necessary". In the same letter, Manuchehr told 
Khagani about the deaths of two outstanding poets, one of which was Abu-1-Ala. 
The poet could not return. He had already been ill for more than four months. 
Khagani received help from his friend Shams ad-Din, who was a well-known 
physician from Ganja. 
On his way back to Shemakha, Khagani went to Barda. Evidently, he met 
his cousin Vahi ad-Din, who had been exiled there. Manuchehr offered a free 
pardon to both cousins and in honor of this, he sent presents to them. They returned 
to Shemakha together. 
On their way back to Shemakha (or perhaps afterwards), Khagani attended 
the opening of the dam in Bakilani in 1159. The dam had been destroyed during a 
severe flood in 1138, and, according to the odes of Khagani and Feleki Shirvani, 
the Shirvanshah worked hard for its restoration and improvement. According to 
Gafar Qandli-Kherischi, the Shirvanshah's son Fariburz and daughter Alchichek 
79 
 
Makbaratulshoara. Tabri, East Azerbaijan, İran. Khagani, 
Gatran Tabrizi, Falaki Shirvani, Shahriyar and others were 
buried there. Photo by Kahanali Siami. 
 
died at this time. Khagani devoted poems and elegies to the deaths of the 
Shirvanshah's children. 
Upon his arrival in Kura, Khagani was accepted by Manuchehr. Towards 
morning he was again invited to the Shirvanshah's court. Before his arrival to the 
royal court, the poet had time to write a verse, in which he reproached, in 
undertones, the high-ranking patron in all troubles. The poet returned to Shemakha 
with Manuchehr in 1159. In 1160 he made trip to Khoy. Then in 1163-1164 he 
went to Hamadan as the ambassador of the Shirvanshah. 
In Shemakha, a conspiracy evolved against the Shirvanshah. Plans of the 
conspirators included the destruction of 60 outstanding personalities of the Court; 
among them were Khagani and imam Nasir ad-Din Bakuvi. Having learned about 
this conspiracy, Khagani fled to Garabagh. Later, the conspiracy was discovered, 
its organizers were executed and Khagani returned to Shirvan, where he conducted 
the active life of a politician. 
He again strove 
eagerly to get to Khorasan, 
but was imprisoned in the 
castle Shabaran. There, he 
wrote a number of "prison 
elegies", which experts refer 
to as the most interesting 
works of the poet. After he 
was freed, Khagani decided to 
make his second pilgrimage to 
Mecca. Atabey Shams ad-Din 
II-Deniz won the battle 
against Akhsitan, who had escaped from Shemakha it Baku; Khagani took this 
opportunity to begin his journey to Mecca. His relatives and friends did not like 
this idea; they correctly guessed that he would not return home. He left for Mecca 
with kinsfolk, friends and servants. Among those accompanying him was his pupil 
Mujir ad-Din Baylakani, who would later become «l well-known Azerbaijani poet. 
By 1176 Khagani had already reached Baghdad. The new Caliph, al-
Mustadi, accepted Khagani even morel solemnly than al-Mugtafi had. Khagani left 
Baghdad; and went to Mecca, and then to Medina. In Medina the poet repeatedly 
visited the grave of the prophet of the Mahammed and again wrote a "vow" in 
saffron, which, by tradition, he dug near the grave of the prophet. On his way back 
to Baghdad, he was plundered and was even imprisoned for a few days. After that, 
Khagani appealed to Amir Salch Asad ad-Din to send him one camel from 
Baghdad, since he had lost ten camels. Amir Saleh immediately sent to the poet ten 
camels. 
80 
 
Back in Baghdad, Khagani wrote some verses devoted to this city and to the 
fine time he had spent there. He I also gave a sermon in a mosque in Arabic, and 
scientists of Baghdad gave him the nickname "Dabiri-arab". The poet visited the 
famous university Nizamiyya. He stayed in Baghdad for about a week. The 
potentates of the neighboring countries and provinces were waiting for their turns 
to invite the famous poet to visit their courtyards. 
Khagani went to Tabriz in 1177 via Diyarbekir. By this time, Tabriz had 
become a metropolitan city of the Azerbaijani state of Atabeys. Shirvanshah 
Akhsitan's favorite son, whose mentor was Khagani, died, and the poet presented 
his condolences to him. 
Khagani spent the rest of his life in Tabriz's library, studying and teaching. 
Toward the end of his life, the poet often appealed to God and to Sufism; he 
traveled and met with many Sufi scientists and visits sacred places. Shirvanshah 
Akhsitan sent delegates to the poet with the request to return to Shirvan. Such a 
request also arrived from the king of Georgia, George III. The letter on behalf of 
George III was written by Khagani's close friend Izad ad-Din, a person of high 
standing at king George's Court in Tiflis. But the poet was uncompromising. He 
loved Shirvan and was ready to serve it, but he would not return there again. 
Afterwards, Khagani's house in Tabriz became a sort of embassy of 
Shirvan. There were always a lot of people from Shirvan there, both official and 
informal. Khagani carried out the orders of Akhsitan, corresponded with him and 
devoted poetry to him. According to the poet, he spent about 3,000 to 4,000 dinars 
on visitors during the course of a year. From his letter it is visible that the 
Shirvanshah paid for these expenses. Akhsitan's aunt (Manuchehr's sister) Ismat 
ad-Din stayed in Tabriz for three months on her way to Mecca at the end of 1177. 
In honor of this event, Khagani wrote a casid, stating that through her, he heard 
about the wife of a hakim of Ahlat, who was visiting Mecca from afar. 
In Tabriz Khaqani became friends with Seyf ad-Din Bektamir. Bektamir 
was a Mameluke, and due to his virile mind and fitful energy, he rose to 
prominence at Atabey Qizil Arslan's court. He had a large library and in every 
possible way patronized scientists and poets. 
Khagani traveled throughout Azerbaijan, visited Iraq and cultural centers of 
Anatolia, and went to Isfahan twice. Another attempt to go to Khorasan - where the 
poet had tried to go his entire life - failed. He had hardly reached Rey when he 
became ill and had to return to Tabriz. On his way back to Tabriz, Khagani reached 
Zanjan and was taken in with warmth and cordiality by-Azerbaijani philosopher 
Eynudovla Hakim al-Zanjavi. Later, from Tabriz, Khagani sent Eynudovla letters 
and souvenirs, including a black horse and black clothes with a white bandage. 
Akhsitan died in 1197-1198, and Khagani wrote an elegy in his memory. 
Khagani died in 1199 and was buried in a suburb of Tabriz called Surhab in 
the famous cemetery that was later named "a cemetery of the poets" ("Makh-barat 
81 
 
ash-Shuara"). After the death of the great Iranian poet Shahriyar in 1981, a 
majestic mausoleum-museum was built in this cemetery. Beside Shahriyar's name, 
one can read the names of Khagani and other outstanding poets and thinkers. 
Medieval tazkirists wrote that Nizami wrote an elegy for Khagani, in which 
he noted with mourning that he had always dreamed that Khagani would write an 
elegy about his death, not the other way around. I said: Khagani will lament me, 
But alas! I have to lament Khagani... 
 
The Creator of Unique Balms 
 
Omar ibn-Osman Kafi ad-Din 
 
And your name will be eternal shine  
In a crown of mind and as of an imperial ring a sea 
Khagani 
 
In the 13th Century, on the initiative of Vizier 
of I Gazan Khan, prominent state figure, reformer and 
I historian of medieval Azerbaijan Rashid ad-Din 
(1247-1318), and with the participation of famous 
Azerbaijan physician Mahmud ibn Ilyas, there was 
established a number of "Health Houses" ("Dar-ush- 
Shafa") - in the modern meaning, a sort of clinical 
centres. Only in   Azerbaijan there were  67 such 
centres. Central "Health Houses", with their main 
medical school were located in Tabriz, at the 
"Academy", which gathered scientists from over the 
Orient. Rashid ad-Din in his famous "Histories" 
pointed out that in Tabriz there worked more than 500 
scientists from almost of all the branches of science, 
immigrants from India, Egypt, China, Arab, some 
other countries, about 6000 students got education 
here. In Tabriz there were arranged a library, various scientific institutions. 
Contributing to the organization of public health scrvicens was organizational and 
scientific talent of Mahmud ibn Ilyas. Not without reason Rashid ad-Din   
responded properly to Mahmud ibn Ilyas titling him "Plato of the epoch, Aristotle 
of the century". However, first such "Health house" in the Middle East set up on 
the initiative of abu Sina long before it. In Shirvan, founder of such medical centre 
in Melgam - Medical Academy was outstanding scientist - physician Omar ibn-
Osman Kafi ad-Din, uncle of not less famous in the Middle East poet Khagani 
Shirvani. His experience was widely used by Mahmud ibn Ilyas   and his 
82 
 
A pharmacist prepares his drugs. 13th 
Century. Arabic version of Dioscorides' 
Materia Medica. 
 
Pharmaceutical vessels. 4th-6th Centuries. Gabala, 
Caucasian Albania. 
 
collaborators during the establishment of "Health House" in Azerbaijan. So, 
describing one of his trips, Mahmud ibn Ilyas writes: "on the way home he came in 
Baghdad to see his great fellow-countryman, talk about motherland (Shirvan), 
recollect edification of Kafi ad-Din; his 
remembrances about Shirvan always 
gladded us". Omar Kafi ad-Din was born 
capital city of Shirvan, Shemakha 
approximately n 1080. He was the 
outstanding figure of his time and the glory 
of his learning spread far beyond 
Azerbaijan. Rati ad-Din was highly 
educated person, had gift for languages, 
knew particulars of philosophy, theology, 
astronomy, mathematics, medicine, 
chemistry, pharmacology, taught in 
university (medrese). Khagani wrote about him:" no devil (shaytan) will mislead 
me, for my uncle will not permit. He is a person of culture and science. As water 
runs high by influence of sun, so I 
due to him my rise. He was aware 
of mathematics, philosophy, worthy 
of Aristotle of the epoch ". 
According to legend, Omar Kafi ad-
Din , before laying the foundations 
of the medical centre, ordered his 
pupil to kill a lamb and hang up its 
meat on trees in the suburbs of 
Shemakha, so that they could not be 
eaten  by predators. In a week Kafi 
ad-Din, ahorseback, went round 
these places and saw, that nearly everywhere meat had gone bad and just in one 
place, named Melgam, it remained unharmed as though it had just been hung up. 
Hence, Kafi ad-Din concluded, that in this place air not only was purest, but 
curative as well, so he decided to build medical Academy here. Now this place is 
known under the name of Melgam plain. There is another version of the origin of 
this name. In Shemakha, until presently there is a legend that in its environs lived 
at one time a dermatologist treated with miraculous plaster (Melgam) and, that in 
his honour the village was named by local name Melgam. Kafi ad-Din invited 
scientists - physicians, occupied by practising medicine, manufacture of medicines 
to work here and train doctors. He was excellent doctor, surgeon and 
83 
 
A physician (Dioscorides) showing his pupil a 
mandrake root. Illustration from a translation 
of Diorides' De Materiamedica. 1229. Topkapi 
Palace Library. 
 
 
pharmacologist. In his hospital, like other similar establishments in the Near East, 
there was a drugstore, where pharmacologists and physicians of various specialities 
lived among them there were surgeons - 
"jarrahi", oculists - "qekhali", 
trakmologists - "mujbiri", or "mujabiri". 
etc. At the medical centres of that time 
usually corridor system was used. At 
the entrance there were reception and 
procedural rooms, wards were located 
on both sides of the corridor and at the 
end of the clinic there was a morgue. 
Near the central building there 
were a little drugstore and rooms for 
physicians and attendants. The 
drugstore looked to a garden, where 
various plants for manufacturing 
medicines were growing. As M. 
Akhundov noted: "At the Academy 
effective treatment from various 
diseases were carried out by means of fungi. There were 17 or so kinds of 
funguses: grain, lactic, honeyed, etc". In one of his poems, narrating about his 
uncle, Khagani said: "He easily explained to me, figures "one", "two", "three", 
"four", "five". "Five" is five sense-organs ; "four" - is the beginning of the world - 
water, air, earth and fire; "three" is an inanimate nature; "two" - is a body and a 
soul; "one" is God ". 
Medical centres of similar sort must have been very popular in Azerbaijan. 
So, in the dastan "Mehsety and Amir Ahmed", hospital (bimarkhana) in Ganja is 
mentioned, where many people stood in a queue. Everyday aid to Kafi ad-Din was 
rendered by his son - Vakh ad-Din Osman. Osman had encyclopedic knowledge, 
was good doctor, pharmacologist, surgeon. He was known as philosopher, 
theologian and poet. Besides, he was a talented musician and musicologist. He 
developed a theory of music and masterly played in ergun, predecessor of modern 
organ. Osman took active part in bringing Khagani up and in music Ibrahim was 
taught by Osman. Omar ibn-Osman Kafi ad-Din died in 1150 and was buried with 
large honous near Shemakha. Here on the  mountain always illuminated by sun, 
among high tree juicy grass and numerous springs even, inmate recover without 
the help of physician. Subsequently, thill place became Pir - place of worship of 
local inhabitants,  believing in sanctity of this place. In honour of Kafi ad-Din , 
who among populace was called "Dede", this place up to our days refers to as 
"Dede Gunash" (" Father of Sun"). 
84 
 
Up to our days, there is used a local idiom to wanj against poisoning by 
grass Bat-bat: "you are like Dede  love to play with this grass. Throw it aside. It is 
poisonous". 
 
On the occasion of the death of Kafi ad-Din, Khagani wrote an elegy:  
Kafi ad-Din, you by the philosopher of the world, scientific true was. 
 Light doors of wisdom of the sky you for living had made open. 
 Your spirit has come back on a place. Heart, not cry and bless the mark!  
Lived you among us, but you heard from the sky a vote, calling:" Be back‖!  
The precious pearl of earthly's sea, entrusted to the new destiny are you.  
You has grasped by hands a belt, dumped from the sky to you.  
You are the composer of wonderful balms, glorified in the terrestrial world. 
The ancient sky you, probably, to made had decided by his doctor. 
And, be back on the high sky, going for a walk in paradisiacal garden, 
Has released you from a malicious fever a quivering star. 
Seven effulgent heavenly houri, wraping up in iridescent colour, 
Before you had bent the knee, had kissed your trace. 
Your empty house is prostrate with grief; to dissolved and dissolved in tears. 
Was you for us as Jesus beneficial, as progenitor Adam. 
Friday formidable.by streak of lightning , life of sage has taken away, 
Friday once also great in the world a flood had beginning. 
About Khagani! Over grave of the uncle burst out bloody crying, 
There was he to you as the father and more dear than natives and friends. 
 Friday once also great in the world a flood had beginning. About Khagani!  
Over grave of the uncle burst out bloody crying,  
There was he to you as the father and more dear than natives and friends. 
 
The Zenith of the Islamic Renaissance 
 
Sheikh Nizami Ganjevi (Ganjeli) 
 
Nizami Ganjavi, the greatest Azerbaijani poet and thinker, is well known 
throughout the world for leading a new trend in poetry - the epic-romantic genre. 
He lived and worked in the city of Ganja in the middle of the 12th Century. 
It was a troubled time. Almost 100 years had passed I since the Seljuk-
Turks had superseded the Arabs in Azerbaijan. With their arrival the Arabian 
language lost its dominant position. At the time, northern Azerbaijan was on the 
border of the Seljuk and Muslim worlds. This led to very diverse and rich language 
and poetry, and the development of a school of Persian poetry, which was very rich 
in structure and became famous throughout the East. At the head of this trend was, 
"the King of the Poets", Nizami Ganjavi. 
Poets of this school included Qatran Tabrizi. Khagani Shirvani, Mehseti 
Ganjavi, Abul-Ala Ganjavi, Izza ad-Din Shirvani, Feleki Shirvani, Mujir ad-Din 
Baylakani and others. Each of these poets may have glorified Azerbaijan, as well 
as any big country. For modern researchers of the history and culture of 
85 
 
Chirakh. 1190. 
Osman ibn-Salman  
Nakhchivani. 
Nakhchivan, the 
Atabeg's State of 
Azerbaijan. The  
Louvre. Paris, 
France. 
 
Azerbaijan, this phenomenon is interesting because they wrote deep philosophical 
works, infused with scientific information and difficult terminology, mythology 
and allegories. However, each of these poets had his own 
readers. Their works were translated and learnt by heart 
and spread with unusual speed for that time throughout 
the Muslim East. How do we explain this phenomenon? 
Where should we look for the roots of this explosion of 
popular culture? 
First of all, obviously, it is necessary to remember 
that the destiny of the northern part of Azerbaijan was in 
many respects determined by the development of its 
southern counterpart, which was heavily influenced by the 
Near and Middle East. Therefore, the penetration of Islam 
too, naturally, went from south to north. The influence of 
Muslim culture on the culture of Christian Georgia and 
Armenia also went through Azerbaijan and, to a large 
degree, directly through Azcrbaijanis rather than Persians 
or Arabs. The influence was very strong and kept deep 
roots in the languages, literature, creativity and music of 
these countries. However, they had very little influence on the culture of 
Azerbaijan. 
The creation of the vast Arabian Caliphate, of which Azerbaijan was a part, 
promoted the strengthening of trade, economic and cultural connections between 
its regions, the intensive growth of cities, the prosperity of crafts and the 
development of science. The development of navigation and the caravan trade 
helped to spread the knowledge of astronomy, algebra, trigonometry and geometry 
throughout the Caliphate. There was a mutual enrichment of science among 
Arabian, Iranian, Turkic and Greek scientific thought. During the reign of Caliph 
al-Mansur (754-775), half of the vice-regents in the Caliphate were of Iranian or 
Turkish origin. 
In Abbasid the Caliphs al-Mansur, Harun ar-Rashid and especially the 
Caliph al-Momin had a lot of Ancient Greek literature translated from either Greek 
or from Syrian. They did all that was possible to spread the knowledge of antique 
cultures and also the cultures of India and China. 
Interpreters of antique books from many countries were invited to the 
"House of Wisdom" in Baghdad. The books to be translated were collected by 
special services throughout the Caliphate. Books were accepted as souvenirs from 
honourable visitors instead of gold. It is thought that about 400,000 books were 
collected in the library of the "House of Wisdom". The outstanding scientist 
Khorezmi managed the library. 
86 
 
Nizami Reads His Work to a Prince. The 
Treasury of Secrets. Nizami. 1538. 
Bukhara. 
 
The diligence of al-Momin and his predecessors was not wasted. Science 
flourished in the 9th Century in the Caliphate. Major and minor hakims created 
libraries and had scientists and poets in their courts. The material in these libraries 
included works by such great scientists, thinkers and poets as Al-Kindi, Khorezmi, 
Farabi, Ibn Sina, Biruni, Kashkari, Bahmanyar and many more. 
English scientist and physicist J. 
Bernal wrote that while "a large part of 
Europe was still suffering from the chaos 
caused by the fall of the Roman 
Empire...(the) Muslim world was 
experiencing a period of resplendent 
flowering". 
The centre of this renaissance in the 
Caliphate was the new capital, Baghdad. Its 
population soared to as much as 2 million 
people in half a century, which was unheard 
of at the time. 
At approximately the same time, 
Ganja was founded in Azerbaijan and it tried 
to imitate Baghdad in everything. At the 
time of Nizami over half a million people 
lived there. Such a city was unknown in this 
region in terms of its population and the 
level of development of science and culture. 
Not for nothing did Nizami call it my 
Babylon. Schools, universities, public and 
private libraries, and observatories functioned there. It is known that a large library 
existed in Ganja called Dar al kutub, which was headed by Abulfazl an-
Nakhchivani. 
The city prospered along with other cities of Azerbaijan. Coins with the 
inscription "Azerbaijan" and "Ar-ran" were minted. Historians mention a city in 
which a large part of the population was specialized in the production of paper. 
There have been a number of eminent Arabic-lingual scientists and writers 
in Azerbaijan. Among them were such giants as the philosophers Abul Hasan 
Bahmanyar al -Azerbaijani (died 1066), Abu Bakr Ahmed Bardiji (died 914), Abu 
Said Ahmed Bardayi (died 929), Eynalguzat Miyanaji (1099-1131) and poets Musa 
Shahavat (7th-8th Centuries), Ismail ibn Yassar (7th-8th Centuries), Abul-Abbas 
al-Ama (died 718), Mansur Tabrizi and others. 
The Seljuks, who replaced the Arabs in 11th Century, differed from them 
with their tolerance and traditional Turkic nomadic democracy. This democracy 
gave way to new conditions for the development and glorification of knowledge 
87 
 
Khosrov and Shirin. Nizami. 1404-1409.  
Tabriz. Freer Gallery of Art. Washington 
DC. 
 
that was accumulated during the last three Caliphs in the north of Azerbaijan. 
These conditions led to the formation of a new school of poetry, headed by the 
great Nizami. The greatest Azerbaijani poet and humanitarian, Nizami abu 
Mahammed Nizam ad-Din Ilyas ibn Yusif ibn Zeki Muayyad Ganjavi was born in 
August 1141. Biographical data about 
Nizami in medieval chronicles is not easy to 
find. Researchers have had to rely on crumbs 
from the poet's works. 
However, the Arabian form of the 
poet's surname has been found in various 
medieval sources, and so we know his place 
of birth, his pseudonym and the names of his 
son, father and grandfather. Nizami's real 
name was llyas. His father's name was 
Yusif, and his grandfather's name was 
Muayyad. His son, Mahammed was from his 
first and favourite wife, Afag. From his work 
we know that Nizami's mother was a Kurd 
of noble origin from the former hakims of 
Ganja Shedaddins. 
He was called Sheikh Nizami or 
simply Nizami Ganjavi, that is Nizami from 
Ganja in Farsi, or Nizami Ganjali in Azeri-
Turkic spelling. In the "Library of the East", 
issued at the end of the 17th Century in Europe, the poet was referred to as Nizami 
Genjli. 
Nizami's other relatives are not mentioned anywhere except for some rather 
late sources, in which Nizami's contemporary poet Qivami Muttarazi, was 
proclaimed to be his brother. However, the majority of modern researchers believe 
that they could not have been brothers, as Qivami died at least 25 years before the 
birth of Nizami. 
Nizami had a deep and extensive knowledge of all areas of science known 
at that time. It is possible, therefore, to conclude that he was educated in a 
privileged university (madrasa) of Ganja, in which he was taught by highly 
educated scientists, and that there was an extensive library. It is also possible to say 
that his parents were rather prosperous and well-educated people and, that his 
family lived in Ganja. All of this can be proved by analysis of Nizami's works. 
Which branches of knowledge were familiar to Nizami? It is very difficult 
to know which field of knowledge Nizami was most familiar with. His encyclo-
pedic knowledge amazed his contemporaries. In his work it is possible to find 
something about all branches of knowledge and it is all written on a very 
88 
 
Nizami and Thinkers. 1485. 
 Insitute of Manuscripts. 
 
professional level. In addition to Azeri-Turkish, he was fluent in Arabic and 
Persian. 
Without knowledge of Arabic, he could not have mastered theology and 
Arabian philosophy. He also needed to read the works of  Farabi, Khorezmi, ibn 
Bajji, Abu Ali ibn Sina, and ibn Rushda. Nizami used Arabian sources in "Leyli 
and Mejnun", except for the stories and legends that were widespread in 
Azerbaijan. Analysis of Nizami's work also shows that he was familiar with 
ancient Greek and ancient Indian philosophies. 
Aristotle and Plato exerted an 
especially strong influence on Nizami. Jn 
"Iskander-name" Alexander (Iskan-der) 
discusses the problem of Creation in a circle of 
ancient sages, including Aristotle, a scientist 
known throughout the East as Arastun, Fales 
(Valis), Plato (Aflatun), Apollonius of Tyana 
(Bulunus Ruminian), Socrates, Parfiri of Tir 
(Forforius) and Hermes Trismegistos 
(Hormus), the suppositional founder of 
alchemy, magic and other magic sciences. 
Nizami used this original artistic means to 
discuss the origin of the Universe in this fic-
tional elite scientific symposium. 
N. Conrad wrote of this, "to me this list 
of names is presented in an amazing historical 
document...He clearly has a huge intellect, and is amazingly rich in spirit. I shall 
add to these names yet and Indian himnosofists. About them, you see, there is 
speech. And before us, in all shining brilliance, is the Renaissance". 
The astronomical and astrological questions of the origin of the Universe 
played a very important role in Nizami's work. Nizami regularly used plays on 
words, parables, allegories and descriptive expressions, and he constantly 
described the sky and mentioned astronomical tools and astronomical tenninology. 
In biography of his heroes, Nizami looked at their horoscopes, thereby 
demonstrating a professional knowledge in astrology. 
From his work it is evident that he was also familiar with the books 
"Magister" by Ptolemy and "The Beginnings" by Euclid, as was any educated 
Azerbaijani of that time. 
He was not only familiar with the astronomical tools of that time, such as 
the armillary, the sphere, the astrolabe, the gnomon, solar hours, water hours, and 
wall quadnfl of the meridian circle, which are all mentioned in the poem, "Seven 
Beauties", but he could also use ill, Nizami was obviously especially familiar with 
89 
 
The Battle of Rival Clans 
with Majnun Looking on.  
Khamsa. Nizami. 1490. 
Behzad, Tabriz.  British 
Museum. London. 
 
Khamsa (Quintet). 1494-
1495. Nizami. Herat. 
British Library, London. 
 
the astrolabe, a compact instrument used to observe and calculi the position of 
celestial bodies, as it was more often mentioned in his poems. 
Nizami used the basic geocentric system of 
Ptolemy in that the Earth is at the centre, surrounded 
by family  spheres, each of which has one of seven 
planets, which corresponds to a day of the week and 
colour. 
The Arabs divided the path of the Moon in the 
sky into 28 parts and these were called the phases of 
the moon. Each phase had a name, and each day the 
moon   passed a different group of stars. The 
movement the planets and the Sun and the Moon 
through the Zodiac constellations and their mutual 
arrangement determined the ancient`s calendar. From 
this it was possible to predict people's fortunes and the 
course of historical events.  
To understand Nizami's allegorical verses fully, 
the modern reader needs to be familiar with the 
elements of  the astronomical and astrological 
tenninology used in  the East at that time. A good 
example of this is the poem "Leyli and Mejnun", in 
which Nizami describes the horoscope of the newborn 
hero using a lot of detailed terminology. Abdulqasimova 
deciphers this horoscope for us in his book "Nizami and 
the Universe". "The| Newborn will amaze everybody 
with his knowledge and courage, because fortune's star is 
in the lion's constellation. He will shine with knowledge 
and succeed in science because the Sun is in 
constellation with the ram. He  will be happy because 
Mercury is in constellation of the  twins. His courage and 
shooting will win him the glory of the world as Venus is 
in the constellation of temperamental Sagittarius. Also, 
he will win wars because Mars is in the constellation of 
Libra". 
From Nizami's own horoscope given in the poem I "Khosrov and Shirin", 
scholars have managed to work out the year, and even a month, of the poet's birth. 
The days of the spring and autumn equinoxes, the Milky Way, the Northern 
and Southern Pole stars and the rings of Saturn, observed by Europe astronomers 
only after five centuries, are frequently mentioned by Nizami. Nizami pays a lot of 
attention to questions of the origin of the Universe and the system of the world. 
90 
 
Nizami Addressing His Son 
Mohammad (detail). 
Behzad. Probably Herat. 
1482. Musee d'Art et 
d'Histoire. Geneva. 
Bihzad (c. 1450-1530). 
Miniature of the Building of 
the Khawarnaq Castle from 
a Copy of Nizami's Khamsa 
(Quintet). 1494-1495. British 
Library, London. 
 
His knowledge of Geography was also astounding. It is unlikely that any of 
his contemporaries set their work in such a wide range of geographical situations; 
though under no circumstances did Nizami turn his back on Ganja. 
In "Khamsa", the following countries are 
mentioned: Azerbaijan, China, Tibet, Kashmir, Iran, 
Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, Yemen, Oman, Aden, Ethiopia 
(Khabesh), Sinai, Egypt, Maghrib, Rum (Greece), 
Andalusia in Spain, Mughan, Shirvan, Arran, 
Abkhazia, Armaghan (Armenia), Kashkar, 
Maverannahr, Mazendaran, Khuzendaran, Khuzistan, 
Jam, Kisir, Sarir, Hatay, Khorasan, Badashhkhan, 
Gimgele, Zanzibar, Istahr, Ifranjat, Haveran, 
Daghestan, Jend, Gilan, Taraz, Khi-tall, Kayravun, 
Alburz, Kahhauj, Khalukh, Ark, Khaz-ran, Zing, 
Mukaddas and Kemar. The poem also mentions the 
Turks, Russians, Abkhazians, Armenians, French, 
Nubians, Sogdians, Saklabs (slavs), Jews, Berbers, 
Zinjians and others. He even mentions the North Pole. 
Nizami also mentions dozens of cities in North 
Africa, southern Europe, Levant, Arabia, Iran, the 
Caucasus, Central Asia and India. Among them were 
Ganja (his home city), Barda, Derbent, Tiflis and 
Chach (Tashkent), Buhara, Samarkand, Herat, 
Khorezm, Baghdad, Medain, Mecca, Sham 
(Damascus), Iskanderia, Khalluh, Medain (Ctesiphon), 
Lahore, Farhar (Falgar), Qirman Shah (Karman Khan), 
Alan, Balkh, Merv (Shahijan), Zanjan, Khotan, Yagma, 
Rey, Isfahan, Mosul, Babylon, Jerusalem, Gazna, Fur, 
Nishapur, Shahrir, Bulgar, Tus, Gurgan, Burtas, 
Khazran, Buskhak, Khar, Bisra, Tamuz and others. 
Modern scientists assume that the Gypsies came 
to Europe from India. In his poem "Seven Beauties", 
Nizami describes the appearance of the Gypsies in 
Iran in connection with the name Bahram, who helped 
them escape from India. 
Nizami was able to describe the processes and 
changes of the Earth's surface, as if it was taken from a modern textbook of 
geography. Nizami also describes rotation movement and inertia property of 
bodies. 
He was also familiar with decimal fractions, roots and irrational numbers. 
91 
 
Leyli and Majnun Faint. 
Khamsa. 1491. Shiraz. 
SPL. 
 
Khosrov Spying on a 
Shirk Bathing. Qalyan. 
Kirman Mid-17th 
Century. Stonepaste 
with polychrome  
underglaze decoration. 
British Museum, 
London. 
 
Nizami's rich knowledge of painting and calligraphy and in particular music 
permit us to make the assumption that these disciplines 
were included in the educational program of the 
university from which he graduated. From Nizami's 
poems, it is possible to learn about all aspects of 
musical life in Azerbaijan and, to some degree, 
throughout the East. Nizami wrote about mughams, 
songs, folk songs, singers, musicians, dancers and a 
variety of musical tools. He used such musical terms as 
melody, mood, rhythm, harmony, modulation and qua-
ver. This is not surprising because in Azerbaijan, classi-
cal poetry and music were intimately connected. The 
poet wrote verses about the love of a woman or about 
love for God, which were also common among the clas-
sical mughams. 
In his poems Nizami mentions many songs and 
mughams. In "Khosrov and Shirin" the famous singers 
Berbed and Nakisa perform 30 songs and eight 
mughams. Among them were such songs as "Donated 
by Wind", "Pearl's Curtain", "Sweet drink", "Revenge 
for Siyavush", "Gardens of Shirin", and also the 
mughams, "Rast", "Iraqi", "Novruzi", "Isfahani", 
"Ushshagh", "Rahavi", "Zirefkand", "Khisari". 
Information about musical instruments that were 
prevalent in Azerbaijan in the 12th Century and earlier 
is scattered throughout all of Nizami's poems and lyrical 
verses. He mentioned not only the names of the 
instruments such as the saz, ud, berbet, setar, chang, 
qanon, mushkar, organon, kamancha, rubab, tanbur, 
karanay, sheypur, qus, dovul, def, naghara, zandan, but 
also their form, the number of strings, their sound and 
how to play them. 
The music of Nizami's time has reached us today, 
although changed, but we know almost nothing for cer-
tain about the fine arts in Ganja at that time. Therefore, 
all of Nizami's information about painting and sculpture is of special interest. In his 
poems it is possible to find information about wall painting, sculpture, and also 
about famous artists and sculptors of that time. 
Above all, Nizami prized the painting of China and Rum. It is interesting to 
compare Nizami's perception of these paintings to a more modern perspective.  
92 
 
Iskandar and  Rovshanaks Wedding Party. Khamsa. 1578 Bukhara SPL. 
 
  
93 
 
Shirin Bathing. Khamsa. 
Nizami. Second half of the 18 th 
Century. Iran. Opaque 
watercolour and gold on paper. 
 
Modern researchers tend to look for iconic symbolism, whereas Nizami 
looked more at the realism of the things depicted. 
Nizami was also familiar with the medicine, anatomy and pharmacology of 
that time, and he was familiar with the work of the medieval doctors Galen, Razi, 
Iskhaq ibn Khunayn and Avicena. He loved chess and backgammon and frequently 
used the terminology of these games in his poems. 
Having had a very good education, Nizami continued his education in the 
rich, "overflowing" libraries of Ganja. 
Nizami's works are like an encyclopaedia of 
Azerbaijan's ethnography of the Middle Ages. One 
can find in his work the answer to almost any 
question of interest to a modern ethnographer, from 
the conditions of economic life and culture to 
questions of marriage and family. 
Bertels wrote, "We must remember that in 
addition to his knowledge, he had a huge poetic 
talent so it is unsurprising that if he became a court 
poet, he could expect quick success. However, 
Nizami did not become a court poet and lived 
without leaving his place in Ganja and he even 
avoided public life". 
This solitude is the biggest puzzle of the 
Nizami's life. The solitude of the poet, as he writes in 
this verse, could be easily explained by his being a 
Sufi, as he had the title "sheikh". Sheikhs, or 
murshids, were to live as hermits and have 
followers, or murids. 
Historical records do not have any 
information on Nizami's murids. We do not know who Nizami's spiritual guide 
was, though there is the intimation that he was a follower of the Sheikh Akhi 
Farrukh Zanjani, who died more than 70 years before Nizami was born. 
It is quite possible that the Sufi order to which Zanjani belonged tried not to 
advertise its activity, as it was opposed to the extremely orthodox Sunni worship, 
which was more common in Ganja at the time. Consequently, we know very little 
about this side of Nizami's activity. However, a legend about the sanctity of Sheikh 
Nizami has been saved. 
Atabey Qizil Arslan, having felt a desire to enjoy the company of Sheikh, 
sent for him; but he was told that this elder had moved away and that he refused 
the company of potentates and the powers that be. 
The Atabey desired to test him, and so he went to him. The Sheikh, having 
had a vision from God that the Atabey was coining to test him, looked on him with 
94 
 
1. Bahram Gur and Azade. Khamsa. Nizami. Qajar Painting. Brooklyn Museum 
of Art. 2.Khosrov Discovering Shirin Bathing. Khamsa. Nizami Qajar Painting. 
 Brooklyn Museum Museum of Art. 
 
disdain; and the 
prince had a 
vision from the 
spiritual world. 
Qizil Arslan saw, 
among other 
things, an 
imperial throne 
sprinkled with 
jewels designed 
for the Sheikh, 
but also a hall 
where there were 
100,000 slaves 
and warriors and 
which shined with the magnificence deserving of a king. He saw people decorated 
with precious belts, viziers and distinguished men around the throne, where the 
Sheikh sat as ruler. As soon as the Atabey's eyes saw the greatness and brilliance 
surrounding the Sheikh, he was amazed by it and wanted to kiss the Sheikh's legs 
because of his humiliation; but at that moment he returned from the spiritual world, 
where he had been I transported by his vision, to this material world and noticed a 
weak, thin old man sitting on a piece of felt at the cave's door with a book, ink-pot, 
reedy pen, table and stick in front of him. He respectfully kissed his hand and 
never again thought of testing him. His respect for the Sheikh had grown 
enormously. 
Most biographers of Nizami link the different stages of his personal life to 
his five most famous poems, which were subsequently incorporated in "Khamsa" 
or "Quintuple". Nizami wrote the first large poem, "Storehouse of Mysteries", 
when he was little more than 30 years old. At that time he was already well known 
in narrow circle of poets as a talented poet and the author of magnificent lyrical 
verses. The poem is dedicated to the ruler of Erzinjan in Asia Minor, Fahr ad-Din 
Bahramshah ibn Daud (1166-1225). 
Nizami wanted to take the poem to the Bahramshah himself, but could not 
do so because of military action in the region. A historian of the Seljuk-Turks 
wrote that having received the poem, Bahramshah said, "If it were possible, 1 
would send my whole treasury as a gift for this book, which has laid down in 
verses, similar to pearls, my name which will be remembered in the world 
eternally". 
"Storehouse of  Mysteries", had a special place in Nizami's work. The 
subsequent four poems included in "Khamsa" are close to modern novels or 
95 
 
1. Leyli visiting Mejnun in the Desert. Khamsa. Nizami. Qajar Painting. 
Brooklyn Museum of Art. 2. Quin Shirin Visiting the Sculptor Farhad.  
Khamsa . Nizami Qajar painting. Brooklyn Museum of Art. 
 
romance-poems, whereas "Storehouse of Mysteries" represents a collection of 
short sententious 
stories, dedicated to 
questions of morals 
and of codes of 
conduct. This book 
excels in its depth of 
philosophical 
consciousness and is 
more religious with 
Sufi mysticism than 
his other poems. 
"Storehouse of 
Mysteries" brought a 
lot of glory to the poet 
and caused many 
imitations in almost every country in the East. "Storehouse of Mysteries" brought a 
lot of popularity to Nizami. In those days, well-known scientists and poets were 
frequently invited to court and took protection under the ruler. Sometimes they 
would simply give the poet a present or grant him some land. We do not know who 
patronized Nizami in those years, but the result of one of such act of patronisation 
made a deep mark on Nizami's life and the poet frequently recalled it. The ruler of 
Derbent, Dara Muzaffar ad-Din, as a mark of his admiration for Nizami's talent, 
sent him as a gift the gentle Kipchak girl Afag, a slave with an ungovernable 
disposition. In approximately 1173-1174 became Nizami's wife. She was the ideal 
woman for the poet. Many researchers of Nizami believe that his for Afag 
introduced a new inspiration to Nizami's poetry. In the same year his son, 
Mahammed, was born and Nizami was happier than ever before. 
 Unfortunately, his happiness was short lived. Afag died in 1180. Soon 
after, Sultan Toghrul III (1177-1194) commisioned Nizami to write a poem about 
love and promised a good reward for the work. Although the poet lived as a hermit 
he accepted the offer. He perfectly understood what the market wanted, expressing 
in modern language that love and the erotic would always be a ranking of success. 
Besides that there was an opportunity to immortalise the memory of his favourite 
wife, Afag, for centuries. The poet based the work on the legend of Khosrov and 
Shirin, which was well-known throughout the Muslim World. 
The poem was dedicated to Toghrul II. Nizami finished the commission in 
about one year but was unable to deliver it as Toghrul II was involved in a war 
elsewhere. There are also two other dedications in the book, to Atabey and Jahan 
Pehlevan, and after his death, to Pehlevan's brother. Sultan of Azerbaijan Qizil 
96 
 
A Meeting of Lovers in a Date-palm 
Garden. 1479. Khamsa. Nizami. 
Shiraz. SPL. 
 
The Parable of Jesus Christ.   
Khamsa. 1508. Shiraz. SPL. 
 
Arslan. The set of dedications is probably connected to Nizami's desire to pass on 
the manuscript only to reliable people. Only rich people could afford to pay for a 
copyist and expensive paper, but only they could bring the book to a wide audience 
and save his poem for posterity. 
"Khosrov and Shirin" is a poem about the 
tragic love of a Sasanian prince, who went on to 
become Shah Khosrov II, for an Albanian 
princess, Shirin. Nizami, with great skill, 
described the ideas and actions of the heroes and 
tried to explain them psychologically for a more 
convincing characterisation. Nizami added to the 
poem a third hero, an educated builder and 
architect, named Farkhad by the poet noble, as a 
crystal clean young man, who would make any 
sacrifice for the love of Shirin. 
Bertels wrote that "Khosrov and Shirin" is one of the greatest masterpieces, 
not only in Azerbaijan, but also in world literature. For the first time in the 
literature of the Near East, the individuality of the person was shown in all her 
riches, with all her contradictions and ups and downs. The poem was amazingly 
successful. 
After Nizami, a dozen of very 
gifted Eastern poets used this theme. 
Among them, the eminent poets, 
Hindu. Amir Khosrov Dekhlevi and 
Uzbeg Alisher Navoi especially stand 
out. It seems that Nizami based his 
story on Azerbaijani folklore. After 
the poem was published this theme 
became even more popular and has 
been saved up to today as a popular 
legend. 
Soon after the death of Afag. 
Nizami married for the second time, but again malicious fate pursued the poet. His 
second wife died in 1188. That same year Nizami received an order for a new 
poem from Shirvanshah Ahsitan I. The Shirvanshah asked him to write a poem 
based on the Arabian legend about the unfortunate lovers, Leyli and Mejnun. 
Originally, Nizami planned to refuse the order, because he was of the 
opinion that the plot was hackneyed and as dry as the sand of the Arabian Desert. 
However, his son, Mahammed, persuaded him to accept the offer. After Nizami 
97 
 
Mejnun comes to Kaaba 
Khamsa 1479 Shiraz SPL 
Dorn 
 
Leyli and Mejnun Mejnun Throws Himself  on 
Leylas Tomb. Nizami. 
 
became acquainted with the written and oral legends about Leyli and Mejnun in 
detail, the theme lead him on and by the end of the year the poem was ready. 
The poem described a crazy love, between 
pupils of a private school, Geys and Leyli, which 
proceeded and grew through the years, despite all the 
obstacles thrown in their way by their parents as they 
grew up from children to become a young man and 
woman. Because of his crazy passion, Geys received 
the nickname Mejnun or madman. Love kills Leyli 
and Mejnun hastens to the grave and dies soon after 
Leyli. Mejnun's friends who were animals guarded 
his body. 
A lot of imitations of "Leyli and Mejnun" 
have been written literally up to the present day. 
Especially popular in the East were some poems 
written on this theme by Amir Khosrov, Alisher 
Navoi and by Mahammed Fizuli. Since its release, there have been imitations 
written in Azeri, the earliest of which is a poem by Hagigii (1512), the only copy 
of which is kept in the British Museum in London. 
On July 31, 1196, at midnight 
Nizami finished his fourth poem, "Seven 
Beauties". The patron of the poem was a 
governor from the dynasty of 
Aqsonqurids Ala ad-Din Korpa Arslan 
(1174-1207). Apart from him, Nizami  
mentioned his sons Nasr ad-Din 
Mahammad Shah  and Ahmad Shah. 
Around this time Nizami's health 
broke down, and the introduction to the poem reflected this with overtones of hopelessness weariness and doubt over his own strwength. 
In his fantastic poem "Seven 
Beauties", Nizami described the entertaining adventures  of the Sasanidan King, 
Bahram Gur. The poet used this as a backdrop to portray the eternal problems of a 
fair ruler. 
In this poem Nizami wrote fantastic, cheerful and  instructive stories about 
seven beauties who became the wives of the Shah and simultaneously seven stories 
about people saved from prison. He also wrote of the faithful stories about genuine 
life in the country, which was ruled by the brutal vizier, and he included descrip-
tions of tortures, massacres and murders. This puts a different slant on the poem's 
title, all the more so because the poem has a mysterious ending. Bahram, whilst out 
hunting, follows a sheep into a cave and disappears. When a warrior who was 
98 
 
Mausoleum of Sheikh Nizami. Ganja. 19th 
Century. Published for the first time.  
accompanying him approached the cave, he heard a determined a voice saying, 
"Go home! The Shah is engaged in business!" The cave appears to be empty and 
nobody can find the Shah. What Nizami meant by this ending remains a mystery. 
As soon as he had completed "Seven Beauties", Nizami began work on a 
new poem. It was called "Iskan-der-name", or "Book of Alexander". It consisted of 
two volumes. The first was called "Sharaf-name", or "Boo of glory", and the 
second was called "Ikbal-name", or "Book of Happiness". 
Nizami's third wife died in 1200. He was at that time already almost 70. For 
him the years had flown past, many of his friends and allies had died and loneliness 
and a feeling of being near the end of 
life inspired melancholy. 
"Book of Alexander" was his 
longest poem. The first book 
describes the fantastic life, wars and 
heroic feats of Alexander the Great. 
In the second book Alexander the 
Great changes from a king and 
conqueror to become a king, 
philosopher and prophet. 
In the poem, Alexander travels 
a great distance and at last reaches 
somewhere in the northeast. It seems 
to be a perfect country; there are 
authorities, no poor or rich, no 
oppressors and no oppressed; there is no theft and no deceit; the people are not 
sick, and they die only from old age. 
At the end of the poem, Nizami addresses the reader and asks them to 
remember him, and he promises that if the reader follows his advice they will have 
a good life. 
In addition to his famous "Khamsa", Nizami also wrote many other works. 
Nizami also wrote "Divan", a collection of lyrical verses, consisting of  20,000 
beyt or, couplets. Unfortunately, for all of us, the majority of them have been lost. 
We now have only around 100 of his magnificent, philosophical verses. It is 
difficult to know which women they were written to. We know, however, that there 
is an unknown woman buried next to him in his grave. The academic, Arasli, wrote 
that people had linked him romantically with the poet Mehseti Ganjavi. Her 
passion and love for Nizami are referred to in some stories about Nizami, as well 
as her wish to be buried next to him. Arasli also wrote that some gazelles confirm 
the plausibility of a love story between Nizami and Mehseti. 
On March 12, 1209, at the age of 68, Nizami died in Ganja. We know the 
exact date of his death was established when his grave was found. The inscription 
99 
 
Inscription on the Headstone of 
Sheikh Nizami Ganjavi. Ganja. 
12 March 1209. Azerbaijan 
Atabey`s State.  
on the tombstone states, "This is the grave of luminary Sheikh Nizami ad-Din 
maula Abu Mahammed ibn llyas ibn Yusuf ibn Zeki, who died in the fourth month 
of the six hundred and fifth year". 
After his death, as well as on the graves of other famous Sheikhs, a 
mausoleum was erected, which people came to visit as a sacred place. The 
mausoleum had clearly been looked after and restored over the years. However, in 
the second half of the 19th century it was in very bad repair, though the historian 
Bakikhanov wrote that a khan from Garabagh, Mirza Adigezal Bey, undertook an 
attempt to restore it. In 1875 a Persian prince, 
Farkhad Mirza Qajar, visited the mausoleum. He 
wrote of it in his book "Manual": "When we had 
travelled seven versts, there was a small dome, 
which was half destroyed. It was Sheikh Nizami's 
grave; from it to Ganja are seven versts. I hastened 
to visit the grave but guardsmen from a post 
nearby had laid a lot of hay for their horses around 
the dome, so it was impossible to enter". At the 
beginning of the last century, what was left of the 
mausoleum probably still existed, as its image is 
depicted by the artist Shmerling in his journal "Molla Nasr ad-Din" in 1908. 
On the 800th anniversary of the poet's death a new mausoleum, 15 metres 
high, was built. After 50 years, however, it was already broken down, and so in its 
place a new mausoleum was built - this time made of marble and granite rather 
than limestone. 
Nizami's popularity has spread far beyond the East, his work has been 
translated into almost to all the languages of the world, and his work has been 
studied around the world. His poetry has inspired, and continues to inspire writers, 
playwrights, composers and artists, especially in the East. If in Europe in the 
middle Ages the Bible was the main source of inspiration for artists or writers, for 
artists in the Muslim East, Nizami's "Khamsa" filled the same role. Books, carpets 
and walls in palaces and residential houses, as well as weapons and household 
crockery, were all decorated with drawings based on the themes from Nizami's 
poems. 
All the world's great museums have at least a few miniatures and subjects of 
applied art based on the themes of "Khamsa" by the most famous artists of 
Baghdad, Tabriz, Herat, Qazwin, Shemakha, Bukhara, Nakhchivan, Delhi, Cairo 
and others. In libraries and museums around the world, more than 900 colourfully 
made out manuscripts of "Khamsa" are stored. Among them is the manuscript 
completed especially for Sefevi Shah Tahmasib I in 1543 in the Court's library, 
founded by Shah Ismail in Tabriz and based on Uzun Hasan's library. It was 
100 
 
written by the most outstanding representatives of Azerbaijan's school of 
calligraphy, including Shah Mahmud Nishapuri, Ustad Sultan Mahammed, Agha 
Mirek, Mir Musawir, Mir Seyyid Ali and Muzaffar Ali. This manuscript is stored 
in the British Museum and is considered a masterpiece of world book art. 
Another very valuable’’’ manuscript of the poem "Storehouse of 
Mysteries", copied in 1239 in Ganja by the calligrapher Fazlullah ibn Mahammed 
ibn Omar, was found by the professor Rustam Aliyev in London's "India Office" 
library. He believes that it could have been copied from Nizami's own manuscript. 
 
Two lovers he awating in this tomb 
Their resurrection from the graves dark womb  
Faithful in separation true in love 
One tent wil hold them in the world above 
 
                   Leyli and Mejnun  
 
The Great Lady of the 
Sufi Realm 
 
Mehseti Ganjavi 
 
Mehseti Ganjavi, an outstanding Azerbaijani poetess of the end of the 11th 
and the beginning of the 12th Centuries, is a bright representative of Azerbaijani 
and Muslim Renessance, a representative of the new urban poetry, glorifying in her 
verses images of inhabitants of urban craftsmen, poets, singers and mutribs. 
Mehseti was first in almost everything. She was the first known Azerbaijani 
poetess, the first woman chessplayer, the first famous Azerbaijani musician, and is 
quite possibly the first female composer. 
Her biography is surrounded by mystery and legends. The only known facts 
of her life, as well as her verses, differ with extreme extravagance, at least in the 
Muslims understanding of life of that time, especially if one accepts them literally 
rather than figuratively. 
According to these legends, she lived in the Ganja Kharabat quarter, and 
spent time drinking, singing and dancing. She poeticized wine and sensual love. A 
series of verses, devoted to the young craftsmen from Kharabat quarter in Ganja: 
tailor, spinner, butcher, gold-digger etc., were particularly famous: 
 
Your face, the son of a tailor, is similar to the moon,  
A hundred Mesheti will want to become the slave. 
 As threads in your hand. I'd like you to lead my path  
To you lips every day a hundred times. 
 
101 
 
Young man knitting wool is my soul.  
A gap on his chin is my prison. 
 God, give me his kiss. 
 Because these lips are my medicine. 
 
 I am in love with an ash seeder. 
I cannot though reveal my secret to him. 
 He is searching for gold, while seeding ashes.  
I am searching for him with gold in my hands 
 
Little of Mehseti's biography is reliably established. Mehseti Khanum was 
born in approximately 1089 in Ganja where she lived to a very old age. Her real 
name mas Manija. The name Mehseti was her poetic pseudonym. Mehseti was 
very well educated, and she had well travelled which is apparent from her work. 
She visited areas such as Rum, Merv, Balkh, Nishapur, Herat, Ganja, Khorasan, 
Iraq, Zuzan, Arran etc. For a while she lived in the the great Sultan Sanjars palace. 
She participated in receptions and literary majlises (meetings). She spent a 
significant part of her life in Ganja, where she participated in the palatial life of 
Sultan Mahammed and his son Sultan Mahmud. 
The basic facts of the life of the great poetess came from the Dastan of the 
XIII century Mehseti and Amir Ahmed, the manuscripts of which are stored in 
Baku, Istanbul and London. Recent findings of Azerbaijani scholars proved, that 
the Dastan's author is an Azerbaijani poet and scientist of the XIII century, 
Abdulla Jovhari Zargar Tabrizi, and that his heroes are real persons. They include a 
poet Amir Ahmed, the first Shah of Ganja (Sultan Mahammed) and the second 
Shah of Ganja (Sultan Mahmud). A large number of Mehseti's rubaiyats are 
included in the Dastan. 
The contents of the Dastan in brief are reduced to following. A daughter 
was born in to a family of a theologian in Balkh city. He went to astrologers to find 
out the future of his daughter. After the astrologers appealed to the stars they 
predicted a great future for her, and love of people. Simultaneously they declared 
that eventually she would end up in a kharabat (arabian- saloon, pub). The father 
sent his daughter to school, which she graduated in eighteen years with honors. 
Following that, the father took her to experts and asked them to teach her twelve 
mugams and their twenty four sections. He also asked musicians to teach her to 
play the chang, ud and berbed. His friends were surprised: "How come first you 
educate your daughter, teach her Koran, and then prepare her for a professional 
dancer career, unless you want to make her a whore?" His answer was, that if she 
was going to end up in Kharabat, she should be prepared. After the death of her 
father Mehseti moved to Ganja and settled in Kharabat's quarter. 
It is known from the same Dastan that by twenty years of age Mehseti 
gained acceptance and love in many countries of the Muslim world through her  
102 
 
  
103 
 
accomplishments, beauty, fine voice and poetic talent. Both nobles and merchants 
came to Kharabat in Ganja to listen to her sing. Even the ruler of Ganja, who was 
called Shah Ganja in the Dastan, could not stay away. 
Khatib (ecclesiastic) of Ganja finally had a son after many years. He named 
him Amir Ahmed. A boy was educated by wet nurses, and at four years of age he 
was sent to school. Amir Ahmed proved himself as a very skillful and talented 
young man and the glory about his gifts was spread far beyond Ganja, though he 
spent all his time studying and not leaving the school. Once Amir Ahmed had a 
dream. He dreamt that he entered Paradise, where met a houri with a cup of wine in 
her hands. Amir Ahmed drank the wine and got drunk with the beauty of the houri. 
The following morning Amir's father found him very sad. To dispel the boy's grief, 
his father allowed Amir Ahmed to take a walk through Ganja with 400 horsemen 
accompanying him. In one of the city quarters Amir Ahmed heard a beautiful 
singing and learned, that this quarter was known as Kharabat. There, in one of the 
taverns he found a beauty, lying on four pillows. It was Mehseti Ganjavi. Amir 
immediately recognized his houri. The young couple fell in love and started 
exchanging rubaiyat (quatrain). 
Hatib was very surprised to find his son reading rubaiyat instead of Koran 
before sleep. He was worried by his son's behavior, which started after his trip to 
Kharabat. Hatib even sent him to doctors, and they promised to espouse him. But 
all efforts were in vein. Amir Ahmed, however, was determined and went to visit 
Mehseti   in  Kharabat without servants.  Once Mehseti's mother learned about the 
boy's family, she asked Mehseti to send him home away from troubles. The young 
couple did not listen to her. Hatib tried return his son and even complained to the 
Shah of Ganja, but his son was firm. Then he sent several people to catch and 
imprison his son. On the third day lengthy conversations about morals and 
peccadillo, Amir Ahmed agreed that his father was right and got  his freedom. The 
father was so excited that he started dancing and gave a big party to celebrate the 
joyful  event. When the party was over and the visitors went  home, Amir Ahmed 
left as well in the expected direction of Kharabat. 
There he found Mehseti surrounded by 40 girls. They played on ney, chang, 
and daf, danced and sang. Mehseti  was giving a music lesson. Here he saw 
Mehseti in a new light. Not only did she write poems, sing, and play on many 
instruments, but she also was a teacher. 
To better understand the musical sphere of tin time, one of the Shah's 
receptions in Mehseti's honor would be very descriptive. Music was played on the 
following instruments: chang, ud, barbat, abrishami, ney and tanbur. 
It was also mentioned later in the Dastan that Mehseti was the strongest 
chess player in Ganja. A match between her and the Shah of Ganja at a party was 
described. In another match Shah of Ganja bet thousand dinars with Amir Ahmed. 
Amir Ahmed won and Shah of Ganja had to pay with gold coins. 
104 
 
The headstrong Shah demanded that the lovers part and Mehseti to remain 
in his palace. Mehseti offered Amir Ahmed to run to the city of Balkh. Mehseti got 
there first. The entire Khorasan and the poets of Balkh gathered in her honor. A 
poetic competition began. Mehseti offered a poetic riddle. Nobody could find the 
answer. Suddenly a wanderer entered the competition and answered Mehseti in a 
graceful verse. Everybody guessed that this was Amir Ahmed. At the end of the 
Dastan - Mehseti and Amir Ahmed the lovers came back to Ganja, were officially 
married and had two children. 
After the death of his father, Amir Ahmed became the Hatib of Ganja. 
Mehseti survived her husband by two years. She lamented over his death so much 
that by the end of her life she lost her sight. It is emphasized in the Dastan that she 
was buried near Nizami Ganjavi. Indeed, when in 1923 the grave of Nizami was 
dug up, to move him to the honorable cemetery of Shah Abbas mosque, there was 
a woman's grave. Hamid Arasli does not exclude the possibility that the two 
outstanding persons met, although the times of their lives are difficult to connect. 
The Dastan is written very well and is interesting to read although it is 
paraphrased. However, it is difficult to believe in all of this. The reader is left with 
a feeling of reticence. There is an impression that the author hid facts of her 
biography, as he used a number of allegories clear only to a reader of his time. 
Indeed it is very difficult to believe that a respectable theologian in those 
times could send his very talented daughter to study music and dance, in order for 
her to prepare for a Kharabat (tavern). The same is with Hatib's son Amir Ahmed, 
who after receiving a magnificent theological education went to Kharabat to follow 
Mehseti. It is yet difficult to believe that the poetess who was accepted to a court of 
the Sultan numerously declared her love to young handicraftsmen: a spinner of a 
wool, baker, tailor, butcher, jeweler and many others. Riddles, riddles and riddles. 
However, everything becomes extremely clear and logical, if only to 
assume, that Mehseti was a member of a secret Sufi Order and that her biography 
was written with allegories, accepted by Sufies in order to defend themselves from 
the orthodox Muslims. Sufies considered that a prime goal of person's life is love 
to God. The ecstatic condition of Sufi was considered intoxication by wine (mast, 
mey), and a place of gathering of Sufies was identified with a tavern (Kharabat, 
Meykhana), and so on. Instead of a mosque, some Sufi attended the assemblies, 
where the reading of hadises was replaced with the reading of verses, singing and 
dancing in Sufic tenement - Kharabat. Doctor Javad Nurbahsh, the head of Sufi, 
Order Nematullahi in London translates "Kharabat" in English as the "Tavern of 
Ruins", meaning Sufi tenement. He writes that Sufi after passing all purifying 
stages, becomes an Accomplished Person and reaches a threshold of True 
(Hagigat): "This last trip in Hagigat could be associated with studying Truth in a 
Divine University, in "Tavern among Ravages" (Kharabat). There are no 
professors in this true center of unsurpassed education, and the only preceptor is 
105 
 
the Absolute Sanctity and Perfect Love. The only teacher is Love, instead of the 
textbooks there is Love and the Accomplished is also Love". This was the 
Kharabat where the theologian sent his daughter Mehseti. And, indeed, 
interpretation of the Dastan, using of the Sufies allegory will make the biography 
of Mehseti look much more plausible. 
Shall we begin with the birthplace of the poetess, which was specially 
transferred to the north cast of Iran - the center of early Sufis? This was the 
birthplace of one of the first sacred Sufi Abu Said ibn-Abi-l-Khayr and the scientist 
and poet Omar Khayyam, who had done so much to spread the rubaiyat genre out. 
A famous Sufi poet Jalal ad-Din Rumi and many others came from here. 
A reader is literally warned that the creativity of Mehseti is related to the 
circle of Sufi poets and while reading the Dastan the amendments on Sufi parables 
should be made. I.e., the pious theologian, when he found out about his daughter's 
unusual poetic gift and musical abilities, decided to send her to follow his own 
path. He addressed an astrologer for an advise, who one predicted for the girl a 
bright future in the Sufi brotherhood. The fortune-teller certainly had his wisdom, 
as women in those days could only feel relatively free among Sufies. As wrote J. 
Spencer Trimingham "the mysticism was the only religious sphere where a woman 
could manifest herself. There were many Sufi women among which the most 
known was Rabiya al-Adaviya". The fact that the author of the Dastan referred to 
the gathering of Sufies comes from the following verses of Mehseti: 
 
The moon has risen above Kharabat:  
She stretched a tent in a heavenly hut.  
And suddenly a voice came from nowhere: 
 ''‖This World is not worth a straw". 
 
Don't come to Kharabat without a desire, 
 If you don't know the symbols of Dervish,  
do not come. 
 
The path here belongs to the brave ones.  
Do not come if you can not sacrifice yourself. 
 
Kharabat is a place for brave men,  
There is no place for low souls in here,  
Pay respect to this path you've chosen  
As this is not a place for sly souls. 
 
The fact that the Kharabat quarter was represented by craftsmen and that 
Mehseti expressed love to a number of them: tailor, jeweler, wool spinner, etc. in 
stead of Yar (God), may mean that she belonged to some group of craftsmen and 
used special symbols accepted by them. 
  
106 
 
 
Such a corporation could have been the Turkic organization Akhi, similar to 
Sufi, to which Nizami belonged as well. Members of this group were young men of 
different trades. It becomes completely clear that the verses dedicated to young 
craftsmen were written specifically for performances at the Sufi gatherings and are 
not love lyrics as we understood them. It is interesting that the arrival of Amir 
Ahmed just, like Mehseti, to the Kharabat was predetermined from above. To him 
the prediction was passed through an angel and her fortune was predicted by an 
astrologer. It would also be impossible to explain another episode without a 
reference to a prediction. In his dispute with his father, Amir Ahmed said he would 
close his eyes and asked to be tied up to a mule. If a mule would carry him to a 
mosque, he would never go to the Kharabat. If, however, the mule would take him 
to the Kharabat, Hatib would have to sell the mule and with the money he and 
Mehseti would organize a Sufi mejlis. The mule of course came to the Kharabat 
and the money went to singers and musicians at the next gathering of the Sufis 
with singing and dancing. This episode described an eternal dispute between Sufies 
and Muslim Orthodox as to where a faithful Muslim should direct his feet to a 
Mosque or to a Kharabat. Fizuli wrote: «I will not go to a Mosque and I shall not 
listen to those preaching. Better move your boots to a Kharabat-Meykhana - you 
will find a winery there. A sight is radiant and wine is effulgent)). 
Another Azerbaijani poet Khabibi, who fancied philosophy of Sufi, called 
Kharabat his "Friend". Another episode from the Dastan proves once again that 
Kharabat is not a tavern or a quarter of craftsmen, but it is the gathering of Sufies. 
A pious uncle of Amir Ahmed, Pir Osman, undertook to rescue him from the 
Kharabat. Amir Ahmed agreed to leave the Kharabat upon one condition, that Pir 
Osman would drink a glass of wine. The old man could not stop after only one 
drink and left the Kharabat completely drunk. It was impossible to recognize Pir 
Osman after that episode. He became a habitue of Kharabat. Without a doubt, this 
episode described the eye-opening of Pir Osman, and intoxication stood for 
religious ecstasy. 
Old men and preceptors in Sufi were called "Pir" and "Sheikh" ("Murshid"). 
Amir Ahmed's uncle Osman apparently became a "Pir" once he passed all stages of 
spiritual perfection in Kharabat required by Sufi and became a spiritual preceptor. 
In Mehseti's poems there are many verses, in which the poetess expresses 
her deep feelings to the beloved without anv symbolizm: 
 
I am your lover, O son of  Khatib. 
Believe that I shall be faithful to you until I die. 
There  are  many  men  ready  t o  die  for  me, 
But 1 wish to bum  in  the  flames  of  my  love  to you. 
 
107 
 
Mausoleum of Yusif 
ibn-Kuseyir. 1162. 
Architect Ajami. 
Nakhchivani. 
Nakhchivan. 
Atabey's State of 
Azerbaijan. 
 
Her love to Amir Ahmed was a highest profane Love. This Love poetess 
took to measure profane passion. But there is another even higher love, and that is 
love to God, hidden behind symbols and under names such as friend, yar, old man, 
dervish, beggar, butcher or a members of Akhi's Order - young craftsmen. As the 
poetess wrote, this love could be "two thousand times stronger than her love to the 
Khatib's son" and "especially under the influence of wine (in ecstasy)" when she 
could come close to God. The end of the Dastan is typical for Sufi. Mehseti lost 
her sight from tears and was buried near a man of great worship, a huge authority 
among Sufies, famous poet and great Sheikh Nizami Ganjavi. The rubaiyat of 
Mehseti Ganjavi are close to Azerbaijani folk tales and carry deep philosophical 
meaning. They left a deep trace in the poetry of Azerbaijan and the entire Middle 
East. Many scholars consider her poetry close to the rubaiyat by Omar Khayyam, 
however the majority of modern critics are inclined to connect them with the 
Azerbaijani poetry school, founded by Qatran Tabrizi and Iza ad-Din Shirvani. 
 
The Sheikh of Engineers 
 
Ajami Nakhchivani 
 
The 11th and 12th Centuries were marked by a 
blossoming forth of Azerbaijan. Towns grew; palaces and 
mosques were built; defensive and memorial installations 
rose; and crafts, science and poetry prospered. This epoch 
saw the emergence of prominent figures such as Qatran 
Tabrizi, Bahmanyar al-Azerbaijani, Khatib Tabrizi, Nizami 
Ganjavi, Khagani Shir-vani, Omar Kafi ad-Din, Abu Bakr 
Ganjavi and Mehseti Ganjavi. 
Starring among them was Ajami Nakhchivani, an 
outstanding architect of medieval Azerbaijan, recognized 
not only in the Orient, but in the Western world as well. 
Avrora Salamzade wrote: "The influence of his 
masterpieces on the architects of the Middle East is easily 
traced in their works. His masterpieces, even centuries later, 
manifest the strength and immortal freshness of his creating 
genius and stir up the highest aesthetic rapture. His works 
are an eloquent testimony to the fact that the Ajami heritage 
forms a part of the world cultural treasury. It was no mere 
coincidence that sources of the 13th Century titled him the "sheikh-ul-muhandisi'' 
("sheik of engineers"). 
The author of numerous architectural masterpieces. Ajami sprang up as an 
artist glowing with brilliant creative genius, and as a giant of artistic and 
108 
 
A big mosque. 12th Century. Architect Ajami Nakhchivani. Nakhchivan, Atabey`s State of 
Azerbaijan.  
Atabey`s square. Tomb of Momine Khatyn and portal. 12th Century. Architect Ajami 
Nakhchivani. Nakhchivan, Atabey`s State of Azerbaijan.   
Ruins of a mosque from the cult complex in 
the village of  Kirna, Nakhchivan.  
 
 
Red Dome Tower, Maragha. 1147. 
Photo by Mizba. 
   
109 
 
Tomb of Momine  Khatun. 
12th Century.  Ajami 
Nakhchivani.  Nakhchivan.  
Atabey's State of  
Azerbaijan. 
 
engineering thought. Ajami burst into the life of the Atabeys of Azerbaijan with 
their capital in Nakhchivan and with their ruler the Great Atabey Shams ad-Din II 
Deniz, and later his son Nasr ad-Din Mahammed Jahan Pehlevan. History has 
preserved nothing of Ajami's lifetime, except for his inimitable works. Fearing that 
he would be consigned to oblivion, the architect inscribed on his mausoleum: 
 
We are temporal. The world is eternal.  
We shall leave the world will remain.  
We shall die and remain in memory.  
Oh, God, an evil eye keep far away!  
And the memory of Ajami survived. 
 
In the Muslim East there are outstanding architectural ensembles, including 
those in Samarkand, Isfahan and the Taj-Mahal. Noteworthy is the fact that long 
before these ensembles, Ajami Nakhchivani had created a structure that was less 
majestic in the oldest town of that world -Nakhchivan. On a vast area of irregular 
form there were memorial monuments, the majestic  
palace of the il-Denizes, the Juma mosque, madrasah, 
caravanserai and other governmental buildings. 
Unfortunately, just two mausoleums out of the mention 
structures have survived to the present. 
An anonymous author of the 13 th Century 
wrote in his "Gimmicks of the world" ("Ajaib 
Addunya"), "Nakhchivan is a town in Azerbaijan, 
located on high place and fortified. There are palaces, 
castles, kushks, state buildings, a fortress made stone 
and madrese. A greater part of kushks have three or 
four storeys, like fortresses. The river Arax crosse the 
town. In Augus Nakhchivan is particularly 
magnificent. There are also governmental buildings 
(Dovlat khana)". 
According to a chronicle of the reviewed 
period, a quarter of million people lived ir Nakhchivan 
in the epoch of Ajami. Among the earliest monuments 
of the area is the mausoleum of Yusuf Ibn Kuseir, 
known in the broader strata of the population as Atababa Gyumbezi. The 
mausoleum is composed of an underground crypt and a surface tower in the form 
of an octahedral pavilion. External parts of the mausoleum are decorated with 
ornaments made of brick blocks. Above the entrance to the mausoleum, there is a 
Kufik inscription that says, "This is a shrine of Haji, born Rais, beauty of Islam, 
head of Sheikhs, Yusif ibn Kuseir. In the time of Shaval, the year seventh and 
fiftieth and five hundredth (557/1162)". On the top of the mausoleum there is a 
110 
 
Eastern Azerbaijan, Iran. 
Blue Dome- Maraghe. 
Photo by N. Mizbani. 
 
decorative quific inscription from the Koran. To the left of the entrance there is 
name of the architect, Ajami ibn Abubekr Nakhchivani. 
Another mausoleum, the largest and nicest in Azerbaijan, is the one of 
Momine-Khatun, known as Atabey Gyumbazi. Momine-Khatun was the first wife 
of Shams ad-Din II-Deniz and greatly contributed to the creation and strengthening 
of the state of Atabeys of Azerbaijan. Momine-Khatun died in 1175. Soon after, Il-
Deniz died and her son Jahan Pehlevan built the mausoleum, which was completed 
only in April 1186. This mausoleum consists of an underground crypt and an 
aboveground memorial part. All ten sides, except for the facade, arc identical and 
contain niches decorated with ornaments. Above the 
mausoleum there is a frieze with a qufic inscription 
from the Koran. The inscription with a height of nearly 
a meter is made of enameled bricks. Despite its great 
height and monumentality, the mausoleum is harmonic 
and graceful to emphasize its relation to the woman. 
It is difficult to explain it better than the Russian 
scholar V. Alpatov. He said that the Nakhchivan mau-
soleum is imbued with humanity like the best works of 
classical literature of the East, like the immortal poem 
"Shah-nama" by Firdovsi or "Leyli and Mejnun" by 
Nizami. As Salamzade noted, tower mausoleums in the 
East, in connection with the Islamic prohibition on 
sculptural images of breathers, played a role in the 
sculptural monuments of Western Europe. The burial 
chambers of these mausoleums were located under-
ground, while the surface pan rose above 30 meters. 
This was to immortalize the memory of the buried  
person. The third of these structures located in this area was a portal with 
two minarets of colossal construction. This edifice was demolished in the 19th 
Century, but some drawings and descriptions survived. 
Up to its demolition, the inscription read: "Work by architect Ajami; the 
mausoleum of Momine Khatun". Experts assert that Ajami offered such a 
composition - two minarets and a portal for the first time. Subsequently, it was 
recurrent in several countries of the Muslim world. 
A general complex of Ajami`s structures includes the huge Juma-mosque. 
The French travellers Tavernye and Delafrua presented its description and 
drawings. The newspaper "Caucasus" wrote: "It is a huge building with arches 
from polished stone. Inside, there are perfect relief ornaments. Part of the building 
is already destroyed, and another part is under the threat of destruction. It is quite 
possible that from the mosque up to the  gates, there were medreses or 
caravanserais". 
111 
 
The image of the inthroned 
Seljuq prince on the minai 
bowl. 13th  Century. 
Gulbenkian Foundation 
Museum. London.  
It should be noted that the inscription on the mausoleum of Yusif ibn Kuseir 
is so imperceptible that many researchers did not detect it. Twenty-five years later, 
the inscription on the mausoleum of Momine Khatun became much more 
appreciable. It was located over the entrance to the top chamber. 
For many centuries. Ajami's creativity served as a source of inscription and 
imitation for many architects of Azerbaijan and other countries. After nearly 300 
years, researchers traced back the influence of Ajami even in the works of the great 
Turkish architect Sina. 
Let today's architects remember Ajami's motto: "We shall die - it will 
remain in memory", and this will be the best monument to the great architect. 
 
The King Renowned for His 
Herculean Strength 
 
Jahan Pehlevan  
 
On the foundation of the Seljuk Iraqi Sultanat 
in the middle of the twelfth century the state of the 
Atabeys of Azerbaijan was formed. In 1175 Nasr 
ad-Din Mahammed Jahan Pehlevan, a son of Il-
Deniz, became the second ruler of the Ildegiz 
(Ildeniz) dynasty over Azerbaijan. Under his reign, 
the state developed and got general recognition; the 
power of the Atabeys grew. 
Jahan Pehlevan was a son of the founder of 
the dynasty, Shams Ad-din Il-Deniz and Momina 
Khatun, a widow of the Seljuk Sultan Toghrul II. As 
a youth, he participated in numerous battles and 
military trips and learned the military art as well as 
diplomacy and the art of state management. Since his 
childhood he was famous for his strength. Even up to now the legend that he won 
all tournaments organized by his father during Novruz celebrations is well spread 
on the territory of Azerbaijan. He is said to have been able to fold four brass trays 
put on top of each other, rumble a couple of horse-shoes, knock a house down with 
a punch and throw a bull-calf over a fence. For his unusual strength and athletic 
might he was called Jahan Pehlevan, which means the Hercules of the (entire) 
Universe, or maybe in the contemporary interpretation - the World Champion. 
His son Nasr ad-Din abu Bakr was also famous for his athletic 
achievements and strength. He was a winner of all tournaments. According to an 
ancient legend, at one of the tournaments in Tabriz he was defeated by a poor man  
  
112 
 
Varga wa Gulshah. 1225. Khoy. Abd al-Momin al-Khoi. 
Atabeys' State of Azerbaijan, Topkapi Saray Library. Istanbul. 
   
113 
 
A Pehlevan's Initiation 
Ceremony. India, Mughal, 
ca. 1720. Margin designs 
attributed to Mohammad-
Baqer. Iran. Mid-18th 
Century. Opaque watercolor 
and gold on paper. 
 
Painted ceramic dish. 12th-
13th Centuries AD. Oren 
Qala (Baylakan). Atabeys' 
State of Azerbaijan.  
Hermitage. St. Petersburg. 
 
called Qara Malik. The audience was so amazed that one of the blocks in Tabriz 
was later named after him, and he himself turned into a tale character. 
When in 1160 ll-Deniz became the Great Atabey, Jahan Pehlevan, who was 
not even eight at that time was appointed the emir-
khajib of the Sultan, and in a year he got married to a 
daughter of the ruler of Rev, Inanj - Inanj Khatun. 
Jahan Pehlevan had four sons and a number of 
daughters. With his first wife, the daughter of the 
ruler of Rey, Inanj Khatun, he had two sons, Kutluq 
Inanj Mahmud and Amir Amiran Umar. With the 
Turkish Kutayb Khatun he had a son Nasr ad-Din 
Abu-Bakr and with a concubine - a son - Uzbek. The 
mother of his daughter Jalaliyya was Zahida Khatun. 
She owned the Alinja castle, where the treasury of 
the Atabeys was kept. 
Having heard about the death of his father, 
Jahan Pehlevan from the capital of the state, 
Khamadan went to Nakhchivan and seized the slate 
treasury. The Seljuk Sultan Arslan Shah,  incited by 
the Iraqi emirs, started off to Azerbaijan to fight 
against Jahan Pehlevan, leading big joint troops. 
However due to a disease he had to come back not 
having reached Azerbaijan. 
Soon after his return to Khamadan, the Sultan 
married a daughter of the city rais (major) and having 
called Jahan Pehlevan to his court, made peace with 
him and appointed him his Atabey. Having given the 
power to the Atabey, the Sultan soon after died. 
Imad ad-Din al-Isfahani writes on the death of 
Arslan Shah the following: "They say, that Pehlevan 
had the Shah poisoned as he did not believe his further 
existence would be useful for the state". Some scholars, 
however, find it doubtful that Sultan Arslan Shah was 
poisoned by the order of the Atabey. 
After the death of the Sultan, the Atabey Jahan 
Pehlevan, put the Shah's seven-year-old son Toghrul III on the throne and 
proclaimed himself his Atabey. Jahan Pehlevan also appointed his brother Qizil 
Arslan the ruler of Azerbaijan and Aran and his general. The discipline and edu-
cation of Jahan Pehlevan's son Abu Bakr was also entrusted to him. 
The south of the country was attacked by the Georgians. Troops led by Qizil 
Arslan were sent to fight against them. The Georgians were defeated and a lot of 
114 
 
Jug with handle. Glazed 
clay with lustre painting. 
Early 13th Century. 
Atabey`s State of 
Azerbaijan. Freer Gallery 
of Art. Washington DC. 
trophies were captured, after which a peace agreement was signed. At that time 
Jahan Pehlevan had to suppress the ruler of Khuzistan, Ay-Toqdi Shimla, who had 
territorial claims and the uncle of Sultan Toghrul III, Prince Mahammed who lived 
in Khuzistan and wanted to get on the thrown. Shimla was defeated first - he was 
killed in a battle, while Prince Mahammed was  imprisoned.  The  military talent of 
Pehlevan became apparent in the fight against the prince. When Pehlevan got the 
news that Mahammed with his army entered Isfahan, he immediately attacked the 
troops and on the fifth day the soldiers of Mahammed were defeated. After that, 
according to historical sources of the time, for Jahan Pehlevan, the country 
"became free from rivals and he got on the thrown of the state". In 1175 Jahan 
Pehlevan added Tabriz to his domain. 
Ziya Bunyatov states: "Order was established in all 
sections of the state authorities due to the administrative 
skills and exactingncss of Atabey Jahan Pehlevan. During 
the ten years of his reign, the state was not even once 
attacked. It was under his rule that the Georgians singed 
the piece treaty and agreed with his terms". The state of 
Jahan Pehlevan occupied a vast territory. He divided it 
among his sons. Qizil Arslan's disciple, Abu Bakr was 
appointed the heir of Jahan Pehlevan. The rule over 
Azerbaijan and Arran was entrusted to Abu Bakr, while 
Kutluq Mahmud and Amir Miran became the rulers of 
Rey and Isfahan. Uzbek got Khamadan. 
Soon after the power of the Atabey was strength-
ened, friendship established between him and Khorezm 
Shah Tekish. Four amicable letters of Khoresm Shah 
Tekish addressed to "the Great Atabey Shams ad-Daula 
va-d-Din, the Pehlevan of Iraq" survived to our times. In 
one of them, for example, it is said that the gyrfal-con was sent to the Atabey and 
that Tekish is sorry that the number of embassies of "his excellency, the great pad 
Shah" (janab-i Humayun) had to be increased. In another letter, Khoresm Shah 
asks Jahan to accept the gifts as they are "given from the sincere heart" and hopes 
that "the paths of joy will be always opened between them and that those of distrust 
will be also blocked". 
On the western borders of the state by the end of Jahan Pehlevan's reign the 
ruler of Egypt and Syria, the founder of the Ayyubid dynasty, the famous hero in 
the fight against the crusaders, Salakh ad-Din Yusuf became very active. Due to 
his excellent diplomatic skills, Jahan Pehlevan managed to avoid serious conflicts 
with Salakh ad-Din and preserve the western borders of his Sultanate. 
115 
 
The Alinja Castle. Nakhchivan, Azerbaijan Atabeys' 
State. The treasures of the Atabevs were stored in this 
castle. The governor of the castle was the wife of Jahan 
Pahlavan, Zahida Khanum. Jahan Pahlavan was 
buried here in 1186. 
 
 
Atabek with court. 
Baylakan. Begining of 
the 13th Century. 
Atabeys' State of 
Azerbaijan. Hermitage. 
St. Petersburg. 
 
During the military trip to 
Khilat to protect it from Salakh 
ad-Din, the Atabey got ill and 
despite the efforts of the best 
doctors died in March 1186 in 
Khamadan. His body was 
transported to the Zahida Khatun 
residence - the castle of Alinja 
where he was buried. 
Jahan Pehlevan patronized 
men of science and culture. 
Scientists, poets, doctors, 
architects, etc. were gathered at 
his court from the entire Middle 
East. The great Azeri poet 
Khagani ran to his court from Tabriz for refuge. Another outstanding Azeri poet 
Nizami Ganjavi dedicated Toghrul, but basically Jahan Pehlevan his poem 
"Khosrov and Shiirin". Under Jahan Pehlevan such cities as Nakhchivan, Ganja 
and Tabriz continued to develop. 
 
The Sultan of Azerbaijan 
 
Gizil Arslan 
 
The state of Atabeys of Azerbaijan was founded 
by Shams ad-Din Il-Deniz. He was followed by his son 
Jahan Pehlevan who ruled for ten years. He had four 
sons and several daughters. 
Having distributed various lands of his Sultanate 
between numerous family representatives, Jahan Peh-
levan bequeathed them to obey their uncle Gizil Arslan 
and be faithful to titular head of Sultanat Toghrul, sub-
ordinate to Caliph, his spiritual lord. 
Pehlevan's son Abu Bakr was nominated governor 
of Azerbaijan and Arran, while Pehlevan's brother Gizil 
Arslan became his preceptor. Jahan Pehlevan granted 
Hamadan to Uzbek; Rey, Isfahan and a part of Iraq to his 
sons Inanj Mahmud and Amir Amiran Umar. In doing 
so, Pehlevan pursued an aim to consolidate the country, preserve order and stability 
in his domains. As a result of intestine wars Pehlevan had to replace rebellious 
116 
 
Qizil Arslan (1186-
1191). Atabeys' 
State of Azerbaijan. 
Dirham. Copper. 
 
Stucco figure of atabey 
attendant or palace 
guard, Lifesize 12 th 
Century. Atabeys State 
of Azerbaijan. 
Metropolitan Museum 
of Art. New York. 
 
emirs by Mamelukes. Note that after his death the latter ascended to power and 
became uncontrollable. Ziya Buniyatov told the story of Ibn Isfendiyar: "Shortly 
before his death, Atabey Jahan Pehlevan arrived in Rey and 
during a conversation with his dignitary suddenly heard 
cries of falcons. Atabey inquired about a visitor and was 
told that his mamluk Sirai ad-Din Gaymaz, vicegerent of 
Atabey to Rey had arrived. Then Jahan Pehlevan said: 
"Gaymaz has been successful so much that affords to have 
his own falcons", and, addressing his dignitary, asked: 
"What can you tell me about my slaves and liberties they 
are taking?" The answer came as follows: "May Great 
Atabey live for ever! You have extolled your slaves up 
heights, so they won't obey your sons after you, and no one 
person will bow to another and while these slaves are alive, Iraq won't live in peace 
and calmness". These words moved Atabey to tears, so he said: "You are right! 
What should 1 do now?" His companion replied as 
follows: "So let it be will of Allah!" 
The dignitary's words proved to be prophetic. 
Moribund Jahan Pehlevan was taken to the remote fortress 
Tabarik where his family was waiting him. Taking 
occasion, his wife Inanj Khatun and her entourage 
contrived for several months to conceal his death from 
legatees in the hope of bringing one of her sons to the 
throne. However, according to the will of the deceased, 
most emirs backed a nominee of Pehlevan's elder son Abu 
Bakr. Note that Aby Bakr, brought up by Gizil Arslan, 
interceded Sultan Toghrul III for appointment of Gizil 
Arslan as commander-in-chief of the army. Sultan had to 
recognize Gizil Arslan as Atabey and, even better, invited 
him to visit the capital of Sultanate - Hamadan to take up 
the government. Gizil Arslan was received very solemnly 
at the court. At the first sight, there seemed to be nothing 
to threaten him. In fact, neither Sultan, nor vigorous wi-
dow Inanj Khatun thought of giving up their intentions. 
First of all, Inanj Khatun could not imagine her sons 
Qutlug Inanj Mahmud and Amir Amiran Umar being deprived of power, while 
their brother from the concubine being brought to Atabey's status. In an attempt to 
combat Gizil Arslan, Inanj Khatun tried to enlist the support of her husband's 
former mamluks. She addressed them as writing: 
«How can you put up with the fact that the son of the concubine has flown 
higher than my son (Qutlug Inanj)? I dispose of huge money, treasures, dinars and 
117 
 
Dish. 1187. Kashan, 
Atabeys' State of 
Azerbaijan. Metropolitan 
Museum of Art. New York. 
 
dirkhems to keep you for years. I want you to have my sons seated on horses and 
delivered to me. I'll arrange everything for you and your supporters, and spend 
money enough to accomplish the goal and unite the army of your governor Atabey 
Jahan Pehlevan». Mamelukes responded to the widow's appeal and pulled their 
troops together to Rey in anticipation of being backed by Sultan. Meanwhile, Inanj 
Khatun and her sons arrived in the place. Sultan got to know about it, and at once 
made a march to Rey.  
The insurgents retreated in confusion. While the 
visitors were celebrating their triumph, Inanj Khatun 
tried to persuade Toghrul to get away. For fear that 
Atabey would get to know about his participation in the 
conspiracy, Toghrul agreed with the proposal, so they 
joined troops escaping Rey. Emirs enlisted Toghrul's 
promise that Inanj Khatun's son Qutlug Inanj would 
hold Atabey position. Realizing the seriousness of the 
situation, Gizil Arslan did haste to act, instead, he tried 
to win over new supporters. In the meanwhile, Toghrul 
decided to move to Hamadan in spring 1187. Not far 
from the town, the two armies joined battle, and as a 
result, Gizil Arslan had to retreat and seek refuge in 
Azerbaijan. To fight Sultan, Atabey decided to enlist the support of Caliph an-
Kasir in Baghdad. He promised Caliph that event of his victory over Sultan, he 
would Caliph's power in Iraq. Caliph welcomed Atabey's decision, and in spring 
1188 he entrusted Grand Vizier to recruit an army to later join Gizil Arslan's army 
under Hamadan. However, Vizier did not wait Atabey and started combat actions. 
Toghrul routed Vizier's army, and the latter was captured. However, Toghrul took 
mercy on him and, even better, sent him to Baghdad with gifts for Caliph. Caliph 
declined from reconciling and put Vizier to death; then he recruited a new army 
and sent it to Hamadan. Sultan proved to be unready for such turn of affairs and 
had to flee to Isfahan. Meanwhile, caliph entered Hamadan, so did Gizil Arslan. 
Caliph handed the command over to Gizil Arslan, delivering him a message which 
proclaimed him a vicegerent of Caliph. Ziya Bunyatov wrote that «it was  
recognition of Gizil Arslan in the rank of independent king (in place of Sultan's 
vassal)». 
Gizil Arslan was arrayed in honorable clothes gifted by caliph, and even 
seated himself near the Sultan knelt down to kiss earth at his feet. In other words, 
Gizil Arslan became a governor of the new indepent Azerbaijan state - Sultanate. 
Following his nomination, Gizil Arslan led his army to Isfahan where Toghrul was 
hiding himself, and after a short siege he entered the town. Leaving the town, 
Toghrul III made his way for Azerbaijan and in avenge for the defeat by Gizil 
Arslan, he destroyed on his way all towns and villages of this once blossoming 
118 
 
Баку. Bakou. № 9. Древняя крепостная стена. - La vieille muraille. 
land. Closely watching these developments. Inanj Khatun changed her tactics. She 
convinced her sons to abandon Toghrul and join the victor. Even better, availing of 
her congenital charm, she urged the severe warrior or marry his brother widow. 
Remaining face to face with Gizil Arslan, Toghrul had to give himself up to 
Caliph. The sovereign 
received Toghrul, though 
declined to render 
military support. Even, 
worse, Caliph denied him 
asylum as well. Toghrul 
did his best to enter into 
allience with a powerful 
ally but failed. During the 
battle of Hamadan, one of 
Gizil Arslan's emirs cut a 
rack of the tent he was 
under, and «this decided 
the outcome of the conformation: Toghrul was taken prisoner». He was put into a 
fortress Kakhram close to Nakhchivan. After some hesitation, Gizil Arslan, with 
the benediction of Caliph, declined an idea to offer Sultan's throne to anybody else, 
and ascended the throne himself. Coins came to be minted on behalf of Gizil 
Arslan. Gizil Arslan reached the top of the power. Suffice it to say that he 
completely helds way over Azerbaijan, Arran, Hamadan, Isfahan, Rey. Further-
more, scores of neighboring areas became his vassals. However, he failed to use 
privileges granted by undivided power. He spent his time in feasts, empty talks, 
revelry, ignoring state administration and affairs. Emirs' dissatisfaction 
increasingly intensified. They profited by Inanj Khatun's discontent that positions 
in the palace were distributed unfairly to infringe upon her sons' interests, while 
Gizil Arslan's nephew she hated so much, played the first fiddle. 
She invited faithful Viziers and addressed them as saying: «We fought 
against Sultan Toghrul, and we were unfair to him. Now nobody believes us. We 
must do away with him, Sultan of the Universe Gizil Arslan before he puts an end 
to us. He has begun nominating slaves to take positions owned by our people». 
As a result of the plot hatched earlier autumn 1191, Gizil Arslan was 
murdered in his own bed. 
Following the Gizil Arslan's murder, there broke out the intestine war for 
power between Abu Bakr who invaded Azerbaijan and became its governor, sons 
of  Inanj Khatun - Qutlug Inanj and Amir Amiran Umar who seized the power in 
Hamadan and its environs, and Toghrul who fled from the prison and recruited an 
army to proceed with his raid. Each of them was capable of gaining victory in the 
struggle for the throne, so long and bloody war was expected to take place. But this 
119 
 
Fragmentary dish with 
signs of the zodiac. 
Azerbaijan.  1563-1564. 
Abd al Vahid. Stonepaste 
ware with blue  underglaze 
decoration. Staatliche 
Museen zu Berlin. 
Islamisches Museum. 
 
extraordinary woman and affectionate mother turned up again. She wrote a letter to 
Toghrul which assured him of her eternal love and devotion. Things went so far 
that she proposed him to marry her. In return, she promised him much money he 
needed to combat Abu Bakr. Toghrul agreed and married the Atabey's widow, 
twice older that he was. However, soon after Sultan was told that she did not 
renounce to enthrone her son. She prepared a poisonous drink for Toghrul, 
however, omniscient Sultan forced his wife to drink it. She did and died. Her 
unforgettable son Qutlug Inanj Mahmud had to move to Azerbaijan, so the struggle 
for power recommenced. 
 
The King of The Kingdom 
of Science 
 
Nasir ad-Din Tusi 
 
 
In Baghdad, near the grave of imam Musa ibn 
Kazim, there is a gravestone that reads in calligraphic 
inscription: "the Assistant of religion and people, the 
Shah of the Country of Science. Such a son has never 
before been born". A great son of Azerbaijan - the out-
standing scientist Mahammed ibn Hasan Nasir ad-Din 
Tusi - is buried here. Our ancestors knew how to 
express their ideas figuratively. For more than 700 
years after his death, hundreds of papers about his life 
and creativity were written, and none could better and 
voluminously describe him this - "Shah of the Country 
of Science". Really, one of the greatest scientists and 
thinkers of the Medieval East, Nasir ad-Din Tusi, 
battling in the fields of mathematics, astronomy, 
philosophy and history, has won a place on the throne 
of Potentate of Science. 
Tusi lived and worked in an epoch of change in Azerbaijan. Taking over the 
Arabs at first were the Seljuks and then the Mongols. Despite huge destruction 
caused by these invasions, the flowering of science and culture in the country, 
which had begun in the Caliphate, continued. In the process of interchanging 
achievements of Arabian, Iranian, Turkic and Greek scientific ideas, Mongolia was 
connected, and through it, China. 
Mahammed Nasir ad-Din Tusi was born on February 18, 1201 in the city of 
Hamadan. He was initially educated by his father, and then in Hamadan Tusi 
120 
 
Hulagu Khan's feast. Jami 
at- Tawarikh, by Rashid ad-
Din. 1528/29. Sankt 
Petersburg. SPL.  
 
continued training with the most outstanding scientists of that time - disciples of 
ibn Sina (Avicenna) and Bahmanyar. Early in his life, Tusi was not restricted to 
just one scientific school. 
The well-rounded and deep knowledge acquired by Mahammed made him 
popular among scientists. At an early age, he had already attracted the attention of 
a number of governors. 
At the age of  30, Nasir ad-Din Mohtasham, 
the leader, of a religious terrorist group called 
Assassins, invited Tusi to visit their place. He asked 
Tusi to translate a book about morals written by an 
Arabian scholar from Arabic to Persian. Nasir ad-Din 
refused this offer and promised to write his own work 
on this theme. In 1235 Nasir ad-Din Tusi finished the 
book, which brought him worldwide glory, and which 
was later translated into many languages. He named it 
"Ahlagi Nasiri" ("Moral of Nasiri"). To the governor, 
however, the book of the freedom-loving author 
seemed seditious, and Tusi was arrested and sent to 
the fortress of the Assassins, Alamut, in the 
mountains. 
In the fortress Alamut, the exiled Tusi lived 
without rights of departure. For more than 20 years, 
Nasir ad-Din stayed at the Assassins' fortress under difficult conditions. and he 
created many new works. He wrote about it in 1242 at the end of his famous work 
"Shahrul-Isharat" (comment on the philosophical treatise of Abu Ali ibn Sina 
"Isharat" ("Instructions"): "I have written the majority of the chapters of this book 
in such extremely heavy conditions, which could not have been heavier, during 
such intimate confusion, that there was no heart more impatient". 
In 1253, grandson of Chingiz Khan, Hulagu Khan, began a campaign 
against the Middle East and the Caucasus.  Hulagu's troops  seized the 
considerably impregnable fortress Alamut and released Nasir ad-Din and other 
scientists. Nasir ad-Din became Hulagu Khan's personal adviser. During his first 
days on this post, Nasir ad-Din had the responsibility of advising Hulagu Khan in 
an important political decision. For a long time, Hulagu Khan had not risked 
storming the Muslim sanctity - Baghdad - from fear of heavenly punishment. Only 
the scientific arguments of Nasir ad-Din helped him take the chance. After 500 
years, the Abbasid government had ended. 
After the conquest of Baghdad in 1260, Hulagu Khan made Azerbaijan in 
the centre of his huge state. Rulers of the new state had the title llkhan (People's 
Khans, in Azerbaijani), and the state was named the State of Ilkhans. In the 
121 
 
Nasir ad-Din Tusi in the Maragha 
Observatory.   Medieval 
miniature. 
 
beginning, Hulagu Khan established as the capital of the state one of the ancient 
and cultural centres of Azerbaijan, Maragha, and then Tabriz. During this time 
Nasir ad-Din began the construction of the Maragha observatory.  
Like many scientists of that time, Nasir ad-Din Tusi was a scientist of wide 
accomplishment. To him belonged over 100 solid scientific works on astronomy, 
mathematics, physics, medicine, philosophy, etiquette, logic, and so on. About 20 
of his works were devoted to astronomy and mathematics. He wrote all of his 
works on mathematics in Arabic, and all of his 
works on astronomy in Arabic and in Persian. 
His most known works on mathematics  
are   "A  Treatise About Complete Quadrangle", 
"A Brief Treatise on the Common Art of 
Calculation by the Help (Panel And Dust) of 
Computing Boards", "Measurement of a   Circle",   
"Summary   of Euclid's "Beginnings" (Tahrir 
Eglidis)", and others. His works on astronomy 
included "Ilkhan's Astronomical   Tables", which 
consists of four books. 
The majority of modern researchers of the 
creativity of Nasir ad-Din consider that he was, 
first of all, a mathematician. His works played a 
large role in the development of geometry and 
trigonometry, not only throughout the East, but 
also in Europe. The publication in 1594 in Rome 
of his "Summary of Euclid's "Beginnings" 
("Tahrir Eglidis") in Arabic, and then in 1657 in Latin, played a large role in the 
distribution of his ideas throughout Europe. Tusi's work "Shaklul Gita" ("A 
Treatise About Complete Quadrangle") played an equally significant role in the 
development of trigonometry in Europe. This work consisted of five books in 
which, for the first time in the world of science, trigonometry was submitted as an 
independent science. This work was translated into English, Russian and French. 
In his works on arithmetic, Nasir ad-Din offers the modern scientist a 
method of extraction of roots of any degree and binomial formula. 
There are many known works by Nasir ad-Din that are devoted to history, 
physics, mineralogy, medicine, music, economy, geography and astronomy. 
Among them, it is necessary to point out "A History of Baghdad", "The Treatise 
About Reflection and Deflection of Light", "Euclid's Optics", "The Treatise about 
the Study of a Rainbow", "The Book About Precious Stones", "The Laws of 
Medicine", "The Treatise About Public Finances" and "Choice of Happy Days". 
Professor G. Mammedbeyli, who examined Nasir ad-Din Tusi's works thoroughly,  
  
122 
 
A celestial sphere from the Maragha Observatory. Azerbaijan. 1279. Mahammad Ordi. Dresden, 
Mathematics-Physical Salon. 
  
123 
 
Illustrations from the Book 
of Fixed Stars. 11th Century. 
Oxford. Bodleian Library.  
came up with a list of what he believed were 76 authentic works of the scientist. 
An Iranian scientist, Ruzevi, included 113 works on his list. 
Many of Nasir ad-Din 's works are still waiting 
to be researched. The manuscripts of his works are 
scattered all over the world - in Baku, Tehran, Paris, 
Berlin, Vienna, Oxford, Cambridge, Leipzig, Munich, 
Florence, Cairo, Istanbul, Moscow, St. Petersburg and 
Qazan. 
In the East he achieved wide popularity as the 
author of a book about ethics, "Ahlagi Nasiri", and as 
the founder of the Maragha observatory. However, as 
was mentioned above, Nasir ad-Din's scientific 
achievements were most significant in the field of 
mathematics. 
Nasir ad-Din had the idea of the construction 
of the observatory for a long time; after the capture of 
Baghdad, under the sanction of Hulagu Khan, he 
began working with the design of the observatory. In 
less than a year, he chose a place for the observatory, 
developed astronomical devices, brought books for the 
observatory's library from different cities, and invited 
scientists from several countries. In "Ziji Ilkhani", 
Nasir ad-Din wrote: "Hulagu Khan has required for 
himself scientists from different vilayats (regions) who 
are aware of astronomical observations: Muvayi ad-
Din Ordi from Damascus, Fahr ad-Din Maraghi from 
Mosul, Fahr ad-Din Ihlati from Tiflis and Najim ad-
Din Debirani from Qazwin". From other sources it is 
visible that among the scientific employees of the Maragha observatory, there were 
such outstanding scientists as Kutb ad-Din Shirazi, Shams ad-Din Shirvani, Jamal 
ad-Din iz-Zeydi Bukhari and Fao Mun-chi. 
Furthermore, eminent statesman and historian Rashid ad-Din stated in the 
Annals that at approximately the same time, the construction of the observatory in 
Pekin was entrusted to Jamal ad-Din Bukhari. He, however, could not manage this 
problem, and he sent for advice from the Maragha observatory, together with 
Chinese scientist Fao Mun-chi. Only upon his return to Pekin with the drawings of 
Maragha was the construction of the observatory successfully completed. 
The creation of the observatory required a large amount of money, and 
Hulagu Khan expressed doubt in the expediency of the costs. According to one 
legend: When Hoja Nasir wanted to begin construction of the astronomical 
observatory in Maragha and announced the prospective charges, Hulagu, who  
124 
 
Second half of the 16th Century. An Ottoman manuscript. The instrument is a giant armillary sphere, 
supported by a wooden frame set up on the ground, apparently in the open air. The five graduated rings 
correspond to the five fundamental circles of the heavens. 
   
125 
 
Bronze astrolabe. 
Shukrullah Mukhlis 
Shirvani. 1486.  
Private collection of 
Harari. 
 
questioned the feasibility of such charges, asked, "Is the science about stars so 
useful that it is necessary to spend a huge sum on the observatory?" Nasir 
answered, "Allow this to happen: in complete secret someone will rise on this 
mountain and cast down a large empty caldron". So they did. 
When the caldron came tumbling down, it produced a terrible noise and 
caused a panic among the army of Hulagu Khan. Nasir ad-Din and Hulagu 
observed all of this and remained quiet. Then the scientist addressed Hulagu with 
the following words: "We know the reason for this noise, and the army do not 
know; we are quiet, and they worry. As we know the reason for this heavenly 
phenomenon, we shall be quiet on the ground". 
Nasir ad-Din 's arguments appeared as if so 
convincing that Hulagu Khan agreed to construction of 
the observatory, and he allocated 20,000 dinars for this 
purpose. Hereinafter, he paid the constant salary for the 
employees of the observatory, the number of which was 
more than 100. Under Nasir ad-Din's initiative, the 
money for the payment of these salaries was received 
from the taxation of the grounds granted to him. 
Clever and educated, Hulagu Khan fully realised 
the purpose of constructing the observatory. Thus, the 
story with the caldron must be an invention of later 
Persian historians that were traing to portrat Turkic - 
Mongols as ignorant nomands. 
The construction of the observatory began in 1259 on the top of a hill 
located in the west of Maragha. Nasir ad-Din personally participated in designing 
the observatory's buildings and developing the astronomical tools. With the 
outstanding astronomer and designer, Muvayi ad-Din Ordi, Nasir ad-Din invented, 
made and installed in the observatory five astronomical devices of a new design 
and five of an old design. Also in the Maragha observatory, earthly and heavenly 
globes were produced and used for educational purposes and for the decisions of a 
number of problems of spherical astronomy. 
It is necessary to tell about the main engineer of the Maragha observatory, 
Muvayi ad-Din Ordi, and his son, Mahammed, separately. The primary role in the 
construction of the observatory and equipment belonged to Muvayi ad-Din Ordi. 
Biographical details of Ordi are not actually known. Only two manuscripts of his 
work "The Treatise About Astronomical Tools of the Maragha Observatory", 
written in Arabic, are known. One of them is stored in the Paris National Library, 
and the other in Tehran. A teacher of a special school of Eastern language in Paris 
named Jurden discovered the first manuscript in the beginning of the 19th Century. 
He translated it into French. The book went through two editions in Paris - in 1809 
and in 1810. Then it was translated into German in 1811. 
126 
 
The book contains detailed descriptions of 10 complex astronomical tools, 
which were developed by Muvayi ad-Din Ordi under the management of Nasir ad-
Din Tusi. Analysis of these descriptions has allowed a number of researchers to 
come to the conclusion that the tools of the Maragha observatory surpassed devices 
of all other known observatories of that time in accuracy of measurement. A 
number of tools invented by Muvayi ad-Din Ordi himself were used in many 
observatories around the world. The trainees and employees of the Maragha 
observatory who came from different countries played a large role in the 
distribution of Ordi's ideas. D. Mammedbeyli wrote, "Tools developed by 
Ordirendered a huge influence on the development of astronomical tools in the 
observatory of Ulughbey, Tycho Brahe, and the observatory in Jaypur in India". 
Muvayi ad-Din 's son, Mahammed Bey Muvayi ad-Din Ordi, also worked in 
the Maragha observatory. He followed in his father's tracks in the development of 
astronomical devices. The star globe of his design was kept and is stored in the 
famous Dresden Mathematics-Physical Salon. It is the most ancient of all the 
globes there. From the situation of the stars on the globe, it was possible to define 
the date of its manufacturing - 1279. Several European scientists have studied the 
description of this globe. Made from bronze and encrusted in gold and silver, the 
globe is a sample of high art of the 13th Century Azerbaijani decorative art. 
At the observatory, there was a library with 400,000 books and a school for 
training the scientific staff of the observatory. It is interesting that among the 
employees of the observatory, in addition to Muslims, were Christians, Buddhists, 
Nestorians and Jews, among which there were Turks, Persians, Arabs, Mongols, 
Chinese, Georgians and Tartars. 
The observatory surpassed in size all known astronomical observatories in 
the East. The scientific activities and astronomical observations of the Maragha ob-
servatory employees resulted in the creation of famous collective works, "Ilkhan's 
Astronomical Tables". They were completed in 1284, after the death of Nasir ad-
Din . These tables consisted of four books. The first book contained descriptions of 
Greek, Persian, Jewish, Arabian and Turkic calendars, and ways of transition from 
one calendar to another were specified. 
The second book was devoted to the movement of stars and finding their 
ecliptic coordinates. The tables of sine and tangent, as well as latitude and 
longitude, of 256 inhabited localities were given. Nasir ad-Din began the 
longitudes 34-35 degrees west of Greenwich and carried them out through the 
eastern part of South America. On this basis, professor G. Mammedbeyli put 
forward the hypothesis that the geographers and astronomers of that time - long 
before Columbus - had information about the existence of continents in the 
Western hemisphere, afterwards named America. The third and fourth books of the 
Tables were devoted to questions of astrology. 
127 
 
The gravestone of Tusi in 
the Jalil Mosque in 
Baghdad. 
 
 
The Maragha observatory played a huge role in the development of 
practical astronomy; the experience of this observatory was directly used in the 
construction of the  Pekinese  observatory  and   the  observatory of Ulughbey. 
Drawings of astronomical tools were brought to Pekin, as was already mentioned, 
by Jamal ad-Din Bukhari and Fao Mun-chi, and to Samarkand by Jamshid Kashani 
- a distinguished mathematician and astronomer of the East. 
 
Among the classes of nations, the Arabs are distinguished for their 
speech, their eloquence and their ingenuity, but they are also noted for harsh 
nature and powerful appetite. The Persians, on the other hand, are 
distinguished by intelligence, quickness, cleanliness and sagacity, albeit noted 
for cunning and greed. The Byzantines are distinguished for loyalty, 
trustworthiness, affection and competence, but noted for stinginess and 
meanness Indians are distinguished for strength of feeling, and of intuition 
and understanding, but noted for conceit, malevolence, guile and a tendency 
to fabrication. The Turks are distinguished by courage, worthy service and 
fine appearance, but noted for treachery, hardness of heart and indelicacy. 
                                                                                                                          
Nasir ad-Din Tusi 
 
Nasir ad-Din Tusi died on June 25, 1274 in 
Baghdad and was buried there in the Jame mosque. 
Three sons survived Nasir ad-Din: Asil ad-Din Hasan, 
Fahr ad-Din Ahmed and Sadr ad-Din Ali. After the 
death of Nasir ad-Din , his third son Sadr ad-Din Ali 
supervised the observatory for a long time. The 
descendants of Nasir ad-Din occupied high state posts in 
the state of Sefevi. In the 14th Century, many of them 
moved from Maragha to Ordubad. Presently, many 
direct descendents of Nasir ad-Din live in Azerbaijan 
and Iran. 
To finish the biography of the great scientist, it is 
necessary to include an extract from "Of a General 
History", by a Syrian historian of the 13th Century 
named Bar-Ebrey, who went to Maragha specifically to 
work with manuscripts there. He wrote, "Due to favor-
able opportunities, the Library of Maragha city of 
Azerbaijan was accessible to me, including a large number of books in Syrian, 
Arabian and also Persian". Further, he wrote about Tusi: "That year (1274) Mister 
Nasir [al-din Tusi] - Persian philosopher, famous person, aware and excellent in all 
areas of science, insatiable in mathematical doctrines - passed away. He made 
128 
 
[astronomical] tools for observation, large compasses from copper, which were 
unusually bigger than [similar tools] of Ptolemy. 
He set off to Alexandria, where he observed and recorded the movement of 
planets. In Maragha city of Azerbaijan, many sages from various countries assem-
bled. From them he received a salary for the teachers and pupils who were at his 
observatory. At this time, when he set off to Baghdad to check on places there, he 
died. The people learned that he was poisoned. 
He made numerous writings, as well as translations from Logic and natural 
and divine sciences. He also interpreted Euclid... He wrote a work on Ethics in 
Persian. In it he collected sayings of Plato and Aristotle about practical philosophy. 
He knew the ancient philosophers, but referred to them hostilely in his works". 
Today, the memory of Nasir ad-Din Tusi is highly-revered and honoured in 
the Republic of Azerbaijan. Many institutions have been named after him, 
including the national Pedagogical Institute in Baku and the observatory at 
Shemakha. 
 
The Greatest of the Grand Viziers 
 
Fazlullah Rashid ad-Din 
 
 
During a gurultay (tribal council) held 
on the river Onona in 1206, Temuchin, one of 
the steppe chiefs, was proclaimed Great Khan 
of Mongolia under the name of Chingiz Khan. 
Commonplace for steppe residents, this event 
was of paramount importance for the destinies 
of Asian and European peoples. Chingiz Khan 
was successful in creating a mighty cen-
tralized state and starting subsequent military 
campaigns westwards. 
The first raid of the Turkic-Mongols 
(note that the Golden Horde was primarily 
made of Turks while Mongols prevailed in 
command) against Azerbaijan was made as far back as 1220. However, it was 
Chingiz Khan's favourite grandson Hulagu Khan that succeeded in finally settling 
down in the region and creating an independent ulus. In 1257, Hulagu Khan 
managed to subdue Azerbaijan and some neighboring countries. The ancient 
Azerbaijani towns of Maragha, then Tabriz were alternately capitals of the new 
state under Hulagu Khan.  
 
129 
 
The court of the Ilkhanids, double-page frontispiece from 
Compendium of Chronicles by Rashid ad-Din. Tabriz. 
Early 14th Century. Berlin. Staatsbibliothek. 
 
In 1258, Hulagu Khan seized Baghdad and put to death the last Caliph 
Mutasim, following which the caliphate ceased to exist. It should be remembered 
that prior to his seizure of 
Baghdad, Hulagu Khan 
succeeded in routing the State 
of Ismailites, which had once 
inspired terror in the countries 
of the Near East, through 
bloody actions of its Shii sect of 
the Assassins. In European 
languages, the word "assassin" 
became synonymous with the 
word "murderer". Moreover, 
Hulagu Khan destroyed the 
impregnable fortress Alamut, the 
residence of the head of the sect. 
Besides Azerbaijan, the Empire of Hulagu Khan (1258-1265) included Arabian 
Iraq, Iraqi Ajam, Kerman, Georgia, Armenia, Asia Minor (Rum), Kurdistan, Fars, 
Khuzistan, Khorasan, and other small state formations. Rulers of the new state 
were called Ilkhans (khans of people in Azeri), and the state proper was called the 
State of Ilkhans (Hulaguides). It is noteworthy that the State of Ilkhans and the 
ruling dynasty of Hulaguides were officially, though formally to a greater extent, 
recognized as an integral part of the great Turkic-Mongol Empire with the capital 
in Khan Baligh (Beijing/Peking). The Great Khan and head of the new Great 
Empire, Khubilay Khan, founder of the Chinese dynasty Yuang, closely watched 
the developments in the west of the Empire. Thousands of stone-hurlers, flame-
throwers, bridge builders, physicians, pharmacists, artisans and painters were sent 
to the region. The latter brought with them new technologies of paper, dyes, 
lacquers and Indian ink production. 
 
The Franks (Europeans) speak twenty-five languages, and no people 
understands the language of any other. All they have in common is their 
calendar, script and numbers. 
Rashid ad-Din 
The Turkic-Mongol elite under Hulagu Khan was utterly heterogeneous. 
Traditionally, they professed shamanism. Under the influence of Turks-Uighurs 
who were at a higher stage of development, a part of them, prior to arriving in 
Azerbaijan, began professing Buddhism, as well as Christianity of the Nestorian 
trend. Wives of many Turkic-Mongolian rulers were Nestorians. Also, most rulers 
were notable for their creed tolerance. Hulagu Khan's mother and primary wife  
130 
 
The Capture of Baghdad by the Turkic-Mongols. Miniature from Compendium of Chronicles by Rashid 
ad-Din. Tabriz. Early 14th Century. Berlin. Staatsbibliothek. 
 
   
131 
 
were Christians from the tribe of Keramites. Persian Shams ad-Din Mahammed 
Juveyni, who headed the civil affairs department, was Muslim. A personal doctor 
was Chinese. The vizier and nearest councilor of Gazan Khan, and then Oljaytu 
and Abu Sayid, as referred to in the fragment, native of Azerbaijan Rashid ad-Din 
Fazlullah was probably of Jewish origin. A Byzantine princess from Trapezund 
was the wife of Abaka Khan. Note that Oljaytu Khan was baptized a Christian 
(Nicholas) and then adopted Buddhism in his early youth. Later on, he became a 
Sunni Muslim under the name of Mahammed Hudabende. Finally in 1309/10, he 
converted to Shiism in an attempt to make it the state religion of the country (this 
was finalized under Gazan Khan). Of interest was the fact that the Turkic written 
language formed the basis of the Mongolian written language. It was not surprising 
that many documents and inscriptions on coins were drawn up in Uighur. 
Opposite Spain and in the middle of the ocean there are two islands. 
One of them is Iberniya [Ireland], and it is a peculiarity of the soil of the 
country, that venomous vermin die. In that country no mice are born. The 
men there are long lived, red-faced, tall, powerful of build and courageous. 
There is a spring of flowing water, such that if a piece of wood is left in it, 
within a week its surface is turned to stone. 
The name of the second, bigger island is Anglater [England]. It contains 
many mountains and numberless mines of gold, silver, copper, tin and iron, as 
well as great variety of fruits. One of the wonders of that land is a tree which 
grows a bird as its fruit It happens in this way at blossom time a pouch, 
looking like an apple, emerges, with the shape of a bird inside it. As it grows, 
it comes to life and comes out of the pouch. They eat the fruit and keep the 
bird until it reaches the size of a large duck. The meat of the inhabitants of 
that country comes chiefly from this bird It is reported that among the 
Christians who eat no meat on fast days, there is disagreement as to whether 
this bird may be eaten. Some consider it a plant because it grows on a tree, 
others as an animal because blood comes from it In both islands they have 
ewes from the wool of which woolen cloth and scarlet are made. 
Rashid ad-Din 
Science and culture thrived under the Ilkhans in Azerbaijan. Important 
figures included outstanding scholars and public figures Hindushah Nakhchivani 
and Mahammed Nakhchivani, great musician and musicologist Safi ad-Din 
Urmavi, founder of the Sufi order Safaviyya Safi ad-Din Adrebeli, philosopher and 
poet Shams ad-Din Tabrizi, and prominent physician Mahmud ibn Ilyas. In 
accordance with the instructions of Hulagu Khan, distinguished Azerbaijani 
scientist and philosopher Nasiraddin Tusi built an observatory in the town of 
Maragha. It was one of the first Azerbaijani designers Muvayieddin Ordi who 
developed unique astronomical instruments for the Maragha observatory. 
  
132 
 
Mausoleum of Oljeytu, Sultaniya. 1313-1314. Azerbaijan. A band of Kufic seal at the base of the 
dome reads “Allah, Mahammad, Ali”. 
  
133 
 
The ruins of the İlkhanids` palace in Takht-i Suleyman. East 
Azerbaijan, Iran. 
 
The capital of Ilkhans, Tabriz, which had grown to compete with Baghdad, 
became the largest cultural and commercial centre of the Near and Middle East. 
Following the downfall of the caliphate, the process of Turkization of Azerbaijani 
culture sharply accelerated, and the Arab and, to an extent, Persian,languages came 
to be forced out by 
Turkic-Azeri. 
The state of 
Ilkhans culminated under 
Gazan Khan who carried 
out several effective 
economic reforms. It was 
Gazan Khan's Grand 
Vizier Rashid ad-Din 
Fazlullah who executed 
most novelties and 
designs for the welfare of 
the country. A famous 
scientist and medical 
man of his epoch, Rashid 
ad-Din created 14 
scientific treatises on medicine, botany, history, theology and agriculture. Of 
particular interest are his works "Jami at-Tawarikh" ("Collected Stories"), "Az-
Risaliyat as-Sultaniya", "Zataifal-Khagaig", "Tovzigat" and "Bayanul-Khagaig". 
Following Rashid ad-Din's instructions, a work titled "Tansugnameh" was 
translated from Chinese into Arab. 
Rashid ad-Din was born in Khamadan in 1247. He spent his life in Tabriz, 
the capital of Azerbaijan; he died there on 18 July 1318. His full name was Rashid 
ad-Din Fazlullah ibn Abu-1-Khayr Khamadani (nicknamed at-Tabib-doctor). He 
joined the court of Ilkhans under Abaka Khan (1265-1282). From 1298 to 1318, he 
served as vizier of Gazan Khan, Oljaytu and Abu Sayid. He had broad and 
universal knowledge and was engaged in medical treatment. He took an active part 
in the state management and development of science, particularly medical science, 
culture and arts. He wrote scientific treatises and books on universal history and 
partook in the construction of towns and immense irrigation canals. 
Specifically, in the centre of Tabriz, Rashid ad-Din built a vast housing 
quarter named after himself, "Rubi'i Rushidi". The quarter numbered upwards of 
100.000 residents, 24 caravanserais, 150 shops, and scores of workshops for the 
manufactureand processing of paper, fabric, arms, etc. The quarter was famous for 
its university attended by more than 7,000 students from several Muslim countries. 
At this university, 450 teachers and scholars, both local and invited, taught various 
134 
 
A Mosque (Arc). 1316-1335. Tabriz. The Mosque was built by Taj al-
ad Din Ali Shah of Tabriz, a famous vizier of Gazan Khan Ilkhan. 
Photo bv Mizbani. 
 
branches of science. The total number of students in Rubi'i Rashidi comprised 
1.000. At that time, this was the biggest university in the Near and Middle East. It 
even surpassed the famous Baghdad University, Nazariyya. 
Along with  theological  sciences,  the university taught such secular 
sciences as philosophy, medicine, history, astronomy and astrology. Medical 
students studied for five years and had probationary courses within a year in a sort 
of Medical Academy (Dar-ush-Shafa). Approximately 50 highly qualified medical 
experts, invited from 
China, India, Egypt 
and Syria, worked at 
the academy. Dar-ar-
Shifa was located in 
Rashid Garden (Baghi 
Rashidabad), in the 
area called Kuche 
Mualijun (Street of 
Curers). Next to the 
hospital, there were 
dwelling houses of 
physicians and the staff 
ofattendants. Medicinal 
herbs were cultivated 
in a special garden called Falhabad; also, there was a pharmacy. Note that there 
were 67 small Health Houses in various regions of the State of Ilkhans, 
subordinated under the central Tabriz House. 
There was a library in Rubi'i Rashidi with 60,000 books. Readers could 
cither look through them in the library or take them home on a certain security. 
Students lived in a special quarter. Board and accommodation charges, as well as 
the maintenance of hospitals and pharmacy costs, were paid at the expense of 
revenues from Rashid ad-Din's lands and buildings. In addition, Rashid ad-Din 
paid for library and related artistic workshop maintenance costs. 
Rashid ad-Din may be regarded as the biggest ever patron of arts and 
literature in the history of Azerbaijan. It should be noted that patronage of arts and 
literature was widely spread among educated Turkic rulers of the Azerbaijani states 
of Gara Goyunly, Agh Goyunlu Safavids and Qajars and surrounding nobility. 
Gazan Khan came into history as the creator of the fundamental work on the 
world history "Jami at-Tawarikh" (collected stories). It was Rashid ad-Din who led 
the tremendous project, and he coped with it excellently. "Jami at-Tawarikh" 
became not only a remarkable event in the Muslim historiography, but also a 
brilliant work of Azerbaijani painting in the first quarter of the 14th Century. The 
point is that calligraphers, painters and binders from all over the country were 
135 
 
invited to a special atelier under the court library (kitabkhane) in Tabriz to write 
the text and decorate the manuscript with miniatures. Note that the traditions of the 
library survived in Tabriz until the end of the 16th Century. 
While creating "Jami at-Tawarikh", Rashid ad-Din held consultations with 
Gazan Khan himself. Prominent expert in Mongolian history Pulad used numerous 
documents of Mongolian rulers and the official Mongolian chronicle "Altyn 
depter". Contributors to the creation of the Chinese history included two Chinese 
historians Li Ta Chi and Maksuna. Other contributors to the work were Iranian 
historians, an Indian, Buddhist monk Kamalashri from Kashmir and a catholic 
missionary. Rashid ad-Din's world history referred to historical events of all the 
peoples and states of the reviewed period: Judas, India, China, Western Europe, 
and not only Muslim, as was accepted. 
Of the tremendous number of manuscripts dating back to Rashid ad-Din's 
lifetime, there survived just two incomplete Edinburgh and London copies. They 
included historical works by Juveyni. Tabari and Biruni, "Tarih al-Vamini" by al-
Utbi (for the creation of Seldjuk history), and "Shah-name" epos. Later records of 
this immense work have also survived. 
It should be noted that Gazan Khan's reforms, carried out by Rashid ad-Din, 
prevented the disintegration of the huge and heterogeneous Empire of Hulaguides. 
Gazan Khan's reforms covered the monetary system, taxation and the distribution 
of land plots, and it imposed restriction on the authorities of Turkic-Mongol 
military-nomadic nobility. It should be recalled that due to Rashid-ad-Din, Gazan 
Khan's reforms were in progress under Oljavtu (Mahammed Hudabende, 1304-
1316), brother and successor to Gazan Khan. 
However, under Oljaytu's heir, his 13-year old son Abu Sayid Bahadur 
Khan (1317-1335), the disintegration process sped up immeasurably. It started 
straight after Oldjaitu's death in 1318, when Abu Sayid put Rashid ad-Din and his 
son Ibrahim to death. The reason for these executions was second Vizier Tadj ad-
Din Alishah's accusation against Rashid ad-Din and his son Ibrahim of poisoning 
Oldjaitu. Rashid ad-Din's property was confiscated, and Rubi'i Rashidi was 
squandered and destroyed. 
Rashid ad-Din was very rich; all of the country's wealth had been in his 
hands. This circumstance may have played a role in the decision to execute him. 
He owned 70,000 to 80,000 hectares of arable land, 39,000 date palms, numerous 
vineyards and gardens (1,200 slaves were engaged in just two of them), 30,000 
horses, 10,000 camels, 250,000 sheep, 20,000 hens, 20,000 geese and ducks, not to 
mention the revenues he had  obtained from lands distributed during his lifetime 
between 14 sons and 5 daughters. Equal to princes, Rashid ad-Din's sons were 
vicegerents of vast regions. 
Subsequently, Abu Sayid nominated one of Rashid ad-Din's sons. Giyas ad-
Din Mahammed Rashidi, as Vizier to take the place of Alishah who died in 1327. 
136 
 
A Tomb Complex. 14th-17th 
Centuries. Ardebil. 
 
Furthermore, he turned over to Giyas ad-Din his previously confiscated property. 
The new Vizier did his utmost to carry on with his father's cause but he failed to 
impede the country's dissolution. In due course, the structure of the state 
administration prior to Gazan Khan and Rashid ad-Din's reign was restored. It was 
again the Turkic-Mongol military-nomadic nobility that seized power in the 
country, which resulted in uninterrupted internal wars and the final downfall of the 
state in 1353. 
It should be added that Giyas ad-Din tried in every way possible to 
encourage arts and sciences. On Fridays, he arranged meetings of scholars, 
philosophers and clergy to carry on scientific and theological disputes. It was no 
mere coincidence that in his historical treatise "Tarih-i-Guzideh", dedicated to 
Giyas ad-Din, Qazwini highly appreciated his political and cultural activity. 
 
 
The Founder of the Gizilbash 
Mystic Path 
 
Safi ad-Din Iskhak Ardebili 
 
Sheikh Safi ad-Din Iskhak Ardebili was the 
founder of the well-known all over the East Sufis 
Darvish order Sefaviyya. Order's activity in 
Azerbaijan and Iran resulted in forming Sufism as an 
indcpended order titled Gizilbash (Redheaded) after 
on colour of headdress of the members of the order. 
Sufism, and in particularly, Sufism in Gizilbash 
interpretation, played its historical role in 
thepolitical and cultural life of Azerbaijan, had ap-
preciable influence on the development of religious - 
philosophical ideology in many Muslim countries. 
Whithout understanding the ideology of Sufism, it is 
impossible realiz motivations of the most political 
events, occurring in the Muslim world in the Middle 
Ages, likewise it is impossible to realize the 
phenomend of cultural life, we should say, literature 
of that time, when adjusted for its Sufi background. 
Before starting with the biography of great sheikh 
Safi, it is necessary to say a few words about the essence of Sufism-Muslim 
mysticism. As I. Petrushevskiy wrote, "Under mistics or mysticism, is usually 
meant a special religious ideology, providing for an opportunity to conduct 
137 
 
Sheikh Zahid Gilani's mausoleum. Lahijan, Iran. 
 
individual dialogue (or even coupling) between a person and God by means of the 
so-called "irradiation", "internal experience", "ecstasy", "trans", etc. 
The religious and philosophical currents, going back to mysticism, are 
typical for all world religions, created by mankind (Buddhism, Hinduism, Judaism, 
Christianity). In Islam, the mystical movement is titled as Sufism. The term come 
from "sufis", wearing rough woolen clothes - suf (wool) or from a word "saf" 
(cleanliness). Though Sufism 
has for many centuries been 
spread all over Muslim world, 
the experts could not properly 
identify this very complex and 
versatile doctrine. Therefore, 
they prefer under this term to 
unite all Muslim teachings 
aimed at developing theoretical 
base and practical methods of 
maintaining direct dialogue bet-
ween individual and God. Sufis 
termed this process through cognition of Truth (Haqiqah). Truth means when Sufi 
gets free from earthly desires in the state of ecstasy (fuddle of divine love), he is 
capable of establishing intimate dialogue with God. Under Sufi was meant 
everyone who trusts in direct dialogue with God and does his best to achieve it. 
According to Sufis terminology, "Sufi-is passionate in Truth , who by means of 
Love and Devotion moves towards Truth and Perfection'". Movement towards 
Truth with the help of Love and Devotion God is called Tarikat, or Way to God. 
Since the Middle Ages, Sufi brotherhoods orders were notable for their own 
way of mystical cognition, movement towards True. In these Sufi brotherhoods, a 
beginner, disciple (myurid) should overcome the entire path to Truth under 
preceptor's (murshid) guidance. 
As writes J. Spencer Trimingham, "Preceptors asserted that potentialities of 
clearing from own "I" and contacting with God are laid in each person, but they are 
in a latent, drowse state and cannot be disengaged without instructions of the 
teacher, except where God confers anybody with ability of special endowment". 
Myurids daily confessed in their sins to myurshids and performed various spiritual 
exercises-"zikr "(for example, by repeating incessantly a phrase " There is no God, 
except Allah" - " La Illah il Allah") for complete renunciation. To achieve of a 
mystical ecstasy, Sufis meet together in Sema- sufi meeting at which under the 
accompaniment of rhythmic music they listened a singer or reciter of gazelles of 
Sufistic or love contents, made certain recurrent movements or dance . Sometimes 
drinks were used to achieve ecstasy. Jalal ad-Din Rumi, great Turkish poet and 
138 
 
OPPOSITE: The Ardabil carpet. Tabriz. 1539-
1540. Measuring 10.97m x 5.34m. A cartouche 
bears the legend: Except for thy heaven there is no 
refuge for me in this world; other than here there is 
no place for my head. Work of the slave of the court, 
Maqsud of Kashan. 1539-1540. Victoria and Albert 
Museum. London. 
 
 
Ardebil. Three Gonbads of 
“Shah Ismail”, “Allah Allah” 
and “Harmhaneh". 
Sufi, so explains the purpose and essence of Sema: "Darvishs will run into ecstasy 
that raise desires and thirst for God, reinforce love to him, enhance love to faith, 
dispel love in hearts to world with 
Sema". 
Sufism came in Azerbaijan 
almost concurrently with Islam. 
However, only Safi ad-Din Iskhak 
Ardebili succeeded in raising its 
authority so that it finally became 
ideology of ruling circles of the 
country. 
Safi ad-Din was born in 1252, 
in the city of Ardebil in Azerbaijani- 
Turkic prosperous and religious 
family. About his Turkic origin a large 
material was collected by M. Abbasli. 
Thus, he showed that in the work of medieval author Tavvakul ibn Bazz 
"Safvat as-Safi", finished in 1357, and in the works of later authors there are 
mentionings like: "Ey Pir-e Turk" adressed to Safi as Turk. 
("Hey, Turkish Saint".), "Turkish Young 
Man", "the Son of Turk" and so on. 
In Sufi's circles it was considered that Safi by 
origin in 21 generations went back to the seventh 
Shiite imam Musa Qazim. 
Fatherless since early ages, Safi was initially 
educated in the ambience of his father's religious 
followers. He felt at home in Persian, Gilani, Arabic 
and Mongol. 
Safi continued his education in Shiraz where 
he made his way at the age of twenty for well-
known theologians Rukn ad-Din Beyzavi and Amir 
Abdullah, others. There, he, at last, decided to 
choose a preceptor. On the advice of Amir Abdullah, 
he chose well-known sheikh from Gilan Hajji ad-
Din Zahidi, who was a wandering Darvish, related to 
Azerbaijan Sufi order of Suhravardiyya. His genuine 
name was Taj ad-Din Ibrahim Bey Rovshan. He came from a little village of 
Halayagiran (Heqlakaran), located near Lenkoran. In his honour, the village was as 
far back as in the Middle Ages renamed into Sheykhakeran. In the same village he 
was buried. 
139 
 
The Memorial Complex of Ardebil. Janat 
Sara and Mausoleum of Shah Ismail. East 
Azerbaijan, Iran. 
 
Safi spent a lot of time for his search. In four years only he discovered 
sheikh Zahid in the mountains of Gilan. Soon Safi married to doughter of preceptor 
- Bibi Fatma (their son Sadr ad-Din subsequently succeded to shaykh Safi) and 
their friendship got stronger. 
For 25 years they preached jointly their ideas, and just in 1294, after the 
death of Zahid Gilani, Safi ad-Din took his place as leader of the order, named in 
honour of Safi - Safaviyya . 
The authority of sheykh Gilani was so high that many researchers are 
inclined to consider him as valid founder of order Safaviyya. However, it was not 
so. The authority of shaykh Safi was not inferious to that of his, and the well-
known ideological base of the order arose after the death of Gilani.  
Among disciples of Safi ad-Din 
there were such famous figures, as Vizier 
of Ilkhan, Rashid ad-Din, his son Giyas 
ad-Din Mahammed Rashidi and even 
Ilkhan, Abu Said. In the end of shaykh's 
life, most Ardebil inhabitants were his 
pupils. He had myurids in Western Iran as 
well (Isfahan , Shiraz, etc). 
Especially strong religious 
influence the order of Safaviyya, as 
powerful Turkic order, had in Asia Minor, 
populated by Turks. The population of 
these regions, for example, actively backed Shah Ismail in the initial period of his 
ascent of power. 
Sheikh Safi ad-Din, like his teacher Zahidi, was reputed to be sacred, 
working many miracles. Therefore, they were supported financially in every 
possible way by people. If in the beginning of order's organization sheikh Safi ad-
Din owned a small plot at the end of his life he owned more than 20 settlements, 
donated to him by different feudals. Note that Safi ad-Din and the order received 
many donations. 
The letter of the Rashid ad-Din's Vizier which informed shaykh that he, in 
connection with the Muslim holiday sent him following donations - wheat more 
than 40 tons, rice about 80 tons, butter more than a ton, honey about two tons, 
orgut half a ton, sugar of lump more than 300 kg, bulls 30 heads, sheep 130 heads, 
geese 190, hens 600, rose water 30 flasks, money 10 thousands dinars. 
Sheikh Safi ad-Din died and was buried in Ardebil in 1334. Over his grave 
there was erected a mausoleum, with mosques, caravanserais, madrasahs and 
residential houses around it. There shaped a large worship centre. Here rest in 
peace most Safavi shaykhs, including Shah Ismail. The centre is still being repaired 
140 
 
and reconstructed. Its final form shaped in the 16 century, during the reign of Shah 
Tahmasib I (1524-1576). 
Mausoleum of shaykh Safi ad-Din and the adjucent mosque arc a 
masterpiece of the architecture of Azerbaijan. Very colourful are tiles of different 
colours. The development of Ardebil was in many respects predetermined by large 
popularity of the complex of Safi ad-Dina among scores of pilgrims. 
The first successors of shaykh Safi ad-Din in the position of Safaviyya order 
shaykhs in Ardebil were his direct descendants Sadr ad-Din Musa (1334-1392/3), 
shaykh Haji Ali (1392/3-1429). Since the epoch of great-grandson of Safi ad-Din, 
Ibrahim Sheikh Shah (1429-1447), Ardebil shaykhs come to the secular power. 
Sheikh Ibrahim Sheikh Shah became a governor of Ardebil, and sheikh Ismail 
(1486-1524) was founder of Shah Dinasty of Safavids of the new Gizilbash state, 
first in Azerbaijan, and then in Iran. 
 
The Sun that Will Never Set Again 
 
Death And Resurrection of The Poet Shams Tabrizi 
 
Shams ad-Din Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Malikdad  Tabrizi, a well-known 
Azerbaijan poet and thinker,  one of the most prominent Muslim mystics was born 
in Tabriz, the capital of Azerbaijan. There is not much biographical information on 
Shams Tabrizi, and all that is known is obscured by Myth. It is evident from his 
works and Sufi activity that he was an all-round educated person. Due to high 
erudition and talent of the teacher. Shams, though young, deserved the name of 
"Murshidcamil" - "Most perfect murshid" (murshid -preceptor). He was noted for 
his physical beauty and spiritual purity. Shams had many desciple-murids. He 
wore a black felt garb on. Tabrizi travelled much with stop-overs mostly in 
caravanserais. 
 
Simply, Two People Met Each Other 
 
On November 26, 1244 in a Turkish city of Konya, staying at the 
"Ricemongers" Caravanserai, Shams met with the subsequently famous poet Jalal 
ad-Din Rumi and they became friends. The place of their meeting was named by 
our contemporaries the Meeting of two Seas - Marj Al-Bahrain. As Fish writes it 
was "a usual autumn day. No great armies committed to battle on that day to settle 
the destiny of empires, nor did any founder of a dynasty, that would rule over 
millions, mounted the throne. Neither was a new continent nor a new kind of 
energy discovered. Nothing, that would shock the imagination and oblige people to 
remember this date, happened. Simply two people met each other. But, the further 
this date recedes in the darkness of the centuries the more exceptional the 
141 
 
Dervishes dancing in Istanbul. 18th Century. Painted 
by a European artist. 
 
A cow bowed down to the 
ground at the sight of Baha 
Walad (father of Rumi). Turkish 
manuscript. 16th Century. 
 
consequences appear. The meeting of two individuals who discovered each other, 
who understood and loved each other is always a miracle, and, maybe, the most 
surprising of all miracles. But the day of their meeting remains great only for these 
two individuals. But, in this case 
two people meeting in Konya more 
than seven hundred years ago, 
represents a specific moment in the 
history of mankind. Had this 
meeting not taken place, tens of 
millions of people from Central 
Asia in the north down to Arabia in 
the south, from Indonesia in the 
east up to Northern Africa in the 
west would have felt and thought 
differently..." 
One Of The Prominent 
Poets Of The Earth 
On this day one of the greatest poets on the Earth - Jalal ad-Din Rumi came 
into the world, embodying in his beliefs, feelings and traditions of the peoples of a 
vast region and expressed in it the greatness of human spirit in its striving for 
perfection. 
A few words about Rumi. Jalal ad-Din 
headed a University (medrese). He was well-to-do, 
was married and made a study of the theory of 
sufism. When the famous Seyid Burhan ad-Din 
Mukhakiki Termezi moved to Konya, Rumi chose 
him as a spiritual guide. After a while Rumi left for 
Damascus lo study. Having completed his studies 
he came back to Konya and again followed his 
guide. Soon the guide passed away and Rumi 
himself started to produce. 
And one with face as Sun-Shams                                             
         At this time Rumi met Shams ad-Din 
Tabrizi. This acquaintance became a crucial point 
in the biography of Rumi and played the deciding 
role in the formation of his world view. The 
appearance of Shams, his human qualities, his deep 
devotion to the ideas of sufism inspired Rumi. He 
was carried away by love and respect to Shams ad-Din. Rumi chose him as his new 
spiritual guide quit the scientific occupations, and gave up the post in medrese. All 
their spare time together with other followers of Shams they held musical Sufi 
142 
 
A gold-beater repenting in 
front of the Sufi Rumi, from 
the Majalis al-Ushshaq by 
Husein Bayqara. 1552.  
Bodleian Library. Oxford. 
 
 
sessions and sacred dervish dances. Shams' presence helped Rumi in his aspiration 
to dialogue with God. Rumi was so impressed that he began to write poetry, much 
of which was devoted to Shams.     
                                                                                                     
I,  as Mercury used to have a weakness for the book-case, 
I in front of scribes sat down. 
But have got drunk, catching sight of your face. 
And cane pen has broken unawares.  
By tears of zeal and work performing my ablutions,  
Your person 1 have made the Quibble for petitions. 
 If 1 survive without you, Cinder, cinder me wholly.  
And off with my head,  
If the brain in it be not yours. 
 I pray to you in church and mosque in Kaaba.  
You - my ambition there, in heaven, and here, on the ground. 
Taste from your bread and I am tilled, as never was before. 
 Partake, swallow of you water, and water is suffice there fore. 
Whom you deify, is your price too.  
As I am happy, happy, deifying you. 
 
The Rumi's relatives and especially his murids 
who did not receive much of his attention got 
overanxious and tried to separate the spiritual brothers 
by any means. On February 15, 1246 Shams was 
forced to leave Konya secretly from Rumi. He settled 
down in Damascus and tried not to think about Rumi. 
Sham's leave did not save the situation. Rumi could 
not stand the separation and started shunning the 
society. The separation's grief strengthened his 
poetry. At last Rumi found out the residence of 
Shams. The news returned him back to life. As the 
poet's friends saw that, they decided to send Rumi's 
son, Sultan Valid, to Damascus after Shams ad-Din 
Tabrizi. Rumi sent with Sultan Valid a letter to Shams 
asking him to return and Shams agreed to come back. 
 
 
O, go there quickly and find him, 
Bring favourite friend home for long. 
Lure the Moonfaced to us 
By sweet address and golden song. 
His word is powerful and mature 
He can turn back rivers. 
By his promises and postponements 
Do not deceive yourselves. 
If only the best of the bunch 
143 
 
He come back and on the door has knocked. 
And then you will see such, 
That never God saw... 
 
In Konya, Shams ad-Din was met with honours, and festivities were 
arranged in his honour. The friendly relations between Shams and Rumi were 
restored. Rumi followed Shams not letting him stay alone. Shams ad-Din Tabrizi 
married Rumi's daughter, Qimiye. But the enemies again put public opinion against 
Shams. Once more he was to leave Konya and this time for ever. He disappeared 
as mysteriously as he came. It was obvious that Shams was assassinated by the 
Rumi's murids and it was not known whether he had been thrown into a well or 
buried beside his father. 
Death And Resurrection Of The Poet Shams Tabrizi 
Next morning Rumi did not find anyone in the medrese. He looked for 
Shams in vain for a long time. But the Sun (Persian - Shams) had set on him for 
ever. The mental shock was terrible but a miracle occured. Rumi found enough 
forces for the resurrection of his guide so that he would remain to live for 
centuries. 
He created one of the most striking poems of love lyrics in the world, 
written on behalf of his spiritual preceptor - "Divan of Shams Tabrizi". The young 
scholar ceased the sufistic surveys and took the name Shams ad-Din Tabrizi. M. 
Zand wrote that creation of "Divan" and each poem written not on his own behalf 
but under the name of Shams ad-Din was not a literal trick neither was it a call for 
the memory of his missed friend. Rumi just found his guide within himself, who 
would dictate him songs and Rumi considered himself as just a transmitterrawi. 
But they are his own songs as well, since they were born in his soul. Thus, Jalal ad-
Din is at the same time identical and non-identical to proclaimed by his hand 
Shams ad-Din. Therefore, Shams, being the subject, author and lyrical hero of the 
verses, simultaneously acted as the object. Communion with Shams allowed Rumi 
to find a new way of mystical understanding (Sufi order). However, finally, the 
order was established only after the death of Rumi. It was called after Rumi, 
Mavlaviyya, taking his title Maviana "our teacher". The works of Rumi and the 
order Mavlaviyya had a direct influence on the "development of the religious-
philosophical and the poetic thinking of the people of the East". Besides, the order 
became famous of its whirling dances. In Europe the dancing dervishes of the order 
were called "whirling dervishes". 
The disciples of Shams Tabrizi have collected all his works in a book called 
"Megalets". 
 
  
144 
 
Mausoleum of Jalaladdin Rumi. Konya, Turkey 
 
145 
 
Qajar Painting. 19th 
Century. Oil on canvas. 
 
The Head of the Musical System 
School 
 
Safi ad-din Urmavi 
 
Safi ad-Din Abdulmomin ibn Yusif ibn Fahir Urmavi, one of the greatest 
musicians and musicologists in the East, was born in 1216 in the ancient cultural 
centre of Azerbaijan in the city of Urmiya. Initially, he was educated in his native 
land. There, he mastered the elements of music and 
learned to play the ud. Then he moved to the capital 
city of the Arabian Caliphate, Baghdad, the scientific 
and cultural center of the Near and Middle East. There, 
he continued his education at one of the best 
universities of that time, Mustansariyya. 
His first wave of popularity was not from his 
music, but from his magnificent calligraphy. He was 
invited to the palace of Caliph al-Mustasim, the last 
representative of Abbasid's dynasty. At this palace in 
Baghdad, he became one of the Caliph's servitors and 
was eventually nominated to be the primary 
calligrapher and chief of the palatial library. 
Copying books and managing the library, 
however, did not prevent Safi ad-Din from continuing 
his musical education in this rich library. He often 
demonstrated his skill in playing the ud at palatial receptions. A few legends exist 
about his mastery over the ud. According to one legend, a camel that had been 
without water for 40 days went to a watering-place, where Safi ad-Din began to 
play his ud. Upon hearing the sounds, the camel stopped drinking. When the 
sounds of the ud died away, the camel started drinking again, but he became 
transfixed when Safi ad-Din started playing again. This happened three times, and 
then tears appeared in the camel's eyes. 
According to another legend, Safi ad-Din was in one of the famous gardens 
of Baghdad, playing his ud for some students. His perfect music attracted a 
nightingale that was flying in the garden. It sat on the nearest tree branch and 
listened to the magical music of Safi ad-Din's ud. The nightingale was so excited 
from the music that it flew closer to Safi ad-Din, began to flap its wings in step 
with the music and, finally, it sat without fear among the people and began to sing. 
In 1252, Safi ad-Din - still in service at the palace - finished one of his 
musical treatises, called "Kitab-al-Advar". The book was written in Arabic and 
consisted of 15 parts. The book considered questions on the theory of music, which 
146 
 
are still discussed today. The modern reader would especially be interested in the 
ninth chapter, which speaks about mughams. It mentions the names of 12 
mughams, all of which are still known today in Azerbaijan - Ushshag, Nava, Abu 
Salic ("Busalic"), Rast, Iraqi, Isfahani, Zirefkand, Buzurg, Zangule, Rahavi, 
Huseini and Hijaz. 
Safi ad-Din devoted the 11th and 12th chapters to his favourite instrument, 
the ud. The 15th chapter is about the recording of music, and it was especially 
important to subsequent generations of musicians and musicologists. According to 
his system, music is recorded in an alphanumeric way. The letters of the Arabian 
system "abjad" indicated the conditional height of a sound, as well as its duration. 
For example, to designate intervals less than one-half of a tone, he used the letters 
T, J, B, etc. The figures also described the mood, tune and meter of a melody. 
The modern Western system of notation does not allow the recording of 
intervals of less than one-half of a tone. Consequently, it is not suitable for the 
reproduction of all the subtleties of mugham sounds and Eastern music in general. 
Urmavi's system was used in the East until almost the end of the 19th Century. 
Two European musicologists, R.Erlanju and J.Fermcr, independently from 
each other recorded one rubayi notated by Urmavi into modern notation. After 
being silent for nearly 700 years, the melody began to sound anew. 
 Safi ad-Din displayed himself as a talented teacher; he educated a number 
of musicologists who became popular in the entire East. Abdulgadir Maraghi, an 
Azerbaijani musicologist during the 13
th
 and 14th Centuries, wrote in his essay 
entitled "Magasidul-Alkhan" that Safi ad-Din Urmavi was the teacher of many 
outstanding people. Among them were the famous musicologists Shams ad-Din 
Suh-ravardi, Ali Sitan, Hasan Zafer and Khusam ad-Din Gutlug Bugha. 
Safi ad-Din created two new musical instruments - the nuzkha and the 
mugni. The nuzkha resembled the modern harp and had 81 strings. Its body was 
tetragonal and made of willow, cypress or boxwood. The mugni had 33 strings. 
Externally, it resembled the modern rubab, but its body was larger and made from 
apricot tree.  
Safi ad-Din Urmavi was also a composer, and there are legends that 
illustrate his talent. A famous singer named Lizakh-Khan lived in Baghdad and fre-
quently met with Safi ad-Din. They sang and played together, anil Sail ad-Din gave 
him lessons in music. Once, Lizakh Khan sang a beautiful song at a palatial 
reception. Everyone liked the song, and the Caliph wanted to know the name of the 
composer. When he learned that Safi ad-Din had written the song, he invited him 
to a reception and everyone admired his skill at playing the ud. 
In 1258, the Turko-Mongol army of Hulagu Khan, grandson of Chingiz 
Khan, seized Baghdad. The Caliph and his family were executed, and after more 
than 600 years of existence, the Arabian Caliphate came to an end. 
147 
 
The Ud, or short-necked lute. This drawing is 
from Safi ad-Din's treatise. The Ud is shown 
with frets and five double strings, whose names 
are given. 
 
As a servitor of the Caliph, Safi ad-Din's life was threatened. Historian 
Hasan Erbeleny personally knew Safi ad-Din and described the events of those 
days. Hulagu Khan's troops surrounded Safi ad-Din's quarter, threatening the lives 
of Safi ad-Din and the others living in 
the quarter. One of Hulagu Khan's 
commanders and a group of 30 soldiers 
went to break down the doors at the 
house where Safi ad-Din lived. The 
owner of the house met the soldiers 
politely and invited them into the 
house. Safi ad-Din soon came to an 
understanding with the "visitors". 
Eventually, the commander had mercy 
on the inhabitants of the quarter and 
Urmavi was led to the palace and 
presented to Hulagu Khan. Safi ad-Din asked for an ud to be brought to him, and 
he played whole-heartedly a melancholy melody, and a singer named Ziya began 
to sing. Everyone was in awe of Safi ad-Din's skill. Hulagu Khan invited him to 
serve in the palace, and he pardoned the quarter's inhabitants. 
Safi ad-Din was taken under the protection of the important dignitary 
(vizier) of Hulagu Khan, Shams ad-Din Juveyni, the brother of Iranian historian Al 
ad-Din Juveyni. Shams ad-Din trusted to Safi ad-Din the education of his sons, 
Bakhi ad-Din and Sharaf ad-Din. Safi ad-Din tried to give them a well-rounded 
education, but naturally, he gave special attention to music. Sharaf ad-Din 
eventually met great success in the study of music, and he devoted his famous 
musical treatise "Risaliya Sharafi" to Urmavi. He wrote the essay in Tabriz and it 
consisted of five parts. 
After the Juveyni family fell into disfavour, Safi ad-Din lived in poverty 
and ended his life in 1294 in Baghdad's debtors' prison. The manuscripts of Safi 
ad-Din Urmavi's works are kept in museums in London, Istanbul, St.Petersburg, 
New York and other cities. His works attracted the attention of outstanding 
musicians and musicologists of subsequent generations. Many of them felt that it 
was their duty to state Urmavi's attitude toward creativity. There are many books 
that comment on Urmavi's writings by authors such as Gutb ad-Din Shirazi (13th 
Century), Abdul-gadir Maraghi (14th Century), Mahammed al-Jurjani (14th 
Century), Abd ur-Rahman Jami (15th Century), and many others. 
In the 15th Century, Turkish musician Shukurallah Ahmedoghlu translated 
"Kitab-al-Advar" into Turkish. The book was later translated into French. In 
Azerbaijan, Afrasiyab Badalbeyli, A. Begdeli, T. Buniatov and others studied the 
creativity of Safi ad-Din Urmavi. English scientist Henry George Fermer wrote 
148 
 
  
Khosrov Listens to Barbad's Music. Mir AH. Khamse by Nizami. 1539-1543. British Museum. London 
 
149 
 
that Safi ad-Din Urmavi was the founder of the system school and that after him, 
all Arabic-Persian-Turkic authors were his successors. 
 
The Interpreter of Sufi Mysteries 
 
Mahmud Shabustari 
 
Saad ad-Din Mahmud ibn Abdul Kerim ibn Yahya  Shabustari Tabrizi was 
born near Tabriz in the village of Shabustar in 1287 to a family of theologians. 
Mahmud Shabustari, an eminent scientist and philosopher, was one of the greatest 
theorists of Sufism in Azerbaijan.  
Like many educated people of medieval 
Azerbaijan, Shabustari had great knowledge. 
Analysis of his work shows that he was well 
educated in theology, philosophy, astronomy, 
medicine, philology and other branches of study. 
In those times, it was accepted as a contin-
uation of education to depart on long trips to 
different countries and cities, to the centres of 
science and theology, which were frequently at the 
graves of esteemed saints. Shabustari was not an 
exception, and during his brief life he had time to 
go to Egypt, Khijaz, Shams, Iraq and other 
countries, where he met many scientists and hereinafter kept correspondence with 
them. 
Based on information from Mahammed Ali Tarbiyat, one of the Shirvans 
among the travellers wrote that Shabustari was in Girman. There he married and 
there he had children and grandsons. Among them were famous scientists and 
literary people. His son was a poet and wrote comments on the famous "Flower-
Garden of the Mysteries", written by his father. 
In his book "Saadatnama" ("The Book about Happiness"), Shabustari wrote 
the following about his trips: 
 
A large part of my life 
Conducted in the study of sciences and theology, 
1 travelled in Egypt, Syria and Khijaz, and 
Much went and skipped in the afternoon and at night. 
Year and month similar to the universe rotated. 
From country to country, from city to city went. 
Sat at the light of a lamp, 
Ate away the smoke of a lamp. 
In each country I met 
With many scientists and connoisseurs of theology. 
150 
 
Mosque of Tassuj. Shabustar, East Azerbaijan, Iran. 
Photo by Khanali Siami. 
 
Collected a set of interesting words, 
Made interesting compositions... 
 
Shabustari understood well ancient Greek philosophy, Zoroastrianism, 
idolatry, Christianity and, certainly, Islam and all of its possible mystical and 
philosophical currents. 
Shabustari died in 1320 and was buried at his birthplace in the village of 
Shabustar in the cemetery Gulshan, where his teacher Bakha ad-Din Yaqub Tabrizi 
was buried. Now this grave is a 
place of pilgrimage. In the 19th 
Century, it was restored three 
times. The first restoration was 
carried out by Haji Mirza Aghasi 
in 1850-1851. On his tomb, a 
memorial panel made from 
marble was attached, with the 
following inscription: "Great 
sheikh in 720 Hejira (1320) at 
the age of 33 years left this 
perishable world to that eternal 
world". The second restoration 
was carried out in 1880 by Mirza 
Husein Khan, and the third time - rather recently - was done by Hasan Mugaddam. 
Shabustari, as it is pointed out in "Essay on the History of Azerbaijani 
Philosophy", kept a rich literary inheritance. To his pen belongs: "Saadat-nama" 
("The Book of Happiness"), "Kanzul-Khananaik" ("A Treasury of Truth"), "Khak 
ul-Yagin fi Marifati Rebbu Alamin"("Authentic Truth in the Knowledge of the 
Creator of the World"), "Mir'at ul-Mukhakkikin" ("Mirror of Looking for Truth)" 
and "Gulshani Raz" ("Flower-Garden of the Mysteries"). However, now 
researchers of Shabustari, including the outstanding connoisseur of his creativity, 
Shaiq Ismailov, believe that "Kanzul-Khananaik" was not Shabustari's work. 
Shabustari also wrote the poem "Shahid-nama" ("The Book of Clairvoyance"), but 
it was not found in the stacks. 
Shabustari translated some books from Arabic to Persian. He translated to 
Persian the work of the philosopher Imam Gazali called "Minkhajul Abidin" ("A 
Way of Pilgrims"). Three is also a record of correspondence between Shabustari 
and Khorasan thinker Huscini Saadat. 
Shabustari wrote his first philosophical works in prose, and only toward the 
end of his life did he begin to write in verse. In his first poetical work (after which 
he only wrote one more) Shabustari gained world recognition. The poem, 
"Gulshani Raz" ("Flower-Garden of the Mysteries"), was written in 1317-1318. 
151 
 
Shabustari described the history of the creation of this poem in a section called "A 
History of the Creation of the Book": 
"In December 1317, an envoy came to me with a letter from one of the most 
educated people of that time, Khorasan philosopher Mir Huseini Saadat, with a 
request to answer some questions of philosophical character. Shabustari described 
this event in the beginning of "Gulshani Raz": 
 
Seventeen years had passed since the 700th year of Khijra. 
Unexpectedly in the month of Shavval, 
One envoy with thousands of items of benefaction and respects 
Arrived from the inhabitants of   Khorasan. 
There is one known and great person 
Of talent similar to a source of  Light. 
All inhabitants of Khorasan from young and old 
Have said that he is the best thinker of centuries. 
He wrote a letter concerning his ideas 
And sent it to a person who understands his ideas. 
There are a number of difficult places from reasoning, 
From difficulties of the people of  "Isharat". 
Creating verses, he asked about each question. 
And asked to answer this world of ideas in brief words. 
As soon as the envoy had read this letter. 
Talk spread about this circumstance. 
Many respectable people were present in that company. 
The eyes of each of them were on Shabustari. 
 One of them, who was more experienced 
And a hundred times has heard from us these ideas. 
Said to me: reply here, 
That the people of the world by it used. 
 
Shabustari at first refused to write the answer, his refusal motivated by the 
reference in his early works, in which it is possible to find the answers to the 
delivered questions. Then he assented to the applicant, on behalf of his teacher 
Amin ad-Din Tabrizi, according to Ismailov, and he wrote the answers to the 
Khorasan scientist's questions in poetical form. After some time, the applicant 
again addressed Shabustari. Only after this did Shabustari agree to answer the 
questions of the sheikh Huseini. Shabustari answered briefly and precisely and 
without special preparation: 
I said to him that there is no need for it, 
As 1 wrote about it repeatedly in my works. 
He said, 'Yes, but according to my request 
We shall receive from you the desired poem.' 
After their urgent request I began 
To write the answers to the letter in brief words. 
Among the noble people, in one instant 
1 made these words without reflection and recurrence. 
So, in answer to the letter, at once 
152 
 
Tomb of sheikh Mahmud of Shabustari (d. 1320). 
Photo by Khanali Siami. 
 
I wrote one, not more and not less. 
The envoy, having received the answers to the letter. 
With gratitude returned by the same way they had come. 
 
The questions of Huseini Saadat consisted of 22 beyt (couplet, distich); 
Shabustari's answers consisted of 49 beyt. From them, 35 were direct answers to 
delivered questions, and others were entered into the introduction and the 
conclusion of the letter. After some time sheikh Huseini again asked Shabustari to 
answer a number of questions, which arose after his perusal of the letters. 
Shabustari again returned detailed answers. This time he grouped all of the 
questions from the first and second letters into 15 questions, and he presented the 
answers in a kind of poem by the name of "Gulshani Raz": 
 
Another time my dear preceptor 
Said to me, 'Append something to the to letter. 
Those ideas that you stated make it plain, 
With the help of science displace in presentation.' 
In those times I did not have leisure, 
To begin this with enjoyment and by mood. 
So that to describe this condition by words is impossible. 
And only the expert knows what this mood is. 
However, I listened to the words of a godly Person, and 
Did not reject the request of the applicant of religion. 
But that the secret were much more illuminated, 
I have given will to eloquence.  
With the benediction and help of God. 
1 have stated all at some hours. 
When the heart asked God to name the letters, 
The answer to the heart came that it is our flower bed. 
 
It was the first large poem 
of Shabustari and he complained 
about the difficulty of an 
exposition of philosophical ideas in 
poetical form. This process, he 
believed, was similar to an attempt 
to store the sea in a limited vessel. 
In 1426, Azerbaijani poet Shirazi 
translated "Gulshani Raz" into 
Azerbaijani. In 1944, Abdulqadir 
Kelpinarli translated the poem into 
Turkish. Since the 19th Century, 
"Gulshani Raz" has been translated into many European languages by various 
authors and has been through several editions. At once after its issue, "Gulshani 
Raz" gained large popularity in the East among followers of Sufism. 
153 
 
A saxifrage. Illustration from 
Dioscorides` treatise on herbs. 
 
In Shaig Ismailov's book, which focused on Shabustari's philosophy, were 
the names of 18 authors who commented on the contents of poems in Persian from 
the 14th to the 18th Centuries. Among them, the comments of Azerbaijani 
philosopher Shams ad-Din Lahiji, "Matafatikh-ul-Ejaz" ("The Keys to Miracles"), 
written in 1472, have had the most popularity, even up to the present. 
In 1319-1320 Shabustari wrote his second philosophical poem, 
"Saadatnama". It greatly exceeded the previous poem in volume. It contained about 
3,000 beyt and consisted of eight sections, broken into chapters and paragraphs. In 
"Saadatnama", Shabustari gave information on his own life and activities and trips, 
and he wrote about his teachers and his favourite books. 
The creativity of Shabustari takes an outstanding place in the history of 
medieval philosophy of Azerbaijan. His works were published in many countries 
of  Europe and Asia. Modern followers of Sufi philosophy recognize Shabustari's 
great authority and frequently refer to his works. 
 
 
The Author of an Outstanding 
13th Century Medical Science Book 
 
Mahmud ibn Ilyas Shirvani 
 
One of the prominent scientists - physicians of Azerbaijan was Mahmud ibn 
Ilyas Shirvani, who lived in the 13th Century. No detailed information about the 
course of life of Mahmud ibn Ilyas is available. It 
was Efendiyev who collected information about 
Mahmud ibn Ilyas, analysed his works. Mahmud 
ibn Ilyas is the author of the famous "Medical 
Scientific Book", which first appeared in 1260. 
The book is written on the basis of the analysis of 
century-long experience of the eastern medicine 
and author's personal scientific and medical 
practice. He learned much from meetings with 
physicians of different countries during his 
numerous trips. Describing one of such trips, he 
wrote, that as a result of the trip he "much 
perceived and much reconsidered" and "on the way back he met in Baghdad a great 
fellow-countryman to talk about his native land, recollect edifications of Kafi ad-
Din; memoirs about Shirvan always gladden us ". "It is paradox, 1 live in Shiraz, 
loving native land of my father - Shirvan". "Medical scientific book" by Mahmud 
ibn Ilyas consists of four sections, devoted to theoretical medical science, practical 
medical science, medicines and complex (compound) medicines. The first section 
154 
 
Medical Treasury. 17 th Century. 
Iran. 
 
is divided into 17, second into 59 chapters. In the third section, medicines are listed 
alphabetically. The fourth section details about complex (compound) medicines, 
and is divided into 22 chapters. As Efendiyev pointed out, "distinctive feature of 
the work as compared with all previous popular - medical and scientific -medical 
literatures is his aspiration to transform medical science into the system of 
scientific edifice both in theory, and practice". 
The author of the "Medical Scientific Book" 
expressed his view as follows: "under the 
medical science is meant a science, by which we 
study the state of human organism, make a 
diagnosis, and if his health is bad, with help of 
this science we restore substances lost by the 
organism and do not allow decline of his 
health... The medical science is divided into two 
parts: first - theoretical medicine, second - 
practical medicine". "The theoretical medicine 
studies natural and unnatural in actions, their 
reasons and regularities. The practical medicine 
studies by application of useful and abstention 
from harmful things, how to protect health and, 
remove various diseases".  
Mahmud ibn Ilyas is prone to think that 
the reason of disease can be cold, grubbiness, 
fever, poisoning with non-standard production and dirty air, smoke, excessive 
work (exhaustion), surfeit in meal, laziness and idleness ("volumetric illnesses 
"),etc. The technique of diagnostics of diseases, offered and used by Mahmud ibn 
Ilyas includes external examination, pulse test, inspection of temperature of the 
body, conditions of eyeballs tongue, humidity and smell, external analysis of urine, 
sputum, motion and blood. 
Much attention is paid to the pulse. He writes like "the pulse is not that 
others, created by vasculars of heart, its reduction and relaxation. Each pulse rate is 
made of two movements and two pauses: movement of relaxation, pause, 
movement of reduction, pause". He considers a great variety of pulses, 
systematizes them. Among them he distingnished frequent, languid and average, 
equal and eratical, systematic and desultory pulses, etc. Under initiative of Vizier 
of, Gazan Khan, prominent reformer and historian of medieval Azerbaijan and, at 
the same time, physician Rashid ad-Din and with the participation of Mahmud ibn 
llyas there were built "Health Houses" ("Dar-ush-Shafa"). In Azerbaijan there were 
such centers. Central "Health House" with main medical school was located in 
Tabriz, a sort of the Academy of Sciences, which attracted scientists from all the 
Orient. In honour of its founder it was named after "Rabi Rashidi" or "Rashidiya". 
155 
 
The Old Man and the Physician. 
Mughal School. 17th Century. 
Abol-Hasan. 
 
There worked about 500 scientists and teachers in nearly all the branches of 
science, people arriving here from India, Egypt, China, Arab, other countries, 
about 6000 students attended the central house. Education, meal, accommodation 
and even clothes of the students were free of charge. Tuition fees were paid from 
incomes of Rashid ad-Din. Under "Rashidiya" - mosques, universities, a large 
library, numbering about 600,000 books, an 
observatory, a hospital, workshops on the 
manufacture of paper and caravanserais were 
operative. In the organization of health sendees, 
development of medical science and training of 
medical staff, a decisive role was assigned to the 
management and scientific talent of Mahmud ibn 
Ilyas. It was no mere coincidence that Rashid ad-
Din referred to Mahmud ibn Ilyas as "Plato of 
epoch, Aristotle of century". First "Health 
Homes" in the Near East were arranged on the 
initiative of abu Sina. The plan of the 
construction of health centers of Mahmud ibn 
Ilyas, as Efendiyev maintains, was richer and 
purposeful than those of abu Sina. Just as in 
modern clinics, Mahmud ibn Ilyas's provided for 
passage system of wards. At the entrance there 
were located reception and procedural rooms, 
wards were located on both sides of the corridor, at the end of the clinic there was a 
morgue. The basic building had improved ventilation of accommodation which 
enabled where appropriate to expand the number of wards. Near the central 
building there were a small drugstore and rooms of physicians and attendants . The 
drugstore looked to the garden, where various plants for manufacturing medicines 
were cultivated  Health Centres, as viewed by Mahmud ibn Ilyas, should have been 
constructed on the outskirts of towns. There a drugstore and houses of pharmacists 
and doctors of various specialities should be placed. Here the beginners should be 
trained, qualification of doctors improved. With this purpose, Mahmud ibn Ilyas 
through Rashid ad-Din assistance invited competent specialists from abroad to 
train doctors of various profile including sur geons - "Jerrahi", oculists - 
"Khekhali", traumatologists - "Mujbiri" (or "Mujabiri"), Mahmud ibn Ilyas in his 
book lists main charges of the clinic: 
1.Allowance (for staff): 
Doctors (common), ophthalmologists, bone-setters, attendants (hospital 
attendants), other servants. 
2.Costs of equipment: 
156 
 
Accessories, cloths, ceramic utensils, stove-couches, tools, etc. 
3. Means (medical - "mazurat"): 
medical drinks, drug mixtures, plasters, ophthalmic ointments, rice porridge 
and liver. 
4. Additional (means): Carpets, fabrics, oils, perfumes. 
5.  Ceremonial costs: Dressing of deceased. 
Central "Health House" in the township of "Rashiddiya" owned to Rashid 
ad-Din personally and was in charge of other 67 Dar-ush-Shafa, located in various 
areas of country. Of interest is the Garden of Rashid ("Baghi Rashidabad") in the 
region, called "Kuche Mualijun" ("Street of Treating"); there, beside the clinic, was 
located residential houses of doctors and attendant. 
The drugstore was located in other garden -"Fatkhabad", where various 
plants for production of medicines were cultivated. Mahmud ibn Ilyas was the 
courtier doctor to run medical sendee of the state. 
In order not to get ill, try not to get tired. It is achievable even if you 
work a lot. Have short breaks while working. Avoid getting tired, do not let 
tiredness continue from day to day. Set up your working place in a nice and 
comfortable manner, try to abide in a good mood while working. 
Mahmud ibn Ilyas 
 
The Medieval Physician Who Treated Stress 
 
Abdul Majid Tabib 
 
One of the most remarkable physicians of the 13th Century in Azerbaijan 
was Abdul Mejid. He lived and worked in the Maragha observatory - Vlaragha's 
centre of science that was created by the great astronomer and mathematician, 
Nasir ad-Din Tusi. 
Abdul Mejid Tabib was the author of a work on medicine called "Qitab ul-
Tibb" ("The Medical Book"), which was a medical manual known widely 
throughout the East. "Qitab ul-Tibb" is devoted to the Mongol governor. Organ 
Khan, consists of 49 parts and covers almost all questions of diagnostics. It also 
covers the treatment of dozens of diseases, including asthma, ophthalmic illnesses 
and poisoning. 
Because of the name, arrangement of material and, partially, its 
interpretation, the book is reminiscent of "The Medical Scientific Book", written 
by one of Mejid Tabib's contemporaries named Mahmud ibn Ilyas, who was a 
prominent physician. However, the similarity between the two books is only at first 
sight. Abdul Mejid Tabib's book contains a lot of original ideas about diagnostics 
and about the treatment of a number of illnesses, especially concerning mental con-
ditions. Despite this, Abdul Mejid might well have been influenced by Mahmud 
157 
 
ibn-llyas, and he could have even been familiar with him. Abdul Mejid wrote 
"Qitab ul-Tibb" in approximately 1275 to 1280, shortly before the death of 
Mahmud ibn Ilyas; consequently, is quite possible that they had met. 
Perhaps for the first time among medieval authors of medical books, Abdul 
Mejid touched upon questions of obstetrics, in particular pregnancy, to which he 
devoted a special chapter. He also gave special attention to questions of psychiatry. 
He wrote about madness, ghosts (qabusi), head pain, various fears and absent-
mindedness. 
I. Efendiev wrote, "Abdul Mejid considers that the centre of a person's 
mental activity is the brain. People connect with their environment through their 
senses. By means of the senses, impressions will be formed. The impressions are 
positive and negative. The first creates good cheer, the second depression. The 
doctor must protect the patient from negative impressions, as their final sum results 
in indifference to oppression. As a consequence of these negative impressions 
systematically building up, the process of depression amplifies and results in 
madness". 
Abdul Mejid's idea about "raving madness" is also original. He considered 
that each negative impression acts in one of two ways: it can cause either complete 
depression or madness. Madness comes when the negative impressions are 
deformed or "jumbled" while being transmitted by the senses to the brain, and the 
person is unable to govern them. According to Abdul Mejid, "The mind cannot be 
contained in the head and the person loses his ability to be his own man". As it is 
visible from this citation, Abdul Mejid realized long before modern medics the 
negative impact that negative stress can have on the mentality of a person. 
Abdul Mejid had several original ideas and his creativity awaited modern 
researchers. 
 
 
The Author of the First Persian-Azerbaijani Dictionary 
 
Fahr ad-Din Hindushah Nakhchivani 
 
Eminent scientist, political figure and interpreter Fahr ad-Din Hindushah 
ibn Sanjar ibn Abdullah Nakhchivani was born at the end of the 13th Century (d. 
1328) in the city of Gilan (modern Khara-bagilan). The family gave birth to many 
Azerbaijan prominent figures, and all of them to emphasize their origin from 
Nakhchivan, were named "Nakhchivani". 
Hindushah Nakhchivani attended one of the famous universities of Baghdad 
Mustansariyya . Here he studied theology, mathematics, medicine, astronomy, 
other sciences, had good command of Persian and Arabic. For great services to the 
state he was conferred a honorary rank "Fakhr ad-Dovla". At the same time, 
158 
 
Hindushah Nakhchivani studied history, linguistics and poetry. He was the author 
of the famous historical work "Tajarib us-Salaf " ("Experience of the 
Predcessors
1
'), devoted to the economic and political life of Azerbaijan, some 
adjacent countries, anthology "Mavaridul-Arab", written on Arabic in 1307/8, 
lexicographical work "As-Sikhakh-ul-Ajamiya", a number of verses in Persian. 
The "Tajarib us-salaf Hindushah was dedicated to Atabey of Luristan,Yusif 
Shah (1296-1330). There is an opinion that this work is a translation of "Tavarikh 
al-Khulafa val Vuzara " ("History of Caliphs and Viziers ") by Arabian historian 
Mahammcd Ali Tagtagha into on Persian. 
This translation is one of the first samples of prose in magnificent Persian. 
Hindushah noticeably recasted and supplemented the translated book, enlarged its 
volume nearly three times. 
A special emphasis in the creativity of Hindushah Nakhchivani is land on 
the Persian-Azeri dictionary is well-known "As-Cikhakhu-1-Ajamiya". This first 
Persian-Azeri dictionary known in the science to be reputed as one of earliest 
Persian dictionary. 
About 5,000 worlds and Persian grammar written on Arabic included in the 
dictionary. Besides, there are phraseological turns and separate phrases. Hindushah 
Nakhchivani noted, that the principle of the dictionary-design was borrowed by 
him from Arabian lexicographer of the 10 century Ismail al-Jovhari. 
For a long time this dictionary was very popular among scientists and those 
studying Persian and Arabic. An eloquent estimony is a plenty of servived 
manuscripts of the dictionary, scattered in many libraries of the world. The latest 
copies go back to the end of the 19th Century, earliest to the beginning of 16th 
Century. 
The dictionary consists of three parts - introduction, dictionary and Persian 
grammar. The introduction and the grammar are written in Arabic, and the 
dictionary in Persian and Azeri. In the introduction he pointed out, that the book 
was intended for those studying Persian, not Persians (for Azerbaijanians). 
"As-Sikhakh-ul-Ajam" of Hindushah is an invaluable monument of Azeri 
lexicography and irreplaceable source of study of the dictionary and grammar of 
Persian and Azeri of the 13th-14th Centuries. The dictionary played a grate role in 
the development of lexicography in the East and even the design of the dictionary 
was borrowed by the majority of the authors of the Persian -Turkic dictionaries, 
down to the end of the 16th Century on Hindushah Nakhchivani. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
159 
 
Farman. East Azerbaijan, Iran. 1292.  Ink on paper. 
 
A brass kasa. Yusif Ibn 
Ahmad Tabrizi. 1319. 
Victoria and Albert 
Museum. London. 
 
The Encyclopaedia of the 
Economic and Political Life of 
Azerbaijan in the Epoch of II Khans 
 
Mahammed ibn Hindushah Nakhchivani 
 
The famous scientific and political figure Mahammed 
Hindushah Nakhchivani, son of the well-known linguist 
Hindushah Nakhchivani, lived at the end of the 13th - beginning 
of the 14th centuries. 
With good education, he, like his father, had great 
command of Azeri, Arabian and Persian. After he wrote some 
scientific works, he in 20-th of the 14th Century was invited in 
Tabriz to II Khan's court, where he for long time hold a position of 
the secretary - Munshi, basically, for state finances. Taking into 
account his large services and scientific authority, a tittle of 
"Shams-i Munshi an-Nakhchivani" was conferred to him ("Similar 
to Sun Munshi an-Nakhchivani"). 
At the court he associated with Vizier of II Khan, Abu Said (1316-1335), 
and then with Arpa Khan (1335-1336), son of the famous political figure, reformer 
and historian Fazlullah Rashid ad-Din Giyas ad-Din Rashidi. To him he devoted, 
his explanatory dictionary of Persian "Sikhakhu-1 furs", written in 1327/28. 
After this, under recommendation of Giyas ad-
Din, Abu Said, issued a special farman (decree), to 
entrust Mahammed Nakhchivani to write a book to 
describe structure and control system of llkhanid state. 
The order proved to be very serious and the work was 
posted. The book was finished  by   Mahammed  in   
1360, however, dissatisfied by the results, author after 
this six years edited and supplemented the book, partly 
due to changes in the political life of the state. 
On April 6, 1366 he, at last, finished his capital 
work, "Dastur al-Katib fi Tayin al Maratib" ("Manual 
for Penman when defining Degrees"). The book was 
dedicated to Sheikh Uveys (1356-1374), Jalairid, to replace Ilkhans in Azerbaijan. 
The medieval scientific and state figures highly estimated this work and the 
authority of Mahammed Nakhchivani much more rise. 
Now this work is in one line with recognized all over the world works 
"Siyasatname" by Nizami al-Mulk and "Jame at-Tabarikh" by Rashid ad-Din. The 
160 
 
Casket. Brass, inlaid with silver. 
Azerbaijan. Second half of the 14th 
Century. 
 
work of Mahammed Nakhchivani "Dastur al-Katib fi Tayin al Maratib" is a unique 
encyclopedic source of economic and political life of Azerbaijan and state system 
of II Khans epoch, reflecting the economic-juridical norms of taxation, ownership 
of land and other property, court and legal proceedings, money circulation. 
Besides, it is possible to find answers to questions, connected with religion, 
relation between religion and state, philosophy and philosophical trends, culture, 
trade, handicrafts and art, and even the description of the precept to use accessories 
of penmen and calligraphers. 
The book was translated and pub-
lished in many languages. In Baku, it was 
published and commented by the Alizadc, 
contributing to research and popularization  
of the creativity, of Mahammed 
Nakhchivani. Of great scientific value is the 
explanatory dictionary of the Persian 
language by Mahammed Nakhchivani 
"Sikhakhul Furs", though for different reasons 
it has not until recently attracted attention of 
scientists. Now the authorship of the dic-
tionary exactly established and its significance in the history of Persian 
lexicography. Some researchers came to the conclusion  that in the 11th-13th 
Centuries leading scientists in Persian linguistics, were basically, sons of 
Azerbaijan. 
Modern scientists, by capacity, scope of the material and its originality 
raised the dictionary by Nakhchivani in one level with the famous explanatory dic-
tionary by Qatran Tabrizi. In the "Dictionary", the reader can find information on 
phonetics, grammar, toponymy of the Persian language. There are verses of poets, 
names of whom are lacking in medieval chronicles and reading-books. The 
manuscripts of Mahammcd Nakhchiwani are kept at many libraries of the world, 
and to many works of the scientists from Europe and East are devoted to their 
study. 
 
The Inventor of a Divine Script 
 
Mir Ali Tabrizi 
 
Haji Mir Ali Ibn Ilyas Tabrizi was one of the most famous calligraphers 
(khattat) in the Orient. Before beginning the story of his life and creation, it is 
essential to specify the role of calligraphers and calligraphy in the spiritual life of 
the Muslim world and Azerbaijan, in particular. Owing to the prohibition on 
161 
 
Ibn Muqla's systen for proportional calligraphy. 
 
Persian poem penned 
in nastaliq script, 
siqned by Mir'Ali. ca. 
1500-1520 
representation of living creatures by Islam and distinctive features of drawings in 
Arabs script, calligraphy turned into supreme art in the Islamic world. Since Koran 
- Word of God - was written in Arab script, religious leaders in every possible way 
backed the cult of calligraphy art, 
stressed its sacramental nature. It 
should be noted that calligraphic 
inscriptions on books, palaces, 
mosques, decorative and applied 
artifacts made of ceramic, metal, 
wood and fabric were often accompa-
nied by decorative design. So the 
calligraphy became independent and 
major sphere of graphic art in the 
Islamic world. Skill in calligraphy became a criterion of the educational level. 
There are many examples when public figures, poyets, painters and scholars were 
excellent calligraphers . 
Azerbaijan scholar of the 15th Century Mahammed 
Bey Hindushah Nakhchivani wrote: "first of all, children 
should be trained to the art of calligraphy and trips ...‖ 
Quoting Prophet Mahammed, Arabs used to say: 
"A writing is half of knowledge". Unity of beauty of letter 
and profound content of the text was required. 
As a result of long search of many generations of 
calligraphers there were formed 6 major classes of Arab 
script to meet practical and aesthetic needs of they time: 
suls, naskh, mukhaggat, reyhani, tougy and rega. 
The art of calligraphy in Azerbaijan started with 
works of Mubarek-Shah Zarrin-Qalem Tabrizi. He was 
one of 6 peoples of prominent Arab calligraphers of the 
13th Century Jamal ad-Din Mustasimi. Among the famous 
calligraphers there was famous Azerbaijani sheikh Ahmed 
Suhravardi. It should be noted that Mubarek Tabrizi was 
skillful in all 6 scripts and had a ureal number of followers. 
To all appearances, the calligraphy reached its perfection 
and nothing new could have been appeared. Nevertheless, a famous khattat sprang 
up in the Islamic word in the 14th Century Azerbaijan. It was Haji Mir Ali Ibn 
Ilyas Tabrizi (1330-1405). Most scholars, biographers and authors of treatises on 
calligraphy consider Mir Ali Tabrizi as inventor of nastaliq script which in a short 
period of time replaced classical 6 scripts and gained popularity all over the Orient. 
162 
 
One on medieval authors wrote: Haji Mir Ali is inventor of small-sized 
naskh and talik". According to the legend Haji Mir Ali Tabrizi, passionately 
desiring to create and original scrip, saw a dream. The first Shia Imam Murtuz Ali 
told him in the dream: "Oh, God's slave! Look at the duck! Throw a glance on it 
and create a new script. Look at the duck's beak, eyes and neck and create a new 
script!" 
Under Emir Timur, Mir Ali was already known as founder of nastaliq 
script, one of the most esteemed calligrapher in the Empire. Today, manuscripts, 
transcribed by Mir Ali Tabrizi, are kept in London, Tehran, St.Petersburg. 
Son of Mir Ali - Mir Abdulla followed his father's footsteps and became 
famous as great calligrapher in many countries of the orient under the nickname 
Shekerin Qalem (Sweet Pen). Among the pupils of Mir Abdullah there was 
eminent calligrapher of Azerbaijan of the 15th Century Jaffar Tabrizi. The latter 
did much for the perfection of nastaliq and it was not surprising that he was 
reputed as the second originator of the script (Mukhtara us-Sani). For sometime he 
as the head of court calligraphers of Baysungur Mirza in Herat. 
Mir Abdullah, Jafar Tabrizi, other disciples of Mir Ali developed their 
teacher's ideas and extolled his skill to the skies. 
 
The Philosopher Who was Executed 
and Buried in Nakhchivan 
 
Fazlullah Naimi 
 
Naimi Shah Fazlullah ibn abu Mahammed 
Tabrizi (Fazl) is the founder of khurufism, a heretical 
philosophical religious movement, and one of the 
greatest Sufis in Azerbaijan. Khurufism was 
proclaimed by Fazl in Azerbaijan at the end of the 
15th century and later disseminated throughout the 
territory of Turkey, Iran, Iraq, Syria and other 
countries of the Muslim East. His teaching became 
particularly popular among Turcik tribes. Shams ad-
Din Mahammed ibn Abu ur-Rakhman Sokhavi (the 
15th century) in his book "Bright Rays Among People of the 9th Century" writes: 
"Nizami abu al-Fazl Astrabadi Ajemi, also called abu ur-Rakhman, was a very 
educated person well-versed in poetry and prose, an active participants of mejlis 
(meetings) specially organized for him in the cities of Gilan, Samarkand and 
others. Khurifits were ascetics and wore white felt hats. This widely spread sect 
had a big number of followers, mostly chagataytzs and other non-Arabic nations, 
poisoned with its heresy." 
163 
 
Naimy's mausoleum. Nakhchivan. Photo by 
Nazim Bababeyli. 
 
Khurufits ("letterers" from the Arabic word "khuruf letter), according to E. 
A. Akhmedov, considered that "the universe and man are a result of graduate ema-
nations of the deity of the Universal Reason, the Universal Soul, the Original-
mother, Space and Time. The divine beginning that penetrated the entire universe 
is especially reflected in human beings that were created in the very image of God. 
The life of the Universe the history of the mankind is a cycle gear. Each cycle that 
consists of seven rings begins with the appearance of Adam and finishes with "the 
Day of Judgment". The letters of the Arabic alphabet, calculations based on their 
numeric value were considered by 
Khurufits to be the mystical symbols of 
the universal cycle. They considered 
words, letters, numbers to be the 
foundation, the beginning of existence 
that became the substance of the world, 
having been stated by Allah in Koran 
and through it. The khurufi idea of the 
reflection of God in human beings 
through the word of God in Koran in 
rooted in this belief. 
Unfortunately, Naimi belongs to 
the cohort of Azerbaijani scholars, of 
whom little is known. Researchers find most full and trustworthy information 
about Naimi in his works and the works of some of his followers. 
Shah Fazlullah was born in 1339/40. Though he received good education, 
Fazl could not determine his place in life for quite a long time. There was even a 
period in his life, when he had to earn his living by making hats. However, his love 
for science prevailed and according to a tradition of  his time, he started off travel-
ing in search for knowledge. 
It is known that in 1369 he visited Isfahan, later Mecca, Nishapur, 
Khorasan, Iraq, Azerbaijan and Central Asia. In Shirvan Naimi was put into prison, 
where he wrote his famous "Javidan-name" (The Book on Eternity) or "Javidan-e 
Kabir" (The Great Eternity), revered by his followers as Koran of Khurufism. 
A lot of biographical data is contained in his work "Naum-name". In it 
Naimi described his endless travel around the countries of the Muslim East from 
Syria to Central Asia, mentioned the names of people he met along his life-way, as 
well as the names of the cities of Baku, Nishapur, Togchi, Jazir, Burjerd, 
Vlazendaran, Khorezm, Damagan, Sufiyan, Baghi Sufian, etc. In this work Fazl 
mainly described dreams he had seen for the last thirty years of his life. The 
content of the dreams was to serve the proof of the holiness of Naimi. Referring to 
his prophetic dreams, he called his follows to rebel: "...in my hand I saw a sword 
164 
 
on which some astronomer according to his science carved that there would be 
several uprisings. After the word "uprisings" "Fazl of Astrabad" was repeated a 
number of times". The prophetic dream called Khurufits to struggle even when 
Fazl was demised by Timur. He called his followers to consider him eternally 
alive: "In the month of djuma-di-al-ula, on Wednesday, at night in the city of  
Brujerd I saw a dream: a lame person sent another one to bring me to him to be 
killed... I saw myself being brought and executed, but I also saw that I was alive. 
Truly. Truly". 
Fazl also described the story of his "awakening" and the story of the 
proclamation of his teaching. A dying dervish called Fazl to himself and informed 
him that the time had come to proclaim his teaching to the world. Following the 
urge of the pilgrim, Fazl gathered nine disciples and revealed to them the hidden 
mysteries. Four of his disciples were most close to him. 
Their names are mentioned in Mahammed Ali Tarbiyyat's book 
"Danishmandaneh-Azerbaijan": 
 
Among his friends to whom the mysteries were revealed are  
Mejid, Makhmud, Kamal Khashemi; 
 Bu-I-Hasan is the forth one. if you ever meet him,  
Since to them the Book was entrusted. 
 
Most medieval authors share the opinion that Fazl developed his teaching in 
the capital of Azerbaijan -Tabriz, approximately in 1386. Khurufits call Azerbaijan 
"Sarzamin-e-restakhiz" ("The Place of Awaking"). One of the most faithful 
followers of Fazl's teaching, Ali ul-Ala in his book "Kursi-nameh" wrote the 
following of the role of Azerbaijan in the formation of khurufism: 
 
Since the Sun of the unity of our beloved Fazl 
Was first born in Azerbaijan, 
She (Azerbaijan) is one of the most blessed countries, 
Since the Sun of  Reason first began shining in her,  
This country" is blessed by God, 
 She is the altar of prophets and saints. 
 
Initially Naimi was keen on Sufism and was lower of the famous Sufi 
Sheikh Shibli. Baku, the center of Khurufism, played a special part in the life of 
Naimi. According to Ali ul-Ala's work "Giyamatnameh", even after Fazl's 
departure, the headquarters of the movement  remained in Baku. 
 
A cry came over from Baku. 
Raise and rejoice 
Baku is the place of our beloved's dwelling 
Though he left, his place remained there. 
  
165 
 
  
166 
 
The Great Atlas of al-Idrisi. 
1154. It places South at the 
top.  
Fazl wrote his main works including "Javidan name" (The Book on 
Eternity) or "Javidan-e Kabir" (The Great Eternity), "Vasiyyet-name" (Will) in 
Azerbaijan. Among his greatest works are "Mahabbat-name" (The Book on Love), 
"Art-name" (The Book on Throne), "Iskender-name" (The Book on Iskender), etc. 
The last work of Naimi "Vasiyyat-name" was also written in Azerbaijan. 
One of Naimi's contemporaries wrote: "Fazlullah ibn Mahammed Tabrizi is 
a heretic that established an ascetic sect and based on his false teaching formed a 
party known as Khurufit. He wanted to involve Timur in his heresy, but the later 
refused and ordered to execute Naimi. Fazl was executed by Miranshah, the son of 
Timur". 
Naimi was killed in 1401 in Alinja castle in Nakhchivan. According to 
some scholars, Timur chose the castle as the place of Naimi's execution because it 
was known as a place of severe opposition to Timurids and constant anti-timurid 
uprisings. Naimi was buried there. His grave and gravestone have remained to our 
days. 
 
The Man,Who spent His life Looking 
For Monuments and Miracles 
Of the world 
 
Abdrashid Saleh ibn-Nuri al-Bakuvi 
 
Abdrashid Saleh ibn Nuri al-Bakuvi, the 
famous traveller, geographer, climatplogist and 
cosmographer, lived in the second half of the 14th 
and the first third of the 15th Centuries. Abdrashid's 
father was born in Baku and was well-educated 
person. Bakuvi wrote that Baku - "is motherland of 
my parent, imam. scholar Saleh ibn Nuri, who was 
the focus of dignity... and died in 1403/4 at the age of 
seventy seven". 
N. Keremov considers that Bakuvi was born 
between 1335-1360 in Baku and died between 1425-
1430 in Cairo. Eybali Mehraliyev, on the basis of the 
analysis of routes of trips of Bakuvi came to the 
conclusion that a large part of his life he spent in trips, and his permanent places of 
residence were Baku and Mecca (or vicinity of Mecca within the limits of 80-100 
kms.) The biographic data about Bakuvi are practically lacking. He was the author 
of numerous works, however, just one book, survived the manuscript of which is 
kept at funds of the National Library in Paris, where it get in 1683. The book 
"Kitab Talkhis al-Asrar va Ajaib al-Malik al-Kakhar" (Abridalment of [Book] 
167 
 
A woman from 
Baku. Drawing by 
Gagarin. 19th   
Century 
 
About "Monuments" and Miracles of Powerful King ), bringing glory to Abdrashid 
Bakuvi, was written in Arabic and described of countries and peoples, known in 
that time in the East. Most researchers believe that the book 
was written in the first decade of the 15 century, and the said 
manuscript was copied in the city al-Laziki in 1614. Known 
are other manuscripts of this book and its translations into 
Persian, kept at various libraries. 
The analysis of the work shows that its author was 
well-educated person and while writing the book of Irips. in 
adition to his observations included here information on 
geography, philosophy and medicine, provided by many of 
his predecessors. 
Main source, used by Bakuvi, was the work "Asr-al-
Bilad" ("Monuments of the Country") by one of the most 
famous geographers of the time Zakariya al-Qazwini. 
Moreover, he refered to a large number of works of the 
prominent philosophers, scientists, poets, physicians, 
including Ikhtari, Masudi, Biruni, Ibn-Sina,Yagut, Hamdullah 
Qazwini, others. In 1789, the book was translated by de Gine 
from Arabic into French. Then it was translated into many other European 
languages. Into Russian, the work was translated and published in Moscow by Ziya 
Bunyatov. A brief retelling of the Bakuvi's book in Russian and Azeri was made by 
prominent geographer N.Keremov. In the foreword, Bakuvi focuses on purposes of 
the work. Then he saw in "mentioning all surprising creatures of Allah and miracle 
of His wisdom, in countries, located on His vast ground and similar to each other". 
And further: " I shall tell you about facts, known to me from personal observations 
or analysis of circumstances". 
As Keremov wrote, the attention of Bakuvi during his trips mostly 
concentrated on towns. This accounts for his special attention to the process of 
their formation. For their construction, Bakuvi noted in the foreword, chose the 
best area in the country "on the coasts, mountains, in places, protected against 
northern winds". In the fortifications, erected around towns, numerous gates 
opened ", so that people did not gather at entrances and exits". Bakuvi wrote that 
the best places in city borders for palaces and for places of concourses, for 
mosques, common and cathedral, for markets, caravanserais and bath-houses were 
allocated". Remaining vacant space was allocated under residency of the town-
dwellers. Further, there are two small sections. The first section was named On 
Reproduction, the second On Division into Climates. In the first section, Bakuvi 
deals with minerals, plants and animals. Bakuvi's information being frequently 
naive or simply fantastic for modern readers, however is valuable to get an idea of 
that time's level of knowledge . Suffice is to read a small fragment from the 
168 
 
A man from Baku. 
Drawing by 
Gagarin.  19th   
Century 
 
foreword. "As to minerals, the gold is fonned in sandy soils only and friable 
mountains, and silver, copper and iron - in stones, mixed with soft soil, sulphur - in 
volcanic soil, mercury - in soils, saturated with water... As to 
plants, dates and bananas grow in hot countries only. Nuts, 
almonds and pistachios grow in cold countries only, and cane-
on river banks... Carnation grow on islands al-Hind, coconuts 
, pepper, ginger -in al-Hind, teak, ebony tree - in Yemen... As 
to animals, the elephants are born on islands of the Southern 
seas only. In al-Hind, they live longer than in other countries, 
and tusks of those are not rather great, as those elephants in al-
Hind; giraffes are found in al-Habash; buffalo - in hot 
countries near rivers; sables, squirrels and kabarga - in 
northeast countries; falcons and eagles incubate nestlings only 
on tops of high mountains; ostriches and kata-in deserts; 
waterfowls - river banks, bogs and marshs; turtle-doves and 
sparrows - in populated area; nigthin-gales and larks - in 
gardens. These are the most widespread kinds ". 
In the second section of his foreword Bakuvi, as 
Keremov wrote, "was one of the first in the history of 
geography to have devided the earth into zones". Bakuvi wrote: "Be aware that a 
circle of celestial equator divides earth into two halves, one of which is named 
south, other - north. And if we shall assume that a circle passes on both poles of 
equator and crosses the earth, then the globe will be made of four quarters: two 
southern quarters and two northern quarters". The whole earth is divided on seven 
zones (climates) and he explains reason of such a division. The main part of the 
book was devoted to the geographical characteristics of these zones". Each of 
seven chapters dealt accordingly with specific zones from Canary islands in the 
West up to China in the East and from number of countries of Africa in South up to 
Ireland and Russia in North. The information on countries, cities, populated areas 
of this zone were given in alphabetic order. In each specific case, coordinates of 
geographical points, historical information on them are given and attempt is made 
to explain the origin of geographical names; describe natural conditions, 
architectonic monuments; information on etnography, culture and subjects of trade 
is provided. Abdrashid Bakuvi gave many many original information about 
Azerbaijan and, especially, Baku. He attributed Azerbaijan to the fourth and fifth 
climatic zones: "Azerbaijan-extensivly populated area between Kukhistan, Arran 
and Armenia. There are many towns, settlements, mountains and rivers ". Speaking 
about river Araks (Uvays), he wrote: "it flows by many countries, until reaches the 
bridge Diya al-Mulk, near Nakjuvan (Nakhchivan ). It is constructed from stone 
and one of the miracles of the world. "Bakuvi paid much attention to Tabriz: " This 
city is full of boon, rich in fruits; its inhabitants are wealthy and know crafts. Near  
169 
 
Naphtha men. A burning naphtha was used to set ships and towns on fire. Mamluk miniature. 15th 
Century. 
 
  
170 
 
Hudafarin bridges (15 arches, 1000-1157 and 10 arches, 1491-1722) across the River Araxes. 12th-
17th Centuries.  Photo by Khanali Siami. 
 
to the town there are bath-houses, with surprising useful properties ". Bakuvi 
admires with sights of Tabriz: "there are mosques, madrasahs, palaces and amazing 
buildings, unamenable to count‖ But he wrote about Baku (Bakuya).This "city, 
was built of stone on the coast of the sea, al-Khazar... . The towns walls are sea-
washed, many of towers are flushed and the sea approaches the mosque... The 
majority of houses are constructed on rocks. Air is good, water flows, from wells, 
drilled in rocks, and the spring water is extremely pleasant. In this area, usually 
there is poor harvest of grain, and a large part of it is brought from Shirvan and 
Mughan. There are many figs, pomegranates and grapes. The gardens are far from 
the town, and most town-dwellers go there for summer, and then come back. And 
so they do annually ". From here it follows that the tradition of departure of 
Bakuians in summer time to summer cottage exists from olden times. Bakuvi as 
eyewitness very colourfuily depicts winds in Baku:" the wind blows high in night 
and afternoon, so sometimes at strong wind it is impossible to a man to make 
against winds, and, horses and sheeps in winter time are blown away into the sea, 
and they cannot stand on one's feet". Further he wrote about "deposits of pitch and 
sources of petroleum, the daily production of which exceeded 200 camel bales", 
and "close to sources there is a hard soil of yellow colour, which bums like candle. 
From it, they are broken away into pieces and carried to the town for heating of 
houses and baths". For modern scientist, of special interest is the description of 
island Pir Allahi, from ancient times associated with the cult of fire and water: " 
171 
 
Town there is an inhabited island, where they hunt for water dogs [seals]. They 
skinned and melted; a fat used as oil for lamps. From the skin, they manufacture 
sacks, which are filled with petroleum and transported on ships to other countries. 
There is a lot of gazelles similar to whom nothing is available. Now and then there 
is a large fire and tongues of flame are visible with a distance of one day way and 
even more. This fire burns for long time, and then dies away". Many medieval 
travellers and even ancient Roman geographer of the 1 century, Pomponi Mel 
reckoned the island among holy places. Bakuvi wrote that the island is noted for 
fertility, fresh water, rich in vegetables and fruits, and is one of the "holy places". 
Bakuvi finished his book with a verse: 
 
O, you, who began to watch what 1 write, 
And started to discuss written by me. 
I call you, in the name of Allah: 
If you will find an error of me, - 
Forgive it to me, since as wise is he, who forgives! 
 
The work of the great geographer Abdrashid Bakuvi will for long time be 
arresting attention of scientists, everyone, who shows interest in geography, 
history, culture and ethnography of oriental countries. 
 
The Great Poet, Theorist and Propagandist of Khurufizm 
 
Imad ad-Din Nasimi 
 
Seid Ali Imad ad-Din Nasimi, an outstanding 
thinker and great poet of Azerbaijan and the Middle East, 
was born in 1370 in Shirvan. Some scholars believe that 
he was born in Baku, but others believe that he was born 
in Shemakha, the capital of the State of Shirvanshahs. The 
poet's father was a well-known person in Shirvan. 
Nasimi's only known brother was a poet under the pen 
name Shah Khandan. Shah Khandan was buried in 
Shemakha at the cemetery that was later named in honour of him Shah Khandan 
cemetery. 
Shemakha had become one of the cultural centres of the Caliphate after 
Islam had finally been accepted in Shirvan. There were many schools, universities 
(medrese), rich general and private libraries, observatories and the famous 
medicine "Academy" ("Dar Ush-Shura"). This academy was founded by Omar 
Kafi ad-Din , a famous physician and scientist who was the great poet Khagani's 
uncle. Shemakha was famed for its constellation of famous scientists and poets, 
such as Khagani, Feleki, Kafi ad-Din and others. 
172 
 
It is clear from Nasimi's works that he was well educated. He knew much 
about Eastern and ancient Greek classical literature and philosophy, Islamic and 
Christian theology, medicine, astronomy, astrology, mathematics and logic. He 
wrote poetry equally well in Turkish-Azeri, Persian and Arabic. His Turkish was 
very rich, and while it was close to the spoken language, it was also enriched by 
proverbs and sayings. In his poetry, Nasimi mentioned the names of great poets 
and scientists of Azerbaijan, Shirvan and other Eastern countries. These names 
included Ali ibn Sina, Khagani, Nizami, Feleki, Khallaj Mansur, Fazlullah Naimi, 
Sheikh Mahmud Shabustari, Ovhad, and many others. 
Nasimi lived and wrote at the turn of the 14th and 15th Centuries. This was 
a rather hard time. The poet's homeland had been ravaged by Timurids from the 
South and by Mongols from the North. The heretic-philosophical teaching 
Khurufism flourished during that time in Azerbaijan. Its origin was, to a certain 
degree, a protest against the Timurids. Nasimi became a furious and outstanding 
advocate and theorist of this teaching. 
Khurufism's name came from the Arabic word "Khuruf, a letter of the 
alphabet. The followers of this teaching deified the Arabic alphabet, declaring that 
without them, God, man and things could not become known. The philosophical 
and social  meaning of Khurufism, however, is wider and more considerable.  
The founder of Khurufism was a famous philosopher and poet Fazlullakh  
(Fazl) Naimi Tabrizi. Fazl created his teaching in Tabriz, the capital of Azerbaijan, 
in about 1386. Baku played a significant role in Naimi's life; this is where he 
originated the center of the Khurufism movement. In Baku, he wrote his main 
work "Javidan-nama" ("The Book of Eternity"). Naimi actively propagated his 
teaching, and soon it disseminated not only in Azerbaijan but also in many other 
countries of the Middle East and Central Asia. Naimi even tried to attract Timur to 
his side but was arrested, and in 1394 he was executed and buried in the fortress 
Alinja-cala near Nakhchivan. Fazlullakh foresaw such a death, and he wrote his 
last work "Vasiyyat-name" before his death as a program to his followers for their 
further struggle after his death. Following the instructions of Naimi, outstanding 
Khurufists left their native places and began to spread the ideas of their great 
teacher all over the East. Nasimi also visited Turkey, Syria, Egypt and other Arabic 
countries, and he actively spread the ideas of Khurufism. As it is seen from his 
works, Nasimi went to Baku, Baghdad, Bursa, Shemakha, Haleb (Aleppo) and 
other places. In Bursa, Turkey he met with the well-known poet Sheikhi, who was 
the first translator of Nizami's poem "Khosrow and Shirin" into Turkish. He also 
met with the head of the famous dervish's Order Bektashiyya, Haji Vali Bektashi. 
Nasimi became very popular among Anatolia's people. Wandering around 
the countries of the Middle East, however, the poet was continuously persecuted 
and even imprisoned, but it did not stop him. The impassioned poetry of the poet-
philosopher had a broad audience. His poetry was rewritten, learnt by heart, and 
173 
 
The execution of the Sufi al-Hallaj. Kitab al-Ahtar al-
Baqiyya (Chronology of Ancient Nations). Tabriz, ca. 
1307.  Edinburgh University Library. 
 
read and sung in market squares. According to a widespread legend, it was namely 
for that reason that the poet was executed in the Syrian town of Haleb. 
One of Nasimi's young pupils, surrounded by a crowd in a market, was 
reciting Persian gazals of his teacher: "O to see my face you need an eye that can 
perceive the True God. How can the eye that is short-sighted see the face of God?" 
He was arrested and in order to save Nasimi's life, he said that he was the author of 
the verses. He was sentenced to death by hanging. The news reached Nasimi when 
he was having his shoes mended at the shoemaker's shop. The poet went to the 
place of the execution, saying that he was the author of the gazals, and he was 
executed. 
The Arabic manuscript 
"Cunuz-uz-zahab" contains a 
detailed story of this execution, 
which took place in 1447 in the 
town of Haleb. "Apostate Ali 
Nasimi was executed at the time 
of Yashbey. During that time at 
the "Par-ul-Adle" ("The Palace of 
Justice"), the case of Ali al-
Nasimi was considered in the 
presence of sheikh ibn Khatib an 
Nasiri, a deputy of the higher rank cadi sheikh lzza ad-Din Shamu ad-Din ibn 
Amin un-Dowle, the higher ranking cadi Fath ad-Din al-Maliki and the higher 
ranking cadi Shikhab ad-Din al-Khanbali. 
A certain ibn al-Shangash al-Khanadan said to the officers and to the 
divines of the town that Nasimi had led astray some madmen and that they had 
obeyed him. The judge said to him, "If you can prove what you are saying about 
Nasimi, I will not execute you". Nasimi said a "Kalme-i-shahadat" (a prayer that 
would once tell the truth), swore and rejected everything they said about him. At 
that time, sheikh Shikhab ud-Din ibn Khilal appeared and, having an honorable 
seat in the majlis, he asserted that Nasimi was a godless man and must be executed 
even if he had wanted to confess his sins. The sheikh asked, "Why don't you 
execute him?" Al-Malik answered him, "Will you write the sentence with your 
own hand?" He answered that he would and he wrote the sentence. Everybody in 
the majlis read it and they didn't agree to it. 
 Al-Maliki said to him, "The officers and divines don't agree with you. Flow 
can I execute him just on the base of your words?" Yashbey replied, "I don't know 
him, but the Sultan entrusted me to tell him the case. Let's wait for the Sultan's 
order". 
So the majlis stopped his work, and Nasimi remained in jail. Nasimi's case 
was reported to Sultan Muayyad, who ordered to strip the skin off  Nasimi and 
174 
 
Nasimis mausoleum in Haleb, Syria. 
mount his body for general observation at the town of Haleb for seven days. He 
further ordered to cut off Nasimi's legs and hands and to send them to Alibey ibn 
Zulgadar, his brother Nasr ad-Din and Osman Qarayoluk, whom Nasimi had also 
led astray. So they did‖. 
Many legends about Nasimi's courage and fortitude during his execution 
were told among the people. Until his last breath, the poet pleaded "not guilty" and 
repeated, "Analkhah" ("1 am the truth, I am God"), and at the same time mocked 
the stupid executioners. According to legend, one of the Muslim divines present at 
the execution cried, "This man is worse than Satan, it is a cursed place where his 
blood will fall, and this place must be burned and cut off by sword". At the same 
time, as if by-magic, a drop of the poet's blood fell on his finger. The crowd, 
excited with such a sign, demanded to cut off the 
finger of the divine. Defending himself, he 
referred to the Koran: "There is nothing about it 
in the Koran. 1 said it by my way". Nasimi's 
answer to that was a couplet, which became a 
proverb afterwards. 
According to another legend, after another 
cry of "Analkhah", he was asked, "What God are 
you if you are growing pale losing blood?" The 
poet answered, "O fool, you can't understand that 
I am the sun of love in the sky of eternity. And 
before the sun sets it always becomes pale". 
Nasimi was buried in Haleb at the family 
pantheon, which is believed to be a sanctuary. 
The pilgrims who visited this holy place were presented with the honorable name 
"Nasimi". 
The poetry of the poet-philosopher became popular among people of 
Central Asia, Turkey, Persia and Armenia in a short time. His name as the name of 
Khallaj Mansur became the symbol of unusual courage and faithfulness to his 
ideas. His poetry was translated into many languages, and many poets and thinkers 
of these countries followed him. Many people were executed as they recited and 
advocated the ideas of Khurufism. 
At the beginning of his creative activity, he and his teacher and friend 
Naimi advocated Sufi ideas, and they were both followers of the famous Sufi 
sheikh Shibli. During his Sufism period, the poet used the pen-names "Huseini", 
"Seyid Huseini" and "Seyid". Nasimi studied the teaching of the famous Persian 
Sufi and poet of the 10th Century, Husein Khallaj Mansur, who was the first to say 
the slogan: "I am God". Because of these heretic words, Khallaj Mansur was 
always persecuted and he was eventualy executed. Nasimi admired Mansur, 
praised him in his poetry and was also ready for such a sacrifice. 
175 
 
Nasimi did not change his attitude toward Sufism after he received the 
teaching of Khurufism. Zumrud Khanum Culi-zade wrote, "God, beautiful and 
beloved, who exalted man, lighting him up, is in the center of Nasimi's creative 
activity. By way of renunciation (self-denial) and moral improvement, man comes 
nearer to God, and higher bliss for man is meeting with him, blending with him, 
dissolving in him. The poet wrote that in spite of someone's words that love is sin, 
he would always keep the way of love, for only this way led to truth - God". 
Khurufism gradually substituted Sufism in Nasimi's outlook. First of all, it 
told about the change of the pantheistical conception of the poet, on the basis of 
which there is not love and dizziness, but rather, reason. However, Khurufism 
advocated by Nasimi is not a simple repetition of Naimi's teaching. Nasimi took 
the philosophy created by Naimi and propagated its main statement. Nasimi 
advocated and propagated the fundamental statements of Khurufism. 
The central place in Nasimi's poetry is the focus on the identity of man to 
God and the definition of man. A very popular and remarkable verse expressed this 
idea in poetic form: 
 
Both worlds within my compass come, but this world cannot compass me. 
An omnipresent pearl as I, and both worlds compass me. 
Because in me both earth and heaven and Creation's ''BE!" were found, 
Be silent! For there is not commentary that can compass me. 
Both worlds are my inauguration. In your essence I begin. 
So know me by this token, though a token cannot compass me. 
Through doubt and surmise no one came to be a friend of God and Truth. 
The man who honours God knows doubt and surmise compass me. 
Pay due regard to form, acknowledge content in the form, because 
Body and I am, but soul and body cannot compass me. 
I am both shell and pearl, the Doomsday scales, the bridge to Paradise. 
With such a wealth of wares, this worldly counter compass me. 
 
About this, Dr Vagif Aslanov wrote: 'Thus Nasimi, whose poems praise 
truthfulness in man and the nobility and beauty of human heart and soul, took his 
place in history as a hero who sacrificed his life for his fellow man and for triumph 
of justice. 
In his poems Nasimi summoned man to know himself and his own divine 
nature. He believed that only man could grasp all the secrets of Creation. In 
Oriental mythology, the legendary Iranian ruler Jamshid, or Jam, had a cup which, 
when full of wine, showed all that was happening in the word. Nasimi often called 
human reason the cup of Jamshid. "The essence of God is hidden in man, and the 
wine in the chalice of Jam is man. Knowledge and reason are the greatest riches, 
and knowledge gives man strength: 0 you who thirst for pearls and gold, for 
knowledge strive! For is not this a gold and pearl - the knowledge of man?" And 
again:  "He who  masters knowledge, O man, is strong. The man of reason who is 
176 
 
aware of his divine majesty is the most precious being in all of Creation: O you 
who call a stone and earth a precious pearl, is not man who is so far and gentle also 
a pearl?" 
Addressing his readers, Nasimi declared, "Call me a man who has immortal 
life, for 1 immortal am ever alive". 
We rejoice that Nasimi's wonderful poetry has come down to us from a past 
age, poetry which shall forever live like the boundless, restless and seething ocean 
rich in pearls‖. 
 
Unique in his Time, Unequalled 
in Musical Art 
 
Abdulgadir Maraghi 
 
Music always plays a peculiar role in all spheres of Azerbaijani life. 
Abdulgadir ibn Geybi Al-Hafiz Al-Maraghi was born in one of the cultural and 
scientific centres of Azerbaijan, Maragha, in the middle of the 14th Century. Like 
many Azerbaijani scientists of the Middle Ages, Maraghi was well educated in 
many fields. He had a deep knowledge of the theory of Eastern music, and he was 
a magnificent singer, musician, composer, painter, calligrapher and poet. Maraghi 
wrote poetry in Azeri, Persian and Arabic. He wrote a 
large part of his verses in meter that matched  well  with 
mughams  Segah, Ushshag  and Nava, who were known 
throughout Azerbaijan, as well as Turkomans of Iraq. 
Maraghi's father Movlana Heybi was a well-
known musician. In his work "Magasid al-Alkhan", 
Abdulgadir wrote about his father: "My father Heybi 
was very skillful in various sciences, particularly in 
music. He largely influenced my education, especially 
in music". Maraghi's sons and grandsons also became 
famous musicologists. His youngest son, Abdulaziz, 
wrote a book on the theory of music called "Niga va 
Tuladvar", which is now stored in the Turkish library 
"Nuri Osmaniyya". His grandson Mahammed's book "Magasuduladvar" is also 
stored there. 
When Abdulgadir was four years old, he could already recite the Koran by 
heart. By the age of 10, he had mastered the basis of a musical education and stud-
ied grammar, rhetoric and stylistics. In addition, he had been frequently invited 
with his father to the majlises of scientists and sheikhs, where he sang the Koran 
and complicated musical compositions. 
177 
 
Maraghi studied music theory from works by scientists such as Farabi, ibn 
Sina, Safi ad-Din Urmavi, Gutb ad-Din Shirazi and Abu Ali. He acquired a 
reputation among musicians as a connoisseur of music theory. Soon his glory went 
beyond the city, and he was invited to Tabriz to the majlise at the Sultan's palace, 
where famous singers and poets participated, including Sultan Uveys Jalair, who 
was not a bad poet and musician himself. Sultan Uveys issued a special "Finnan" 
("Decree"), which glorified the young musician. In the decree, Abdulgadir was 
called "Unique of epoch, unequalled in musical art". 
After Sultan Uveys' death, Abdulgadir remained at his son Sultan Husein's 
court. This new Sultan looked upon Abdulgadir with even more favor than his 
father had. 
In 1377, Maraghi wrote "Alkhani Sigana" ("Thirty Songs"). He wrote this 
composition in connection with the following episode in his life. Sultan Husein 
asked Maraghi to write one musical composition for each day of the month of 
Ramadan; Maraghi agreed. Then one of Azerbaijan's most illustrious musicians of 
that time (and Maraghi's future father-in-law), Rizvanshah Tabrizi, bet 100,000 
gold dinars against Maraghi.  He bet that Maraghi could not carry out the condition 
of setting verses to music, if the mughans, rhythms, structure and poetics were 
specified to him just a day in advance. Eminent poets of the majlise, including 
Sultan Husein, wrote poetry in Arabic and Persian. Husein asked that the verses be 
written according to his mood. Although Maraghi was confronted by demands 
within narrow bounds, he overcame the difficult conditions and wrote 30 
marvelous songs in time. Rizvanshah admired Maraghi's talent and sent him not 
only the gambled money, but also his daughter for marriage. 
Maraghi devoted to Sultan Husein the musical composition "Rhythm of 
Spring", which he wrote impromptu in the palace garden in Tabriz. The new 
governor of Azerbaijan, Sultan Ahmed ibn Uveys, who came to authority in 1380, 
also gave back to the talent of the scholar-musician. In his honour, Maraghi wrote 
"Dovr Shahi", which consisted of 30 separate parts. 
After Timur's invasion of Azerbaijan, many artists were removed to 
Samarkand. In 1397, Maraghi was among them, but he managed to escape Timur's 
ordered execution. Nevertheless, within a year, Timur named Maraghi "Padishah" 
of all connoisseurs of music in an official order. 
In 1399, Abdulgadir went back to Tabriz to the court of Timur's son 
Miranshah. His happiness in breathing his native air of  Tabriz lasted a short while. 
Two years later Timur again sent him to the scaffold, this time because he served 
on the court of Miranshah, who had been convicted of treason. Again all came off 
satisfactorily, and Abdulgadir succeeded in escaping capital punishment. While the 
first time his reference to the Ruler of Universe on the Turkic rescued him, this 
time he softened Timur's anger with his gallant singing of the sura from the Koran. 
178 
 
Abdulgadir again went to Samarkand to Timur's court, where he wrote 
many new musical compositions and musical treatises. In his treatise entitled 
"Qandz al-alkhan" ("Treasury of Melodies"), he recorded melodies using Urmavi's 
alphanumeric method. The letters indicated the pitch of the sounds; the figures 
indicated the duration, mood and size, and determined the harmony and rhythm of 
a melody. English musicologist J. Fermer analysed this essay and arrived at the 
idea that some melodies written by Maraghi now exist among Turkmen under the 
names "Giyar" or "Kiyar". 
In 1405 Maraghi began his theoretical work "Jame al-alkhan" ("Aggregate 
of Melodies"), which he finished in 1413. Then he wrote the musical treatises 
"Magasid al-Alkhan" ("Function of  Melodies"), "Lakhiiye" ("Music"), "Sharh al-
advar" ("Comment on Circles") and "Favand-i ashara" ("Ten Profits"). His last 
works differ by increased complexity, and they are clearly destined for prepared 
professional musicians, theorists and performers. Ella Zonis wrote that "Jame al-
alkhan" listed several examples of the first voluminous notions in Persian music. 
A large portion of Maraghi's creative work was focused on the theory of 
mughams and other musical forms and genres of that time's professional music of 
oral tradition. Regarding mughams he wrote, "The sounds of mughams are 
disposed on the principle of improvement and the fondness of sounding. They are 
eight or ten in number". He also wrote, "Turkic people prefer to compose in the 
mood of mughams Ushshag, Nava and Busalik, but some other mughams also 
enter into their compositions". From these statements it is clear that under the term 
"mugham" he aimed one of the main moods, constituting the basis of various 
musical compositions. 
The majority of the musical treatises that Maraghi wrote in verse were 
written in Persian and Azeri-Turkic. In one of the poems written in Azeri, Maraghi 
described an episode from his life. Somehow he lapsed into a nasty illness and the 
best doctors who drew round his bed could not even help him. Then he took his ud 
in his hands and under its accompaniment chanted, "O, doctors, do not be surprised 
if Abdulgadir finds his cure in the ud, since the best medicine for himself he 
considers to be music". 
Maraghi devoted significant attention to the music of Turkic people, 
particularly to Ashug's music. In his works he marked out nine main Turkic 
melodies and melodies common among all people of the East, especially those 
frequently used in Turkic music (Ushshag, Nava, Busalik, Nekhoft and Bayati-
Novruz). Maraghi wrote that Mongol musicians used Turkic melodies. 
There is a lot of interesting information in Maraghi's works about tools used 
during his time, which he described in various musical treatises. He described 
string instruments, such as the kamancha, gijak, nay-tan-bur, rubab, rudkhanii and 
others. He also described wind instruments, such as the ag ney, gara ney, ney-
balaban, zurna, burgu and others. It is interesting that one of the described 
179 
 
instruments was referred to as the Tabriz-Shirvan tambur. It confirms that there 
was already an available generality of musical culture in Tabriz and Shirvan, and 
that they were original, as he described another instrument, named by him as the 
Turkic or Mongol tambur, which was observably different from the first. Maraghi 
played a significant role in the development of musical science in the countries of 
the Near and Middle East. The works of two Azerbaijani titans of musical science, 
Safi ad-Din Urmavi and Abdulgadir Maraghi, underlie almost all of the medieval 
musical treatises: al-Lazina (15th Century), Abd ur-Rahman Jami (15th Century), 
Mahmud Chelebi (16th Century), Dervish Ali and Mirza Bey (17th Century), and 
others. 
Maraghi lived the last years of his life in Herat. He died in 1436 and was 
buried in Heart. 
 
An Outstanding Physician 
from Lenkoran 
 
Ramazan ibn Sheykh Ali Lenkorani 
 
The information about Ramazan ibn Sheykh All Lenkorani, as well as 
several other outstanding physicians, was collected and published by I.Efendiyev. 
Ramazan ibn Sheykh Ali Lenkorani is the author of medical treatise 
"Farrukhna-me-Jemali", abounds in original medical ideas. The work was written 
in Arabic in 1409. Later, the well-known doctor from Lenkoran Mekhub Ali ibn 
Ahmed Lengerkerani in 1594 translated "Farrukhna-me-Jemali" in Persian. The 
manuscript of the work was kept by Ali Nagi, well-known interpreter . 
The work, mainly deals with effect of organic and 
inorganic substances on organism, used in medical practice, 
gives brief recommendations on diagnostics. As I. Efendiyev 
wrote "in the first chapter Ramazan Sheykh Ali Lenkorani 
recommends organotherapy, demonstrates medical effect of 
milk, brains, stomachs, kidneys, livers, etc, and differentiates 
between bodies of various animals and birds, believes that 
their action is not identical; in the second chapter - medicinal 
plants are listed; here, in fact, there was nothing of the kind, 
except that the author pays greater importance the roots of 
wild grasses (as decoction); the third chapter refers to the 
results of mineral treatment meant. Using this work as 
translator, and commentator, Mekhub Ali ibn Ahmed Lengerkerani had for the first 
time applied auripigment (zirnikh), as a remedy for depilate hair, called later in the 
medical literature as "Azerbaijan mud" (vajibi), and also renovated forgotten cure, 
the so-called Azerbaijan soap -gilabi. Both these remedies had long time been 
180 
 
items of export and brought great profits. It is necessary to point out that 
auripigment was known as far back in Atropatena and even earlier, but was used 
only by leather-dressing, and gilabi was natural soap and was of sanitary 
importance". 
 
A Medieval Linguist 
from Garabagh 
 
Sadallakh al-Bardai 
 
The famous linguist and poet of medieval East Saadin Sadallakh al-Bardai 
was born in the town of Barda, situated on the teritory of modern Garabagh. Many 
famous scientists of the Middle East came from this town, capital of Caucasian 
Albania, since 5 century, cultural and trade centre of Azerbaijan. The biographical 
facts about Bardai is so scanty that even his lifetime had not 
exactly been established. The scientists approximately link 
the time of Al-Bardai to the end of the 14th Century 
beginning of the 15th Century, according to the manuscripts 
of later period. Known are two works of Al-Bardai: these are 
comments to the works of outstanding linguist Izza ad-Din 
az-Zanjani "Attasrif', titan of linguistics of all times az-
Zamakhchari "Al-Anmyzaj fi-n-nakhv" ('"Perfect 
grammar"). Comments of Sadallakh Al-Bardai to the works 
of az-Zamakhchari titled "Khadaik addanai fi charkhi risalt 
al-lamatal-khanaik", brought fame to Al-Bardai . Bardai 
himself  in the beginning of his comments wrote: "Having 
seen the famous treatise titled "al-Anmuzadj" for glorification of which any 
statementsare powerless and there was nothing formed like these in no part of the 
earth. I would like to raise the veil, to discover the soul and mistcrics, included in 
it, to point out jewelry, hidden in its treasure to explain the slight hints, put into it, 
to make accessible his great exploit. Linguist N. A. Agaeva in her work, dedicated 
to the creativity of Al-Bardai, wrote: "His comments occupy an exceptional place 
by its theoretical meaning, principles and purposes. As for commenting, he based 
on the main dogmas of such sciences as logics, study of literature, sematics, lexic 
(vocabulary). And that is the explanation of unusually great popularity of 
comments of Al-Bardai for many centuries all over the East. 
 
 
 
 
 
181 
 
Shirvanshah Firidun ibn-Firiburz. 
 15th Century. Abdul Bagi Bakuvi. Shamakha, the 
State of the Shirvanshahs. British Museum, London. 
 
Helmet of Shirvanshah 
Sultan Farrukh Yasar 
(1464-1500). The State of 
the Shirvanshahs. Military 
Museum, Istanbul.  
 
The Shah of the Great Shirvan 
 
Shirvanshah İbrahim 
 
The reign of Shirvanshah Ibrahim ibn Sultan Mahammed ibn Qeyqubad fell 
on hard times in the Azerbaijan history - times of the campaigns of Sheikh Timur 
against Middle East and Caucasus. In one of the little villages of Sheki region with 
his father and relatives there lived 
impoverished feudal lord Sheikh 
Ibrahim. He was a distant relative of 
Shirvanshah (son of paternal uncle) 
and as all Shirvanshahs considered 
himself to be a descendant of 
Sasanid King Khosrov I Anushirvan, 
but did not advertise his origin. After 
the death in 1352 of Shirvanshah 
Khusheng ibn Qavus, the nobility of 
Shirvan recalled Sheikh Ibrahim 
(born in 1352) in Shemakha and 
proclaimed King of Shirvan. As 
noted ancient chronicles, "having seized such attributes of imperial power as king 
horses and retinue, they moved to Ibrahim and saw, that he is tired, and fell asleep 
under the tree at a strip of broken ground. They 
pitched a tent over him and stationed at some distance 
like imperial retinue, awaiting his awakening. When 
he woke up, they welcomed him and had swore an 
oath of allegiance. They carried him to the city 
[Shemakha], seated him on the takht [throne], and he 
became to counquer countries and create justice 
among his own citizens, conciliating their hearts and 
displaying his generosity. His position was 
strengthened and he became widely known and 
famous". Sheikh Ibrahim founded of dinasty the 
Shirvanshahs  Derbenti. In that restless time Shirvan 
was threatened from the south by Sultan Ahmed 
Jalairid and Timur,  from the north, Golden Horde 
Khan, Tokhtamish. Routes of Timur and Tokhtamish   campaigns   passed   
through   Shirvan. Independence of the country was constantly under threat. Sheikh 
Ibrahim, having shown his worth as wise ruler and flexible diplomat, could, 
sometimes to his detriment come to understanding with Timur and save the throne 
182 
 
Iron arm guard and glove.  Agh Goyunlu State. 
Second half of the 15th Century. Military Museum, 
Istanbul. 
 
and statehood of Shirvan. In 1386, Timur planned a campaign against Tokhtamish. 
The way passed through Shirvan. Sheikh Ibrahim was advised to run away to the 
mountains. He not only declined from fleeing, but collecting a large retinue, 
regardless of danger, went to the encampment of Timur in Garabagh. Sheikh 
Ibrahim presented to Timur expensive gifts and in every possible way tried to 
express obedience to him. Turks had a practice to make presents consisting of nine 
pieces of each kind. Sheikh Ibrahim gave everything according to the established 
tradition, but presented only eight out of nine of slaves, having declared: "I am 
ninth". Timur was so pleased that he officially announced Ibrahim the King of 
Shirvan and Shemakha. Gradually the relations between Ibrahim I and Sheikh Ti-
mur had grown into friendship. In 1385/6, ninety thousand strong army of 
Tokhtamish invaded Azerbaijan and, reaching Tabriz, came back to the Horde 
through Derbent. In a year, Tokhtamish again invaded Shirvan. However, this time 
Shirvanshah supported by Timur stopped him. When in 1395 Timur moved 
through Derbent against Tokhtamish, Sheikh Ibrahim with his army joined him. 
The allies gained Victory over 
Tokhtamish. Every time when 
Timur moved through Shirvan to 
Georgia or northward to Derbent, 
Sheikh Ibrahim accompanied him   
in campaigns together with  his 
army. Timur ordered Derbent 
walls to be restored. He was 
interested in good relations with 
Ibrahim I, as he protected   the 
northern borders from Horde. In 
this connection, Ibrahim I, actually, did not pay tribute to Timur, and was 
contented by magnificent repastes during the movement of Timur through the 
territory of Shirvan and presenting jewelery, beautiful slaves and boys, gold armors 
and belts, expensive brocaded fabrics, weapon and thousands horses to him. 
Thanks to the wise policy of Ibrahim I, even in these hard times Shirvan again 
prospered.  Shirvanshah  Ibrahim  I  participated  in    Timur's campaign of 1399-
1405 in Rum (Asia Minor) against Ottoman Sultan, Bayazid. Sheikh Ibrahim 
accompanied Sheikh till borders of Syria, then came back to Shirvan. Timur 
frequently encamped in Garabagh. Here he restored Beylagan destroyed by 
Mongols and built an irrigative canal on the river Araks. In 1405  Timur died.  
Sheikh   Ibrahim,  taking advantage  of internecine struggle for succession, tried to 
get released from Timurids, expand his own possessions and unite   all Azerbaijan. 
Sheikh Ibrahim with army crossed the Kura river and  seized Ganja and a large part 
of Garabagh. Many of local rulers joined his army. The Georgian King also entered 
183 
 
Helmet of Shirvanshah 
Sultan Farrukh Yasar 
(1464-1500). The State 
of the Shirvanshahs. 
Military Museum, 
Istanbul. 
 
into this union.  The friendship between Ibrahim and Timur's grandson, son of  
Miranshah, Mirza Umar grew into enmity, however, no battle broke out, though 
the army of Ibrahim and allies  and the troops of Mirza Umar confronted near 
Barda,  ready to fight.  
In spring 1406, in Tabriz there arose  revolt against 
Timurids. Heading it, Sheikh Akhi Gassab, which was 
urban tamgachi (main tax collector - tamga). Emir Bestam 
Jagir, having learned about the revolt, moved army to 
Tabriz. Same did the army of Sheikh Ibrahim. 
Bestam entered Tabriz in April 1406, not waiting till 
Ibrahims arrival. Their relations become worse. 
Approaching Sheikh Ibrahim in Tabriz, Bestam leaved the 
city and went to Ardebil. Shirvanshah, however, did not 
stay long in Tabriz. He came back to Shiran when superior 
forces of Jalairid Sultan Ahmed and his supporters 
approached Tabriz. Sultan Ahmed entered Tabriz in 1406, 
but he did not remain here long and the city passed into the 
hands of an other son of Miranshah, Abu Bakr. 
In two years, Gara Yusif Gara Goyunlu during the 
fierce battle routed troops of Miranshah. 
Miranshah perished in battle, and Gara Yusif came in Tabriz, invited there 
Sultan Ahmed. After Gara Yusif, launching the next campaign in turn, left the city. 
Sultan Ahmed, having called to the aid of Sheikh Ibrahim, besieged Tabriz. 
However, Gara Yusif, having learned about events in Tabriz, had time enough to 
arrive there earlier than the son of Shirvanshah, Qayumars and on August 30, 1410 
in the suburb of the city he routed Ahmed troops. 
Ahmed fell in action, state of Jalairids ceased to exist existence and in its 
place the state of Gara Goyunlu, headed by Gara Yusif was formed. He made 
Tabriz the capital of the state. 
Qayumars, son of Ibrahim, with his army approached Tabriz when Sultan 
Ahmed had as already been defeated. At night, he was attacked by Gara Yusif's ar-
my and defeated and taken prisoner. Gara Yusif released Qayumars without 
repayment and any conditions, having handed him a message to Shirvanshah with 
his demand to submit. 
Shirvanshah, not expecting such a mercy from severe Gara Yusif, suspected 
his son of high treason and put him to death. As a reply, Gara Yusif  broke into 
Garabagh. From here he sent to Sheikh Ibrahim a messenger with the offer to 
submit. Ibrahim was ready to fight to the end for the sake of independence. He 
mustered in Shirvan a large army, again in alliance with ruler of Sheki, Seyid 
Ahmed and King of  Georgia, Constantine II, and moved against Gara Yusif. The 
battle took place on the bank of  Kura in 1412. It lasted a few days and, despite 
184 
 
Mail shirt that belonged to Sultan 
Keygubat I, Shirvanshah (1317-
1344). The State of the 
Shirvanshahs.   Military Museum, 
Istanbul. 
 
heroic struggle of Shirvanshah's troops and his allies, the battle was won by 
considerably superior forces of Qara Yusuf `s army. Ibrahim I, King of Georgia 
Constantine, sons of Sheikh Ibrahim Gazanfar, Asadulla, Khalilulla, Manuchekhr, 
Abdurrahman,  Nasratulla and  Hashim, Ibrahim's brother Sheikh Bahlul, many 
notables of Shirvan, as well as physicians, astronomers, "jarchi", other cortiers 
were taken prisoner. Gara Yusif released ordinary soldiers of Shirvan without 
ransom, but ordered to put to death Georgian 
prisoners. 
Arrogant King Constantine was killed by 
Gara Yusif and his son, Pirbudagh. Ibrahim with 
sons and retinue were put into Tabriz prison. 
Gara Yusif detained Sheikh Ibrahim to get huge 
ransom in 1200 Iraqi tumans and a little bit 
smaller sums for members of his retinue. Such 
ransom Shirvanshah could pay by deplenishing 
his treasury only. Fortunately, the treasury 
remained safe. Tabriz merchants and craft 
foremen led by already mentioned Sheikh Akhi 
Gassab, offered to gave the ransom for Shirvanshah, if Gara Yusif would agree to 
accept goods instead of money. Gara Yusif accepted this offer and after releasing 
Ibrahim had him seated near himself during the feast. Shirvanshah acknowledged 
the suzerainity of Gara Yusif and continued to govern Shirvan. In spring 1413 all 
captives came back to Shirvan, and the army of Gara Yusif left it. 
Shirvanshah Ibrahim died in 1417. Due to outstanding diplomatic abilities 
and military talent, Sheikh Ibrahim during thirty five years of his reign preserved 
independence of  Shirvan and strengthened its authority. Moreover, the boundaries 
of Shirvanshah's State were visibly extended. 
 
The Power and Glory 
 
Shirvanshah Halilullah I 
 
Shirvanshah's state, including nearly the whole territory of the Azerbaijan 
Republic, at the end of 14th Century due to wise policy of Shirvanshah Ibrahim I, 
turned into the strong independent state. After death of Sheikh Ibrahim in 1417, 
Halilullah I, his senior son, ascended the throne. 
While in Azerbaijan a fierce struggle for power between successors of great 
Sheikh Timur and Padishahs of Gara Goyunlu` s state was waged, there appeared 
185 
 
Helmet. 16th-l7th 
Centuries. Shirvan. 
 
Mail shirts that belonged to 
Shirvanshah Halilullah I 
(1418-1464). The State of 
the Shirvanshahs. Military 
Museum, Istanbul. 
 
new contenders, rulers from the family Agh Goyunlu and descendants of known 
Ardebil Sheikh Safi ad-Din. 
After comine to nower. Halilullah. as well as his 
choice of ally proved to be successful. In 1420 during the 
war with Shahruh, Timur's son, King of Gara Goyunlu, 
state Gara Yusif unexpectedly died. 
His army fled in panic and son of Gara Yusif, 
Jahan Shah (known to us under the name of poet Hagigi 
also), after he fell under the authority of Shahruh, ceded a 
city Sultaniya to him. Shahruh came in Tabriz, and from 
here moved to winter in Garabagh. There Halilullah with 
brother Manuchehr arrived. The ruler of Central Asia. 
Iran and larger part of Azerbaijan favourably received 
young Shirvanshah, notable for his bravery and courage, gave him valuable 
presents, and took his brother, emir Manuchehr, into his service. In the Shahruh's 
encampment  there was a widow of Gara Yusif, a daughter of  Mirza abu Bakr, son 
of Miran Shah and grandson of  Timur. During the where her grandfather, Miran 
Shah perishsed, she was taken prisoner by Gara Yusif, and he married her. The son 
of Gara Yusif, Gara Goyunlu Iskander, which had time 
to consolidate his position and muster army, was 
naturally, dissatisfied by this alliance and evcrytime 
tried to attack Shirvan. Once or twice, Shirvan and 
Shemakha was devastated by him. In turn Shirvanshah 
in every possible way  supported Shahruh in his 
struggle against Iskander, through taking part in his 
campaigns. 
Thus, Halilullah in 1429 participated in the 
battle under Nalmas in Azerbaijan, where Iskander 
suffered defeat. After that, authority of Shahruh in 
Gara Goyunlu's state passed to his brother abu Said, 
who recognized the suzerainty of Timurids. Soon, however, Iskander killed abu 
Said and again got out of Shahruh control. In 1432, the son of Iskander Yar Ali, 
broke off with his father and had fled with 2,000 equestrians to Shirvan and joined 
Halilullah. Latter refused to return the son to Iskander and set him out for Shahruh 
with an army on ships. 
In reply, Iskander led his army to Shirvan, defeated the main forces of 
Halilullah and devastated the country. 
Halilullah had recourse to Shahruh. As Sara Khanum Ashurbeyli wrote: 
"Halilullah departed from Baku by sea to Rey to Shahruh together with qadi and 
divines and informed him about Iskander's crimes in Shirvan. At the general 
meeting of  Fakikhs-Muslim lawyers, Shahruh condemned actions of Iskandcr, and 
186 
 
Mail shirts that 
belonged to 
Shirvanshah 
Halilullah I (1418-
1464). The State of the 
Shirvanshahs.             
Millitary Museum, 
Istanbul 
they brought in verdict of  his guilty. "Shahruh, together with troops of Shir-
vanshah, moved to Azerbaijan. Iskander suffered a complete defeat, lied in citadel 
Alinja near Nakhchivan, where in 1436/7 perished from hand of his son. Shahruh 
entered Tabriz, and then moved to Garabagh to wintering. 
While continued to rule in Shirvan, there was a 
peace. This time grew opposition of Jahan Shah Gara 
Goyunlu to Uzun Hasan Agh Goyunlu rose. Activities of 
the rulers of Ardebil intensified. Afraid of growing popu-
larity of Sheikh Juneyd Sefevi, grandfather of Shah Ismail, 
Jahan Shah deported him in Diyarbakir. In four years, 
Sheikh Juneyd returned to Ardebil where he enlisted Uzun 
Hasan Agh Goyunlu's (Sheikh Juneyd was married to 
sister of Uzun Hasan, Khadija) support, he led his troops to 
Shirvan. The plans of the conquest of Shirvan Sheikh 
concealed under the pretext of religious war against with 
Circassians. Shirvanshah Halilullah, suspecting Sheikh 
Juneyd's intentions, moved against him. The battle took 
place in 1460 on the left bank of the river Samur near 
village Kipchak. During the battle Shirvanshah Halilullah 
had been supported by Jahan Shah Gara Goyunlu. The 
army of Sheikh Juneyd was broken, and he perished. 
Under one version, Juneyd was taken prisoner and put to 
death, on other - fell in battle, pierced by arrow. According to chroniclers, his body 
was transfered from the left bank of Samur to right and was buried in the village of 
Gulkhan (at present, villages Khazra Guba region). A mausoleum, constructed over 
his grave, servived to our days, though remains of Sheikh were carried by the Shah 
Ismail to Ardebil. 
Halilullah died after nearly fifty years of reign in 1465, in Baku and was 
buried in a specially built mausoleum on the territory of palace ensemble of Shir-
vanshahs. 
Under Shirvanshah Halilullah who chose Baku as his residence, the city 
grow up and got stronger economically. Main buildings of Shirvanshah's palace 
ensemble were constructed. At the Court of Shirvanshahs. scientists, poets, 
musicians and philosophers had served. Among them, it is necessary especially to 
single out the well known in the Orient scientist and philosophe-sufi Seyid Yahya 
al-Bakuvi. 
  
187 
 
The mausoleum and Divan Khana on the territory of the Shirvanshah`s Palace. Icheri Sheher, Baku.  
Helmets of Shirvanshah Sultan Farrukh Yasar  (1464-1500). 
The State of the Shirvanshahs. Military Museum, Istanbul. 
 
Mail shirt that belonged to 
Shirvanshah Keygubat 
(1317-1344). The State of 
the Shirvanshahs. Military 
Museum, Istanbul. 
 
 
  
188 
 
A Muslim and a Christian playing chess. 13th 
Century. Madrid. Bibliotheca del Monasterio 
de el Escorial. 
 
The President of the First Chess Club 
 
Hajji Ali Tabrizi al-Shatranji 
 
Haji Ali Tabrizi al-Shatranji was an outstanding chess player of the end of 
the 14th - beginning of the 15th centuries. He was born in Tabriz. The dates of his 
birth and death are unknown. 
The game of chess has been popular in Azerbaijan since ancient times, and 
according to the 12th century historian Ravandin, in the 6-7th centuries the game 
was already widespread. 
After Islam was adopted in Azer-
baijan and the state joined the Arab Cali-
phate, the cities of Ganja, Nakhchivan, 
Shemakha, Ardebil and Tabriz began to 
grow rapidly. Science, arts and crafts in 
those cities were developing. Draughts, 
chess and nards were increasingly popu-
lar are professional chess-players in the 
contemporary meaning of the word ap-
peared. According to several sources, the 
first among the chess players was Jalal 
ad-Din Nakhchivani, widely popular in 
the twelfth century in the Middle East. 
The outstanding Azeri poets, Mehseti Ganjavi, Khagani, Nizami, Fizuli, Nasimi 
and many others were fond of playing the game and were quite good players. 
In medieval bibliography chronics (tazkira) along with the mastery of an 
outstanding person in poetry, calligraphy or let's say, art, his ability to play chess 
was very often mentioned. The tazkira of the famous Azeri miniaturist and poet, 
Sadiq Bey Afshar "Majme-ul-Khavas" mentionsthat his teacher, talented artist  
Muzaffar Ali played big and small chess both perfectly well even with his eyes 
closed. In his book "Eminent People of Azerbaijan", the famous Iranian scientist 
Mahammedali Tarbiyat, draws a number of facts taken from the medieval chronics. 
In the life description of the sixteenth century poet Abdi Shirvani it is said that 
though he was an outstanding master of word, he usually lost in chess, however the 
biography of his contemporary, eminent scientist and poet Chelebibey, among all 
his other talents underlines his ability to play chess. 
In his work "Khabib-us-Siyar", the famous historian of the sixteenth 
century, Khandemir, gives the most detailed information on the life of  Haji Ali 
Tabrizi. According to Khandemir, he was the best chess player of the huge empire 
of  Timur and was known as an outstanding master of chess, defeating everybody 
he played with even not looking at the board. He could play wilh four players 
189 
 
A father's Discourse on Love 
(detail), Chess Players. Mirza Ali.  
Haft Awrang. Jami. 1565. Freer 
Gallery of Art. 
 
simultaneously not seeing the boards. (There is an opinion, that the practice to play 
chess and nards not following the game with one's eyes appeared during long 
camel caravan trips). 
HajiAli had a phenomenal memory. He 
knew by heart the entire Koran and a number of 
big poetic works. After getting to the court of  
Teymur, HajiAli got the pseudonym of al-
Shatranji and under the name entered the history 
of chess. By the way, the great general and 
statesman Timur did a lot to develop the game of 
chess. 
The well-known historian of chess, G. 
Murray in his book "History of chess", that came 
out in 1913, writes: "At that time, Teymur's chess 
partner was a famous Iranian chess-player and 
composer of chess problems, Ali Shatranji. Ali 
Shatranji helped Timur to compose chess 
problems. Another chess partner of Timur was Al 
ad-Din Tabrizi, master of blitz. "Historians report 
that Ali Tabrizi at court always defeated his very strong rival, the famous Arab 
geographer and historian, Shikhab ad-Din al-Khvafiya. According to Khandemir, 
Ali Tabrizi organized and led a group of chess-fans, called "Shakhmalbaz dastasi". 
Famous at that time chess players HajiAbdulvakhab Tabrizi, HajiYusif  Najar and 
Shams ad-Din Kazaruni were among its members. It obviously was one of the first 
chess clubs mentioned in the history of chess. 
Data on the life and creative work of the outstanding Azeri chess player 
HajiAli Tabrizi Al-Shartranji was cal-lected and published by the Azeri scientist 
Shahriyar Guliev. He was the first one to mention that HajiAli wrote a chess 
treatise. 
 
A Shah and Poet 
 
Muzaffar ad-Din Jahan Shah (Hagigi) 
 
The great state figure, poet and outstanding representative of Khurufism 
philosophy Muzaffar ad-Din Jahan Shah (Hagigi) was born in a small VILlage 
located near the city of Khoy in 1397. Jahan Shah was the third son of the founder 
of Azerbaijan state of Gara Goyunlu (Qara Qoyunlu), Gara Yusif . 
After deadly struggle with Ti-murids and Jalairids, Gara Yusif created a 
powerful state, including besides Azerbaijan - Armenia. East Georgia, Iraq Arabian 
and Iraq Persian, other small-sized possessions. 
190 
 
During the military campaigns of Gara Yusif, from his early age his son, 
Jahan Shah took part in them. Despite this, he had time to become a well educated 
person, even one of the most educated rulers of the time. 
After the death of Gara Yusif in   1420,  began an 
internecine struggle for power and the country was about 
to disintegrate. Taking advantage of this, sons of Timur. 
Shahruh and Baysonqur, repeatedly invaded in 
Azerbaijan. When one of the sons of Gara Yusif, Iskander 
seized the power in Azerbaijan and rushed on Shirvan. 
Shahruh came to the aid of Shirvanshah   Halilulla I. 
Jahan Shah also acted  against  his  brother, and Iskander 
could not resist an assault of joint armies any longer, and 
fled from Shirvan. Shahruh after Iskander's defeat in 1435 
transfer Azerbaijan to the possession of Jahan Shah. 
Iskander tried to restore his power in Azerbaijan and 
wanted to seize Tabriz, but the joint forces of Jahan Shah and emirs of Shirvan 
routed his army. He fled to the citadel Alinja, near Nakhchivan, where met a 
violent death. Jahan Shah from this moment actually became an independent ruler 
of Azerbaijan. In 1440/41, he made a successful raid upon Georgia, and in some 
years encroached in Arabian Iraq and captured Baghdad. His young son, 
Mahammed Mirza was nominated a ruler of Iraq. The city of Mosul was granted to 
the sons of Iskander, Alvend, Rustam, Tarkhan and Mahmud. Carrying out   the 
politicy of friendship with Timurid, Shahruh, with neighbouring Osman Sultan 
Murad 1 (1360-1389), unlike Iskander, who had constantly been at war with them, 
Jahan Shah not only restored the state of 
Gara Goyunlu within its former borders, 
but also expanded the territory. 
Between Jahan Shah and Shahruh 
there established fairly close relations, and 
eventually Shahruh's wife Goushad Beyim 
adopted Jahan Shah. Despite this, the state 
of Gara Goyunlu remained in some degree 
dependent from Timurid's Sultans. 
Complete independence of the state of Gara Goyunlu, governed by Jahan 
Shah, fellen 1447 after the death of Shahruh in Khorasan. Taking advantage of 
anarchy Jahan Shah seized Sultaniya, Qazwin, Hamadan, and the same year he 
again made a campaign in Georgia. 
This time, the ruler of Mosul, Alvend Mirza, son of Iskander, revolted 
against Jahan Shah and after seizing adjacent territories, announced his own 
independence. In reply, Jahan Shah came back to Tabriz and led his army against 
Alvend Mirza. Alvend suffered defeat and fled to King of the state of Agh 
191 
 
  
192 
 
Tenga. 1446. Tabriz. 
Silver.  State of Gara 
Goyunlu. 
 
Goyunlu (Aq Qoyunlu), Jahangir. Jahan Shah had to direct his army against 
Jahangir. The Jahangir's army was broken, and a part of his territory passed to 
Jahan Shah . 
Jahan Shah had five sons: Pirbudagh, Hasanali, 
Hasimbey, Mahammed Mirza and Yusif Mirza. They in 
every possible way helped their father to struggle for 
power, at the same time they repeatedly tried to separate 
from him. In 1452, Jahan Shah submitted Persian Iraq and a 
part of Fars region. He nominated his son, Pirbudagh as 
ruler of Isfahan, who moved to Fars and seized Shiraz and 
Girman. 
At the end of 1453 Jahan Shah nominated 
Pirbudagh a governor of Fars and came back to Tabriz. In 1457, Jahan Shah moved 
troops to Khorasan. Next year he seized the capital of Timurids state, Herat and 
took up his own residence in the famous Shahruh Palace. This time, his son Hasan 
Ali crowned himself Sultan and seized Tabriz. Jahan Shah came back to 
Azerbaijan and severely punished insurgents. 
Deported by Jahan Shah, 
Hasan Ali went to the encampment, 
warring with Uzun Hasan Agh 
Goyunlu, and therefrom to Shiraz to 
his brother, Pirbudagh. The  brothers 
announced about insubordination to 
Jahan Shah. 
Having learned about it, 
Jahan Shah in 1462/63 year 
beleaguered and seized Shiraz. The 
interference of mother again rescued 
brothers. After that Jahan Shah distributed the power between his sons. Baghdad he 
entrusted to Pirbudagh, Phars to Mirza Yusif, Girman to Gasimbey. 
Pirbudagh again arose against his father and announced himself as Sultan. 
In 1466, Jahan Shah has besieged Baghdad - capital city of the newly created Sul-
tanate and this time he executed his son. The same year, the state of Agh Goyunlu, 
headed by great commander and political figure Uzun Hasan was formed. In 1458, 
he made a foray on Georgia. Simultaneously intensified activity of Ardebil rulers. 
Jahan Shah, afraid of the growing popularity of Ardebil Sheikh Juneyd Sefevi, 
grandfather of Shah Ismail, departed him from Ardebilin to Diyarbakir. In four 
years Sheikh came back to Ardebil and soon fell in action against Shirvanshah 
Khalilulla. In the meantime, Uzun Hasan made one more attack on Georgia and 
seized Arzrum. 
193 
 
Jahan Shah, faced with growing aggressiveness of Uzun Hasan and incited 
by Osman Sultan, took drastic measures. He mustered army and moved from 
Tabriz towards the capital of the state of Agh Govunlu, Diyarbakir. 
However, following his servitors' 
advices, he postponed a battle, and sent an 
army on wintering. Taking advantage, Uzun 
Hasan in spring 1467 suddenly attacked 
Jahan Shah in the south of Armenian plateau, 
Mush and won a decisive victory. Some time 
later Uzun Hasan again unexpectedly 
attacked Jahan Shah , who with several 
servitors had a banquet in the village of 
(Sanjar) Chubugjur. Here Jahan Shah was 
killed by a warrior called Iskander. 
It took place on 4th October, 1467. A 
body of Jahan Shah was brought in Tabriz 
and buried in the famous "Blue Mosque", 
constructed by Jahan Shah himself. On the 
death of Jahan Shah some poets wrote 
elegies. So had finished fifty eight years of existence of Gara Govunlu state and 
unexpectedly been broken the life of the greatest person in the history of 
Azerbaijan. The person who personified the best qualities of prominent public and 
political figure, outstanding diplomat, great commander and brilliant poet. 
Jahan Shah had done much for the development of trade, craft, science, 
culture and art. During his raign such cities as Nakhchivan, Ganja and especially 
Tabriz blossomed. Under his order, in 1456 in Tabriz there was constructed one of 
the most famous building of Azerbaijan, "Gey Masjidi" ("Light-blue Mosque"), 
many other buildings. The prodigious marble building of "Blue Mosque" decorated 
by unusually beautiful and bright polychromatic tiles, had no analogues in 
Azerbaijan architecture and was the first among such buildings in the Middle East 
and Central Asia. Jahan Shah played a tremendous part in shaping the Azerbaijan 
poetry. Jahan Shah came in the history of the Azerbaijan literature under name of 
"Hagigi", as one of the first poets, who wrote in native Azeri. Having perfect 
education, Hagigi wrote in Azeri and Persian gazals, mesnevi and rubaiyat. 
He was well-versed in poetry of the East and considered himself as Nasimi 
follower. Hagigi was in friendly terms with great Persian poet Abd ur-Rahman 
Jami, who highly evaluated the poetic and spiritual properties of  Hagigi's "Divan". 
This "Divan" was termed by Jami in one of his verses as "treasury". 
The history of the "Divan" 's manuscript is not less intriguing than the life 
of its author. Long time, the scholars regarded this manuscript lost and just in 1961 
the manuscript's secret was revealed. Hagigi's "Divan" had for long time been kept 
194 
 
at the library of the Turkish Sultans in Istanbul. However, under Sultan Abdul 
Gamid the manuscript disappeared from the library. Some time, it later came to 
light in Egypt - the library of Alexandria. Then again disappeared and after 
wandering in all the parts of the world appeared London. Here with "Divan" well-
known oric talist Minorsky acquainted. However, tirony is that the manuscript did 
not stay long. From here it got in New York in the collect on of a certain Arutyun 
Gazaryan. He, together with other numerous manuscripts from his collection, left it 
by testament to Irevan University. "Divan" was found out and publisher by Latif 
Huseynzade. 
Hagigi knew well the oriental philosophy. Though Hagigi was Shah, he 
accepted Nasimi and Naimi Khurufism, became its active missionary: 
 
Unify with him I know as unity with Fazl,  
For me, poor such desire of unity is necessary. 
 
As connoisseur of Khurufism in Azerbaijan, Zumrud Guluzade wrote, " The 
poetry of Hagigi by its form is especially Khurufistic. He repeatedly writes about 
incarnation of letters in all creatures and, first of all, in man and his face. The man 
and his face impersonate Koran and ayats of Koran. 
 
Ayat sab-ul masani in features of your person.  
The letters of lovhi-mahvuz in happiness 
of meeting with you. 
 
                          " The Book of Destiny"". 
   
Despite obvious Khurufit nature of Jahan Shah's poetic creation, he 
executed 500 Khurufists in Tabriz headed by Naimi's daughter. It is possible to 
make a conclusion that Khurufism attracted Hagigi by form convenient to him, or 
by antitimuridy trend of some followers of Khurufism. 
 
The Creator of a Unique 
Bronze Cauldron 
 
Abd al-Aziz Tabrizi 
 
 In 1931, the Second International Congress of Persian Art was held in 
London at the Academy of Fine Arts, Berlington Palace. The Congress decided 
that the next meeting should be held in the Hermitage, Leningrad. The Congress 
was opened in September 1935, when this magnificent city was in a sorry plight. 
As Jozef Orbeli, Director of Hermitage, wrote, everything was done to gain 
"the Communist Party's confidence, which regulated the life of the country". 
195 
 
Memorable postage stamps, medals, badges and later the proceedings of the 
Congress were issued. 
As part of the current practice, sacred Muslim 
worship objects from the mosque - mausoleum of the 
greatest Turkic sufi Ahmad al-Yasevi (died in 1166) 
were requested "by the Communist decree",with a 
promise to return them after the end of the Congress. 
Unfortunately, "the highly educated" Soviet scholars 
did not keep their promise and till these days all the 
objects remained in the Hermitage. Only after the dis-
integration of the Soviet Union, the Republics of Central Asia and Kazakhstan 
receive their relics back. Among the objects brought to the Congress was a ritual 
cauldron for water from the city of Turkestan, which became the main decoration 
of an exhibition opened in the Hermitage. An inscription on the vessel stated that it 
was made in 1399 on behest of  Timur by ustad (master, expert) Abd al-Aziz 
Tabrizi, the son of ustad Sharaf ad-Din. 
The Azerbaijanian poets, painter-
miniaturists, musicians and architects 
were always popular in Central Asia. So 
one of medieval manuscripts reads: "I 
have immediately ordered to bring to 
Samarkand engineers and architects from 
Arabian and Persian areas of Iraq, Phars, 
Azerbaijan, Diyarbakir and Khorasan and 
told them to draw the plan". 
In the famous Shah-e-Zind group of mausoleums, the mausoleum of the 
spouse of  Timur, Turkan-aqa-Mafra, was created by an Azerbaijan architect, Zayi 
ad-Din Tabrizi. There are many similar examples to be cited. 
The cauldron is remarkable from the decorative point of view as well as its 
unique casting techniques. Dr. M. Heydarov writes that large vessels of this type 
were in wide use in Azerbaijan. 
Another cauldron of the 12-14th centuries, with four handles, was found 
north of Baku, near the village of Altiaghaj. A similar cauldron, dated 
approximately to the same period was found near Shemakha. The casting mould 
for this type of handles and ready cast handles made for such vessels were found 
during the archeological excavations at Oren-kala. 
The famous expert in the arts of the Middle East and Azerbaijan B. 
Weymarn writes: "The large cauldron from the mausoleum-mosque Haji Ahmed 
Yasevi remains an unsurpassed masterpiece. It has no analogue in the practice of 
casting art in the medieval age. Two-ton bronze vessel, which can contain more 
than three thousand litres of waters... The vessel is deservedly considered to be a 
196 
 
Jafar Tabrizis handwriting. 
Mehr and Mustary by Assar 
Tabrizi, 1419. 
 
miracle of casting of the 14th century. The creation of the cauldron was connected 
with solving many extremely complex and difficult technical problems of the 
period. A huge sphereconic cup (dia. 242.4 cm) smoothly grows into the refined 
foundation, the base of which stands on a massive plate (total height: 158.3 cm). 
The cauldron patterns impress  with well-considered scales and detailing of 
elements. The top part is decorated with bands of ornamental inscriptions, serving 
as a background for ten large decorative handles, alternating with large convex 
medallions. A continuous strip passes under the ledge's corolla, which is inscribed 
by spectacular naskh, containing Timur's command to manufacture the cauldron in 
the 801 year of  Hegira. It is followed by verse from Koran, to please God granting 
water for pilgrims. The space between the handles and medallions is filled with a 
recurrent benevolent inscription and the '"signature" of the author - ustad Abd al-
Aziz, son of master-ustads Sharaf ad-Din at-Tabrizi. The last decorative band 
consists of continuously repeating traditional kufic script "Authority belongs to 
Allah". The smoothness of the vessel's base contrasts with the characteristic trefoil 
decor, called "modekhil", which is placed in a chess order. The cauldron impresses 
with its immense size, monumenlality of design and highly artistic execution. The 
perfection of its forms, refinement of proportional silhouette and its grace are 
indicative of the great talent and high professionalism of the artist ". 
 
A Prominent Medieval Calligrapher of Azerbaijan 
 
Jafar Tabrizi 
 
In medieval Azerbaijan, for any educated 
person, regardless of who he was-governor of the 
country, astrologer, doctor or philosopher, one of 
criterion of all-round education was his ability to 
compose verses and master art of calligraphy. 
Therefore in that period it was very difficult to 
become famous among poets and calligraphers, 
especially calligraphers (khattats), as there was a 
large number of libraries and workshops, where 
professionals of high-class, khattats rewrote the books, 
made inscriptions for headstone, religious and civil 
buildings. As Koran was written in Arabian script, 
many people attributed divine origin to calligraphers. A large number of art scripts 
is known, but from the 14 Century the most widespread was the nastaliq script. A 
pleiad of calligraphers, writing in nastaliq script, began from Haji Mir Ali ibn Ilyas 
at-Tabrizi (1330-1405), a famous inventor of this handwriting. 
197 
 
Jafar Tabrizi, one of the best Azerbaijan calligraphers of 15th Century is 
attributed to this school. To master nastaliq script, he was trained by famous Azer-
baijani calligrapher Mir Abdulla Tabrizi nicknamed Shekerin Qalem (Sweet Pen), 
which used wide popularity in Khorasan and Turkestan too. Jafar 's life fell on the 
period , when Middle East and Caucasus were invaded by Timur. In Tabriz Jafar 
Tabrizi worked under the court of governor of Azerbaijan Miranshah, son of  
Timur. However, soon he, together with group of artists, calligraphers and foremen 
set off in Herat to serve anuther son of  Timur, Shahruh. There he had always been 
under the protection of his son, prince Baysonqur, which was large lover and 
patron of the art. In this connection, Jafar was named Baysonquri. As is seen from 
medieval sources under the court of Baysonqur Mirza he headed library-atelier, 
where 40 calligraphers worked over creation of manuscripts. Moreover, 
miniaturists, gilders, restorers, bookbinders and other worked there. Among them 
there was a great number of Tabrizians: Ayni Tabrizi, Ibrahim Shaffar Tabrizi, 
Ibrahim Tabrizi, Haji Ali Musavvir etc. 
Jafar Tabrizi turned out a very good teacher and organizer. He did much to 
improve the library. He regularly presened reports to Baysonqur Mirza about the 
library. One of such reports (June 1427 ) is kept now at the Museum of  Palace 
Topgapi in Istanbul. Besides description of library activity, information about 18 
miniaturists, calligraphers, bookbinders, gilders and interpreters, etc. was provided. 
Of interest is fact that in 1484 the library was headed by greatest painter, Behzad, 
who after capturing Herat by Shah Ismail set off together with some painters and 
calligraphers to Tabriz and headed Shah Ismail's library. Exchanges of the persons 
of shining talents between two famous libraries led to the integration of Tabriz and 
Herat's book art schools and their further growth. After the death of Baysonqur, 
Jafar worked at the library of his brother Ala ed-Dowle. As researcher of his 
creativity A. Kaziev wrote: " He made much for perfection of new nastaliq script. 
One of  Jafar 's disciples, Azkhar Tabrizi named him as second inventor of this 
handwriting (Mukhtara us Sani), as in this style, he left behind his teacher". Jafar 
Tabrizi, besides nastaliq, had a good handwriting in all classical six scripts and 
talig. He was taught suls script by Shams ad-Dina Mashrigidan, and his son and 
pupil Abu ur-Rahim Khalvati. 
Analysis of dating of artist's works makes it possible to make a conclusion 
that the period of the most active activity of Jafar fell on 1413-1452. The experts 
consider that he wrote worse in nastaliq, than in classical scripts, though he 
became famous as master of this script. 
Nastaliq at that period was, small- and large-sized. In large-sized script 
were written so-called, Qita. The Qita was glued on a sheet of paper on which a 
poetical text of secular contents, enframed by ornament was written. In small-sized 
and average-sized nastaliq were written poetic manuscripts. 
198 
 
Tughra of Uzun Hasan  
The small-sized nastaliq script reached perfection in Herat in the second 
half of the 15th Century. Herat's foremen created a special style of small-sized 
nastaliq, which was titled gerati script. Jafar Tabrizi is considered to be progenitor 
of gerati script. Among disciples of Jafar Tabrizi in nastaliq script there were 
Azkhar Tabrizi and Shah Mahmud Zarrin-Kalem Khafines, who became famous 
later by their high skill. He had disciples, scilful in classical handwriting. There are 
manuscripts of Jafar Tabrizi, copied by him personally during his stay at the court 
of prince Baysanqur. He copied in nastaliq script, "Shah-nama" Firdowsi (1430), 
"Gulistan" Saadi (1427), "Khamsa" by Nizami Ganjavi (1431) etc. They are kept at 
libraries and museums of Paris, Dublin, Teheran, Istanbul and St. Petersburg. Jafar 
Tabrizi was known as poet too. He wrote marsiya (elegy) on the death of 
Baysanqur, verses, in which he described his own high position under courts of 
Shahruh and his sons - princes Baysanqur and Ala ed-Dowle. The prominent 
master died in the city of Herat in 1480 at the age of sixty five. 
 
The Emperor and Empire 
 
Hasan bay Bayandur – Uzun Hasan  
 
In the 15th Century there were two states on the territory of Azerbaijan. 
Their tribal symbols were images of sheep. These symbols were depicted on the 
flags of the states. In accordance to the 
colors of the sheep one of the states was 
called Agh Goyunlu (Aq Qoyunlu) (of 
White Sheep) and the other - Gara 
Goyunlu (of   Black Sheep). They 
struggled with each other for dominion 
over Azerbaijan and Central Asia. Tur-
kic Osmans and Timurids were also 
involved in the struggle.  
At the beginning of the 15th 
century, when the state of Agh Goyunlu 
was only being established by Hasan Bey Bayandur (Uzun Hasan), the state of 
Gara Goyunlu  had  already reached its height. The territory of the state covered 
Azerbaijan, Iraq, Kurdistan, Western Iran, Armenia and many other surrounding 
countries. The capital of Gara Goyunlu State's was Tabriz. However the disposition 
of power was rapidly changing.  
The   outstanding  political leader, a talented general and a wise diplomat, 
the ruler of the state of Agh Goyunlu, Uzun Hasan Bayandur was born in 1423/24 
in the city of Diarbakir. 
199 
 
Tenga. Tabriz. 
Silver. State of 
Agh Goyunlu. 
 
Mail shirt that 
belonged to Uzun 
Hasan Agh 
Goyunlu. 15th 
Century. Military 
Museum, Istanbul. 
 
Being extremely tall Hasan Bey was called Uzun Hasan, which means Long 
Hasan in Azeri. He was married to a daughter of Trapezund Emperor John IV, 
Despina Khatun (Theodora). He had seven sons: Ughurlu 
Mahammed, Magsud Bey, Zeynal Bey, Sultan Khalil, Mirza 
Yagub, Yusif Mirza and Masih Mirza. Three of them, 
Ughurlu Mahammed, Magsud Bey and Zeynal Bey died 
when Uzun Hasan was still alive. 
We learn a lot about Azerbaijan and Uzun Hasan 
from travel notes of Ambrozio Kontarini, a Venetian 
diplomat and ambassador at Uzun Hasan's court. He wrote: 
"Uzun Hasan eats and drinks a lot. He is constantly 
surrounded by a big number of singers and dancers ready to 
implement his orders. In general he seems to be a good 
natured man, he is tall, read-faced and has something Tatar 
in his features". 
Little is known about the childhood and youth of  
Uzun Hasan. We can only guess, that he received a good 
education and was an active participant in military cam-
paigns for the establishment of the young state of Agh Goyunlu. 
The name of Uzun Hasan appears in history when he manages to unit Agh 
Goyunlu tribes and establish a small dominion in the upper reaches of the Tigris 
and the Euphrates with the capital in Diyarbakir. 
Surrounded by enemies, the ruler of the small state 
hoped to enter into alliance with his western neighbors, that 
were frightened by the possibility of mighty Osman Empire 
penetrating Europe. Uzun Hasan carried out successful 
negotiations with a number of European countries on 
providing assistance in the form of weapons and advisors. The 
assistance was supposed to come by the Black or 
Mediterranean Sea through Agh Goyunlu's trade partner, the 
allied Greek state of Trapezund and its western neighbor, the 
state of Garaman. 
Osmans tried to prevent the implementation of this agreement and after the 
seize of Constantinople in 1453 by Mehmed II, they decided to destroy the state of 
Trapezund. Uzun Hasan tried to stop them but had to ask for peace after Turks 
invaded his country. To the camp of Osmans at Yassichemen, he sent a delegation 
led by his mother Sara Khatun, a skilful diplomat, who was famous for her 
diplomatic talent far outside the state. She managed to conclude a peace treaty 
200 
 
The ruler talks to countiers. Tabriz. Agh 
Goyunlu State, Turkoman style. The height 
and constitution of the ruler`s body 
correspond to the appearance of Emperor 
Uzun Hasan described by contemporaries. 
Thus, it can be supposed that Uzun Hasan 
himself was engraved in this miniature.  
according to which Uzun Hasan was not to prevent Osmans from seizing 
Trapezund and Turks were to leave the territory of his state. 
To neutralize Uzun Hasan, Mehmed II took Agh Goyunlu's delegation and 
Uzun Hasan's mother to the assault of  Trapezund. On October 26, 1461 Trapezund 
was seized. Sara Khatun managed to persuade the Sultan that a portion of  
Trapezund's treasury should go to her daughter-in-law, Despina Khatun, and 
brought quite a big portion of Osman trophies back home. 
The state of Agh Goyunlu lost its traditional trade partner and access to the 
Black Sea. Later when Turks seized the state of Garaman, the state of Agh 
Goyunlu also lost access to the Mediterranean Sea. The tension between Osman 
Turkey and Agh Goyounlu grew stronger. Osmans constantly incited Jahan Shah 
Gara Goyunlu and Timurid Abu Sayid to fight against Uzun Hasan. 
As a result in 1467 Jahan Bey Gara Goyunlu led his troops from Tabriz 
towards Diyarbakir. Mehmed II promised to send his son Bayazid to support him. 
However, Uzun Hasan, having been informed of their plans, met Jahan Shah's 
army in Musha valley. Jahan Bey was defeated and had to retreat with his army. 
Uzun Hasan followed him and after surprise attack at his military camp in 
Erzinjan, totally defeated the army of 
Gara Goyunlu. Jahan Shah died. In a 
while, in the battle at Khoy Uzun 
Hasan totally defeated the troops of 
Jahan Shah's son Hasanali, aspiring to 
restore the state of Gara Goyunlu. 
Uzun Hasan sent the head of Jahan 
Shah to his ally - Abu Sayid, and the 
head of his son to Mehmed II. 
After the defeat of Gara 
Goyunlu, Timurid Abu-Sayid began 
preparing for a military campaign 
against Azerbaijan under pretense of 
his ally's protection. Sara Khatun who 
was sent to conclude a peace treaty 
couldn't dissuade him. Hoping to get 
Shirvanshah's support and assistance, 
Abu Sayid headed towards Shirvan. 
However,  Farrukh Yasar together with the ruler of Ardebil, Sheikh Heydar had 
joined Uzun Hasan, and the army of Abu Sayid was blockaded. Hunger started out 
in the troops of Abu Sayid. Uzun Hasan did not agree to the suggestion of Abu 
Sayid to start negotiations and having attacked Abu Sayid's army, totally defeated  
201 
 
War mask. 15th Century. Steel and iron, engraved. Agh Goyunlu State, Azerbaijan. 
 
  
202 
 
The Suicide of Shirin' from 
the royal Turkoman's 
Khamsa by Nizami. Tabriz, 
ca. 1505. Opaque 
watercolour, gold and ink on 
paper. Keir Collection. 
 
it. This battle is known in history as the battle at Mahmudabad. Hasanali was 
captured by Uzun Hasan's son, Ughurlu Mahammed and put to death. 
The state of Gara Goyunlu stopped existing 
and the state of the Timurids was seriously 
weakened. Uzun Hasan established an immense state 
covering Western Iran, Iraq, Armenia, Kurdistan, 
Diyarbakir, Eastern Georgia and other small 
formations. The capital of the state was in Tabriz. 
A new stage in the history of the state of Agh 
Goyunlu was achieved. The country had only one, 
nevertheless, very strong adversary Osman Turkey. 
Old methods were not applicable in the fight against 
it. It was necessary to strengthen the country econom-
ically, reorganize the army and find new strong allies. 
Uzun Hasan began implementing these objectives 
fully understanding their importance. 
First of all, in order to stimulate the economic 
development of the country, Uzun Hasan 
implemented a number of reforms that were reflected 
in the code of laws called "Ganun-nama". Later it became known as "The Laws of 
Hasan Padishah". As a result of the implementation of these laws, tax-collecting 
system was legitimatised, handicraft and trade revived. New sums were constantly 
added to Uzun Hasan's treasury and a mighty centralized state was established on 
the territory of Azerbaijan. 
Religious tolerance of Uzun Hasan favored the stabilization of the country, 
which was composed of various tribes. Being Sunni, Uzun Hasan, however, fully 
supported Shiites and Christians. He was married to a daughter of Trapezund's 
emperor, John IV (1429-1458), Despina Khatun, his sister was married to Shah 
Ismail's grandfather, Juneyd Sheikh who was a Shiite and his daughter married 
Sheikh Heydar, the son of Sheikh Juneyd. 
Uzun Hasan invited European specialists to modernize his army. His key 
goal was to establish a regular army. Specialists from Venice and other countries 
helped the state to develop the production of fire-weapons. Cannons and cannon-
balls were now produced in the country, however the amount produced was not 
sufficient. In addition, by various reasons, shipments of cannons from Western 
counties regularly failed. 
During the reign of Uzun Hasan, construction works were underway all 
over the country. A covered market called Geysariyya, a mosque with a university 
Nasriyya and many other public buildings were constructed in Tabriz. A big 
number of scholars worked at the court in Uzun Hasan's rich library. The best 
caihgraphers and miniature - artists of that time worked in numerous workshops of 
203 
 
Iron arm guard. Agh 
Goyunlu State. Second half  
of the 15th Century. 
 
Iron graves. Agh goyunlu. 15th  Century. 
 
the library. Later the library was expanded and enriched by the Safavid Shahs 
Ismail and Tahmasib. A ansemble of saz-players consisting of 98 ashugs (bards) 
was established at the court. 
After numerous splendid victories of Uzun 
Hasan. the authority of the state greatly increased. 
The military successes of the state of Agh Goyunlu 
amazed everybody. The names of  Uzun Hasan and 
his generals Mahammed Bakir Mirza, Mirza Yusif 
Khan, Ughurlu Mahammed, Zeynal Bey and many 
others were famous far outside Azerbaijan. Uzun 
Hasan was compared with Alexander the Great and 
Timur. According to Uzun Hasan's contemporary, 
Fazlullah ibn Ruzbikhan Khunji, "Khakan al-afak, 
sakhib-kiran, muin al-khilafa vas-saltan abu Nasr 
Hasan Bahadir Khan... left no room for the domain of 
Gara Goyunlu, that were only weeds on the field of 
the world-constructors. He gave a death drink to 
Jahan Shah's son, Hasanali, who lit his candle of 
leadership at the fire of his father's treasury. At the 
battle of Garabagh he turned into "a black garden" the 
jasmine garden of Sultan Abu Sa'id Timurid, who came from far-away Otrar and 
Qashgar with 100,000 soldiers wonderfully armored. Thus, in a short period of 
time he managed to expand the borders of his state from the Euphrates to the 
Amur-Darya and from Rum to the islands 
of Osman. Several times his horses 
trampled down the ground of unfaithful 
Georgians. He has carried his flag to the 
borders of  Rum and Syria. He has 
protected his land and roads, giving a new 
life to the symbols of  Islam. He has been 
generous and has constructed 400 places 
for worship". 
Europe placed big expectations on 
Uzun Hasan. He was the only one to stop Osmans from further invasion of Europe. 
According to the work of professor Yagub Mahmudov the state of Agh Goyunlu at 
that time had diplomatic links with the Venetian Republic, the Great Moscow 
County, the Golden Horde, Poland, Austria. Hungary, Czech, Germany, Burgundy 
Naples, Rodos, Cyprus, Cerman, Egypt, India and other countries. 
A big number of materials on the relationships between the state of Agh 
Goyunlu and the Venetian Republic have remained to our days. This republic had a 
204 
 
Khamse by Nizami. 1491. Tabriz. 
Agh Goyunlu State.  
regular embassy at the court of Uzun Hasan. Katerino Zeno, Barbaro and 
Ambrozio Kontarini served as ambassadors at different times. The Venetian Senate 
regularly discussed a question of Uzun Hasan's involvement in the fight against the 
Osman Empire. 
Uzun Hasan was ready to fight for access either to the Black or 
Mediterranean Sea but under condition that he would be provided with fire 
weapons and that the two states would start military actions simultaneously. Based 
on an agreement with Venice, fire weapons were supposed to be shipped to the 
territory of the Garaman state. However, Sultan Mehmed II conquered the 
remaining territory of this state and by doing so, cut Uzun Hasan from his 
European allies. In reply, in the spring 1472 Uzun 
Hasan led his army to Garaman. As result, after a 
number of  brilliant victories, the famous cavalry of 
Uzun Hasan delivered Garaman from Turks and got 
access to the Mediterranean Sea. Unfortunately, 
Uzun Hasan's efforts were useless. His allies did not 
only restrained from opening a second front; they 
did not supply the promised weapons. 
Being cut from the home front the army of 
Agh Goyunlu. led by Mirza Yusif Khan, 
experienced great  difficulties in their fight against a 
big army sent  to Garaman by Mehmed II. In the 
battle at Beyshchir. the army of Agh Goyunlu was 
defeated and Garaman was regained by Osmans. 
Having concluded an agreement with Venice 
on the shipment of weapons, in the middle of 1473 
Uzun Hasan again led his troops towards th 
Mediterranean Sea. This time. Mehmed II himself headed Osman troops. Trying to 
entice the Osman army to a place where his army would have a privileged position. 
Uzun Hasan moved deep inside the territory of the country. Turks carefully 
followed him. The Osman troops were moving to south along  the right bank of the 
Euphrates while Uzun Hasan with his army along the left one. For a long time 
nobody had the courage to cross the river. Finally on August 1, 1473 not far from 
Malatiya, a long awaited battle took place. This severe battle lasted for more than 
three hours and ended by Uzun Hasan's total victory. More than 50 thousand Turks 
died in the battle, 150 officers and 35 high ranking generals were captured. Right 
after the battle Mehmed II asked for truce, however Uzun Hasan decided to 
continue the campaign. Turks were not totally defeated and retreated along the 
right bank of the river. 
In nine days after the battle Uzun Hasan's general decided to cross the river 
and give Turks a final battle. An attempt to encircle the Osman army and prevent 
205 
 
them from using artillery seemed successful at the beginning. Turks were encircled 
and about to surrender. However, after an artful maneuver, Turks cut through and 
thanks to their artillery won the battle that lasted for almost eight hours. This battle 
is know as the battle at Orlugbeli. The victory cost the Turkish army a lot - 
Mehmed II decided to go back to Istanbul, and laid no territorial claims to Agh 
Goyunlu. 
Once again Uzun Hasan received no weapons that had been promised to 
him to rearm his soldiers. The problem of lack of arms could be sold neither by his 
sons nor his grandson Shah Ismail. The superiority of Turkish artillery was the 
main reason of Shah Ismail's defeat in the Chaldiran battle. 
Ambrosio Kontarini, a Venetian ambassador wrote the following: "The 
armor of Uzun Hasan's soldiers consists of a bow, a sword and a small silk-lined or 
wire shield. They do not use pears. High ranking officials wear quite good helmets 
and armors. Their horses are beautiful and of great endurance". 
Uzun Hasan realized that it would be difficult to defeat a well armed 
Turkish army and to create conditions under which his famous cavalry would play 
a leading part. Nevertheless, the great military talent of Uzun Hasan and his ability 
to manage his reserves, allowed him to win a number of splendid victories though 
experiencing lack of fire-arms and not having finished the reorganization of the 
army. After his defeat, Uzun Hasan resumed his diplomatic efforts of the 
establishment of anti-Turkish coalition. There were a lot of diplomats from 
numerous European countries at his court again. He promised to continue his 
military campaign against Osmans and demanded his allies to do the same. In 1477 
Uzun Hasan made his last intrusion to Georgia. From Georgia he returned with rich 
trophies and 5 thousand captives whom he gave to his retainers. At that time his 
son Ughurlu Mahammed, a talented general and a participant of the most brilliant 
victories held by Uzun Hasan, rebelled against his father. Pursued by his brother 
Sultan Khalil, he fled to Turkey. In Turkey he was accepted with a great honor by 
Mehmed II and married his daughter, Gebkharkhan Sultan. Ughurlu Mahammed 
continued his fight against his father, however soon he was captured and executed. 
Soon after that, on January 5, 1478 Uzun Hasan died. He was buried in Tabriz in 
the mosque of the Nasriyya complex which was later called "the Mosque of 
Padishah Hasan". 
Uzun Hasan's descendants did not manage to retain the might of the great 
empire established by him. Internal fights weakened the state and in 1499 it was 
divided into two parts. Azerbaijan and Armenia were ruled over by Alvend Mirza 
Agh Goyunlu, and Murad Padishah Agh Goyunlu became the ruler of Iran and 
Pars. In 1501 Shah Ismail defeated the army of Alvend Mirza, and later in 1503 the 
troops of  Murad Padishah. Thus, the state of Agh Goyunlu stopped existing. 
206 
 
The Poor Man and the Prince, 
ca. 1582. Sheikh Mahammed.  
 
A new state of the Safavids established by Shah Ismail was "a heir" of the 
Azeri-Turkic states of Gara Goyunlu and Agh Goyunlu and played a big role in the 
future development of Azeri literature, culture and art. 
 
A World Famous Sufi from Bakuvi 
 
Seyid Yahya Bakuvi 
 
In the 15th Century,on the territory of Azerba-
ijan there existed independent states of Gara Goyunlu 
and Agh Goyunlu, grounds for the formation of new 
Safavi state. Under Shirvanshahs, Ibrahim I and 
Halilullah,Shirvan prospered.Cities, trade and work-
manship flourished. This century- was very rich in 
outstanding scientists, physicians, poets and 
philosophers. Suffice it to mention names of: Jahan 
Shah Hagigi, Khalili, Nematullah Kishvari, Shukrulla 
Shirvani, Ali ul-Ala, Sheikh Ibrahim Gulshani, 
Qasim Anvar, Shams Maghribi,Yusif Miskuri. The 
said period of in the history is characterized by the 
development of opposition-anti orthodox philosophy 
and further development of philosophy of Sufizm. 
Eminent representative of the philosophy of 
the Sufizm and one of the founders of the Sufi order Khalvatiya was Seyid Yahya 
Bakuvi. He was born in Shemakha in the prosperous family, died in Baku in 1457 
and buried on the territory of a a Shirwanshah's Palace. Over his grave there was 
erected a mausoleum, which survived to our days. Full name of scholar was Seyid 
Yahya ibn as-Seyid Bakha ad-Din the ash-Shirvani ash-Shama-khi al-Bakuvi. In 
youth, Seyid Yahya was a follower of sheikh of Ardebil, Sadr ad-Din al-Khalvati, 
who headed Shirwan's branch of Sufi order Khalvatiyya. People say that healthy 
and imposing Seyid Yahya went in for game of chovghan. During a game, murid 
of Sheikh Khalvati, Sheikh Pirzade got acquainied with him. The future 
philosopher had a favourable impression on him, and his daughter married him. 
Being acquainted with the young man closer, sheikh adopted him as disaple. When 
sheikh died, Seyid Yahya, after unsuccessful attempt to head a sect, moved in 
Baku. In Baku, Seyid Yahya headed a mosque and university under it . 
Subsequently, he was invited to the court of Shirvanshah Halilullah, where 
he up to the end of his life used large authority as philosopher, scientist and mentor 
of princes. Seyid Yahya Bakuvi was the author of a number of widely known in 
East works on philosophy of Sufism, the most important of which were "Asrar at-
Talibin" (The Secret of Selectors of True" ) and "Sharh-i Gulshan-i Raz" ("The  
207 
 
Drunk Sufis. Timurid Miniature. 1490. 
 
  
208 
 
The Baku Citadel.The Shirvanshah's 
palace group. Seyid Yahya Bakuvi's 
mausoleum. 15th Century. 
 
 
Comments to "Gulshan-i Raz""). The last 
book is a commentary to famous works of one of 
theoreticians of sufism, Azerbaijanian 
philosopher Mahmud Shabustari. Besides, Seyid 
Yahya Bakuvi wrote a number of works on 
astronomy and history. 
Seyid Yahya Bakuvi had numerous 
followers of his doctrine. Among them there was 
his disciple Sadr ad-Din Ardebili, the well known 
theoretician of Sufism, Yusif Miskuri, who 
together with son of Sheikh Mahammed Amin 
preached Sufism doctrines in Guba. From 
different countries many followers came to 
Bakuvi, a common number of which exceeded 
ten thousand person. Many followers of Bakuvi 
lived in  the countries of the Middle East. Abbas 
Gulu Agha Bakikhanov in his "Gulistani Irem" 
wrote: " Seyid Yahya from Baku in the 8th 
Centuary of Higira was the main spiritual master on this territory, his name is 
known in many mysterious sciences..." As wrote Zumrud Khanum Guluzade: 
"Seyid Yahya was one of ideologists and chiefs of Sufi sects Khalvatiya, scored of 
supporters in Azerbaijan and, in 
particular, in Shirvan. Origin of 
Khalvatiyya goes back to order 
Suhravardiyya, set up and 
headed in the 11th-12th Cen-
turies by Azerbaijanian thinker 
Abu-i-Najib as-Suh-ravardi 
(1097-1168) and his nephew 
Shihab ad-Din Abu Khafs 
Omar Suhravardi (1145-1234 ). 
It is characteristic that after 
sheikh Abu Abdullah Khalvati, 
the name of whom was given to order, up to Bakuvi the order was headed by many 
representatives of Akhi (Akhi Mahammed, Akhi Izz ad-Din and other). This makes 
us to judge about social status of the order". As ancient chronicles noted in the end 
of his life Seyid Yahya Bakuvi during six months declined from food and finally 
passed away. 
 
 
 
209 
 
Jade  jug. Azerbaijan. 
First quarter of the 
16th Century. Inscribed 
with the name Shah 
Ismail (ca. 1501-1524).  
Nephrite, inlaid with 
gold. Topkapi  Saray 
Museum. Istanbul. 
Ashrefi. Gold. Tabriz. 
Sefevids. Ismail I. 
 
The Great Sheikh, Distinguished 
General, Eminent Statesman 
and Notable Poet 
 
Shah Ismail 
 
To understand the events of the background of the life of Shah Ismail Safavi 
- the great sheikh, distinguished general, eminent statesman, notable poet and 
generous patron of art - the narration should begin from beginning of the 14th 
Century. This is when Ismail's distant ancestor, sheikh 
Safi ad-Din (1252-1334) founded the Sufi order 
Safaviyya in his native Ardebil and declared himself the 
descendant of the seventh prophet Musa Kazim. 
When the order was founded, its members were 
mainly Sunnites. Gradually, the order became only Shi-
ites, and military activity began from Ismail's grandfa-
ther, sheikh Juneyd. The fame of the order and its mili-
tary success grew step by step. 
Shah Ismail's father Heydar received a revelation 
in a dream to introduce into practice for his followers a 
cap with a turban put round it with 12 creases 
symbolizing 12 prophets. In this connection, members of 
the order Safaviyya were named "Gizilbash", which 
means "redheads" in Azeri. In the narrow sense of the 
word, Gizilbash was comprehended as the name of Azer-
baijani-Turkic tribes, which formed the backbone of the order. Safavids, 
descendants of Sheikh Sefi-ad-Din, strove hard to come to power in Azerbaijan 
under the Shines' slogans. 
A well-known expert in Islam Petrushevskiy wrote about the order 
Safaviyya: "The order Safaviyya in the 15th Century turned into a military 
confraternity of Turk nomads as a kind of clergy-knight order. The political 
interests of sheikhs Juneyd and Geidar have alwaj predominating over the 
religious". 
By that time, the spheres of influence of the Safavids had extended. The 
descendants of the Great Sheikh were bent on the consolidation of Azerbaijan. 
However, the rulers of the new Azerbaijani states Agh Goyunlu and Gara Goyunlu 
stood in their way. The founder of Agh Goyunlu State, a wise politician and great 
general, Emperor Hasan Bey (Uzun Hasan) Agh Goyunlu, wanted to create further 
consolidation of the realm after its union with the Safavids. At first he married his 
sister Khadija Beyim to the sheikh Juneyd; then he married his daughter Marta 
(Alemshah Beyim), granddaughter of  Emperor Trapezund, to the Sheikh Heydar. 
210 
 
Ashrefi Gold. Tabriz. 
Sefevids. Ismail I 
Shah Ismail's pierced iron belt section, inlaid with 
gold.Tabriz. 1507/8.. Topkapi Saray Museum, 
Istanbul. 
 
In the reign of Uzun Hasan, the Agh Goyunlu state was converted into a powerful 
country. Safavids were temporarily compelled to put off the struggle for 
Azerbaijan and sent their warriors to the north ef Shirvan, 
which was populated mainly by Moslems-Sunnites. 
Ismail's grandfather, sheikh Juneyd, and father, 
Sheikh Heydar, were killed in the crusade against Daghestan 
and Shirvan in the battles against the Shirvanshahs. Uzun 
Hasan was frightened by the further strengthening of the 
Safavids and sent the detachment of his son Sultan Yakub 
Agh Goyunlu to support the Shirvanshahs in the last battle. 
After the death of the Sheikh Heydar, Ismail's uncle 
(on his mother's side), Sultan Yagub Agh Goyunlu, seized Ardebil and took the 
sheikh's sons, Sultan Ali, Ibrahim and Ismail, and their sister, Alemshah Beyim, as 
prisoners. At that time, Ismail was not yet two years old (Ismail was born on 17 
July 1487 in Ardebil). In 1490, Sultan Yagub's son, Baysonkur, came to power, but 
one year later his cousin, Rustam Padishah Agh Goyunlu, overthrew him. Looking 
for help, Baysonkur fled to Shirvanshah Farrukh Yasar, who was his father-in-law. 
Rustam Padishah released Sheikh Heydar's sons and asked Sultan Ali to 
help him in the war against Baysonkur. He brought Sultan Ali back to Ardebil, 
where he became the sheikh of the Safaviyya order. With the help of his murids 
(disciples) from the tribes of Qajar, Qaramanlu and Shamlu, Sultan Ali took part in 
the battle against Baysonkur. One 
medieval historian wrote, "Sultan Ali 
showed wonders of courage and 
bravery. Rustam Bey was frightened 
and appalled by the perfection of 
bravery and fortitude of Sultan Ali, so 
he decided to eradicate him. He sent 
Sultan Qajar and Husein Bey Ashkhani 
to Ardebil to seize Sultan Ali and his 
brothers. In the fight with them, Sultan Ali entered into battle and tasted the 
beverage of tormented death". 
In the summer of 1495, Sultan Ali encountered the forces of Agh Goyunlu 
in a battle near the small town of Shamasi. Against a total of 700 Gizilbashes in the 
battle were 4,000 warriors of Agh Goyunlu. 
Shortly before his death, Sultan Ali appointed Ismail as the successor of the 
order's sheikh. Thanks to the Gizilbashes devoted to him, the seven-year-old Ismail 
succeeded in hiding. First, Ismail was in concealment in Ardebil. But when the 
mass raids searching for the brothers began there, Ismail was removed to Resht, 
and then to the palace of Gilyan ruler Karkiy Mirza Ali. Here he stayed for about 6 
211 
 
Ardebil. 1683. Drawing by Kemphfer. 
The Wooden Sarcophagus. The 
mausoleum of Sheikh Juneyd Sefevi. 
16th Century. Khizry village near 
Baku.  
years, continuing his lay, non-civil and religious education under the guidance of 
well-known emirs and scientists. 
When Ismail came of age (13 
years old), he could start unaided 
political and religious activity. Ismail 
left Gilyan "with the hope for reign". 
He spent the winter with his 
detachments in Astara. Then he went 
to Erzinjan through Chukhursaad (a 
region around Irevan). Local sufis 
joined him on the way, and almost 
7,000 riders were under his banners 
when he arrived in Erzinjan. At the 
meeting of the Gizilbashes' 
commanders, an offer was accepted that the first campaign of the young sheikh 
should be aimed at Shirvan. By the end of 1500, Ismail had passed over the Kura 
river without meeting resistance anywhere in Shirvan, and entered Shemakha. Shir-
vanshah joined battle with Ismail beside the village of Jabani, near the fortress 
Gulistan. His army contained nearly 25,000 men, of whom 20,000 were horse 
troops. 
The most devoted and talented 
commanders of the Gizilbashes' tribes were at 
the head of Ismail's army. Most of them had 
taken part in the removal of Ismail from 
Ardebil and his education and stayed with him 
up to the end of his life. No problem was 
solved in the country without their 
participation. They are mentioned in the 
historical chronicles as "pillars of state". 
Among the "pillars of state" who took part in 
the battle near Jabani were Piri Bey Qajar, 
Abdin Bey Tavachu Shamlu, Husein Bey Lele Shamlu, Mahammed Bey Ustajlu, 
Ahmed Bey Sufioglu Ustajlu, Bayram Bey Qaramanlu, Kilij Bey Qaramanlu, 
Garaja Ilyas Bayburtlu, Ilyas Bey Khunuslu, Soltanshah Bey Afshar, Dana Bey 
Afshar, Khalil Bey Mukhrdar Afshar, Husein Bey Sufrechi Afshar, Piri Bey 
Parvanachi Afshar, Lele Mahammed Tekeli, Bekr Bey Jajirlu, Salman Bey Khazin 
Zulkadarlu. 
In this battle near Jabani, Ismail's small army won a decisive victory, 
capturing many prisoners and plentiful treasures. Shirvanshah Farrukh Yasar was 
killed, and the remains of the shirvanshahs' army hid in the fortress Gulistan.  
212 
 
Portret of Shah Ismail. Uffizi, Florence. 
  
213 
 
A battle of Shah Ismail I and 
Shirvanshah Farruh Yasar. 
1541. Tabriz. British Museum, 
London. 
 
 
Afterwards, Shah Ismail won many battles glorifying him as a great general. 
However, for his self-assertion from the military, political and religious points of 
view, the battle near Jabani was very important for  Ismail. It is just what 
motivated Azerbaijani miniaturise of that time to continually return to the theme o 
battle. 
Ismail besieged the Gulistan fortress, seized 
Baku and returned to Gulistan. Here he learned thai 
Azerbaijani ruler Alvend Mirza Agh Goyunlu had 
prepared a campaign against him. Ismail summoned 
his "pillars of state" and asked them, "What do you 
want: the throne of Azerbaijan or the fortress 
Gulistan?" They answered unanimously: "Azerbaijan. 
Tabriz must be won back from the 'heretics-Sunnites.'" 
With an immense amount of loot, including the 
Shirvanshah's treasury seized in Shirvan, Ismail's army 
moved to Nakhchivan, where Alvend Mirza was. In 
the middle of 1501, Alvend Mirza and his army of 
30,000 met Ismail's army of 7,000 horsemen on the 
plain of Sharur, near Nakhchivan. Here Ismail again 
achieved a brilliant victory with a small army. In order 
to preventa stampede, Alvend Mirza protected his 
army by a cat of camels chained to each other. But it was little help. Ismail showed 
extraordinary and outstanding general abilities and bravery in the fight. He himself 
killed one of the leading emirs of Agh Goyunlu, Kargichai Bey, with a sword. 
Other famous generals were also killed, and their heads were put on the spears of 
the Gizilbash riders, so as to frighten the enemies. 
Ismail again won large spoils of war, and the way to Tabriz had opened. In 
the autumn of 1501, Ismail marched into Tabriz and announced himself Shah and 
began to mint coins with his name and a Shiitc's faith symbol: "No god besides 
Allah, Mahammed - messenger of Allah, Ali - a friend of Allah". 
Shiism was declared the state religion and Azeri-Turkish became the 
language of the new Gizilbashes' state. In the period of flourishing of the Safavid's 
state, the large territory that stretched from Gerat to Baghdad spoke Turkish. 
One year later. Shah Ismail levied war against Murad Padishah Agh 
Goyunlu, the owner of Persian Iraq and Farse, trying to restore the Agh Goyunlu 
state. In the summer of 1503, Shah Ismail encountered the main forces of Murad 
Padishah in a battle near the town of Khamadan. Shah Ismail was placed in the 
center with his bodyguard. In the flanks, there were detachments of the "pillars of 
state". Kulafa Bey and Mansur Bey Kipchahi were in the vanguard. Qarapiri Bey 
Qajar and his detachment of nearly 1,500 horsemen were in reserve. The ruler of 
Qum Islamish Bey was in the vanguard of  Murad Padishah's army. When the 
214 
 
Five Youths in a Landscape. Divan 
{Collected Poems) by Khatai. Tabriz. 
1515-1520. Opaque watercolour and 
ink on paper. Arthur M. Sadder 
Gallery, Smithsonian Institution, 
Washington DC. 
 
armies met, Islamish Bey broke into the center of Ismail's army. At that time, 
Qarapiri Bey Qajar attacked him from the ambush and Shah Ismail personally led 
his horse regiment into attack. 
Islamish Bey's army was completely 
smashed, and he himself was taken prisoner. 
The result of this skirmish had an effect on the 
fate of the entire battle. The army of Agh 
Goyunlu was completely defeated and the Agh 
Goyunlu's state came to an end. Nothing else 
was left to Shah Ismail but to strengthen his 
positions in the conquered regions. 
That same year, Shah Ismail pursued 
Murad and seized Shiraz, Isfahan, Kashan and 
Qum. By 1508, Shah Ismail had taken 
possession of Arabian Iraq with Baghdad, 
Diyarbakir, Armenia and other regions and 
cities of the Middle East and Central Asia. In a 
short time, Shah Ismail created a great state 
stretching from the Uzbek state of Sheybani 
Khan to the frontiers of the Osman's empire. 
Sheybani Khan conquered Khorasan, 
which had strategic importance for Ismail's 
government. After this, Sheybani Khan proposed to seize Iran and Azerbaijan. In 
his letter to Shah Ismail, he wrote, "I'll gather the armies to the frontiers of Iran and 
Azerbaijan, and after they are seized, the time will arrive for capturing Arabian 
Iraq and Hijaz". As a reply, Shah Ismail went to Khorasan with a large army. 
The enemy army hid in the fortress Merv, but Shah Ismail devised a plan 
for drawing Sheybani Khan out of the fortress. His trick served its purpose. When 
the Uzbeks saw their enemies retiring, they came out of the fortress. On 2 
December 1510, near the village of Mahmudi, the armies of Shah Ismail and 
Sheybani went into battle. The cruel battle that continued all day ended in a 
decisive victory for Shah Ismail. Sheybani Khan tried to run and was killed by 
Ismail's soldiers. Sheybani Khan's head was cut off and presented to Shah Ismail. 
Afterwards, this skull was gilded and used to make a wine cup. 
After this battle, Shah Ismail became the owner of the cities of Gerat, Merv 
and Balkh. Also, all of Khorasan became his possession. The Safavids' state ranked 
as the strongest and richest state in this region. Its territory totaled about 2.8 
million square meters. The strengthening of the power of the Shiites' and 
Gizilbashes' state caused uneasiness among the Sunnites' of Turkey. Additionally, 
Shah Ismail carried out active Shiite agitation in Anatolia and the neighboring 
regions of the Osmans' empire. 
215 
 
Babur kissing the Hand of Shah Ismail I. ali Qulu Bey Jahadar. Commissioned by Shah Abbas II. ca. 
1665. Album. Opaque watercolour and gold on paper.  
Turkish Sultan Selim I, who mounted the throne in 1512, began 
preparations for war against Shah Ismail. He executed more than 40,000 Shiites 
living on Turkish territory, gathered and sent 200,000 troops to the Azerbaijan 
frontiers and declared a sacred war against the Safavids - enemies of the Moslem 
religion. The battle took place on 26 August 1514 in the small town of  Chaldiran. 
It went on with variable success for Shah Ismail, but the Osmans outnumbered 
Shah Ismail's forces and were greatly superior in quality. Shah Ismail had 
practically no artillery, whereas Sultan Selim had more than 300 guns. 
As always, Ismail showed wonders of courage. He defeated the well-known 
Ali Bey Malkug-oghlu. Shah Ismail struck a blow of such force that his sword split 
Ali Bey's helmet and head in two parts and reached his breast. At the height of the 
battle, Ismail forced his way to the artillery with a small detachment. At that time, 
his horse lost balance and fell down. The Osmans attacked him, but Soltanali 
Mirza Afshar, who bore a great resemblance to Shah Ismail, rescued him at this 
critical moment. He attracted the attention of the Osmans away from Shah Ismail 
by crying, "I am Shah". Shah Ismail got a horse and joined the battle, which went 
on for three days. The Turks won the battle. 
Chasing the wounded Ismail, Sultan Selim 1 seized Khoy, Marand and 
Tabriz. However, Sultan Selim I could not consolidate his position in Tabriz and 
retreated with a large amount of booty, including the throne and treasures of  Shah 
Ismail and Shirvanshah's treasure. Furthermore, Selim I captured many remarkable 
216 
 
Sandalwood and ivory sarcophagus 
of Shah Ismail. Ardebil. ca. 1524. 
men of art, craftsmen and handicraftsmen. In the future, they played a significant 
role in the development of craftsmanship in Turkey. 
One of the world's richest museums Istanbul's Top-Gapi and Military has 
exhibited unique articles of Azerbaijani applied art, which were seized during the 
Chaldiran battle. Such exhibits could not be found in Tabriz, Tehran or Baku. 
Among the prisoners were the wives of Shah 
Ismail, Behruza Khanum and Tajli Khanum, who were 
armored. Many armored women's corpses, as historians 
have reported, were found in the battlefield. Azerbaijani 
women admired the courage and patriotism of Selim I, 
who spared the fate of their husbands and ordered them 
to be buried with military honors. 
In 1515 a truce with Osman's Turkey 
was established. West Anatolia was passed 
into the hands of Turkey forever. For nearly 
100 years, only the incredible efforts of the 
Safavids could deter the Osmans from 
sequential occupations. In fact, in the entire 
near and Middle East, only Azerbaijanis, as 
brave fighters as Turk-Osmans, succeeded in 
resisting expansion and keeping independence 
from the Osmans. 
After the Chaldiran battle, Shah Ismail did not carry out any other military 
operations, with the exception of the campaigns against Shirvan and Georgia. He 
devoted himself wholly to the process of strengthening and developing his vast 
empire. Shah Ismail died in 1524. He was buried in Ardebil in the burial vault of 
the Safavids (Darul-Irshad). 
Shah Ismail had five sons: Rustam Mirza, who died young, Shah Tahmasib, 
Sam Mirza, Algas Mirza and Bahman Mirza. He also had five daughters: Khanum-
Khanum, Parikhan Khanum, Makhinbanu, Firangiz Khanum and Shahzeinab 
Khanum. 
Shah Ismail was a remarkable person. However, it is not known to 
everybody that the ruler of the Safavids' state, the Great Sheikh of the Sufi order of 
Safaviyya and one of the most gifted poets of his times, who wrote in Azeri under 
the pen-name Khatai, was also devoted to races and hunting, had a fancy for 
painting and calligraphy, played barbat and had a good voice. Remarkable 
scientists, astronomers, astrologers, historians, poets, artists, calligraphers, 
musicians and musicologists gathered in the palace of Shah Ismail. 
Shah Ismail began a new library on the base of the famous library that was 
founded by Uzun Hasan Agh Goyunlu in Tabriz. Scientists of Azerbaijan and 
neighboring countries made free use of this library. An atelier attached to this 
217 
 
library was a sort of Academy of Arts. The best artists, calligraphers and masters 
from all parts of the empire gathered here. They worked in this special atelier, 
where paper, cardboard, ink and dyes for painters were made. Here books were 
rewritten by calligraphers (khatatts), illustrated by painters (musavvirs), decorated 
by ornamentalists (nakkashes) and gilders (muzakhibs), and bounded by binders 
made from specialty cardboard (sakhafavims) and skin (mujelids). 
Talented youth, members of the Shah's family, and 
nobility who qualified took a training course in art in the 
library. The greatest Eastern artist and miniaturist, Kamal 
ad-Din Behzad, became one of the library's head. In the 
times of Shah Ismail, and then of Shah Tahmasib, 
distinguished calligraphers and miniaturists, including 
Mahmud Nishapuri, Agha Mirek, Sultan Mahammed, Mir 
Ali Khattat, Sadiq Bey Afshar and Mir Seyid Ali 
Musavvir, worked in the library. The worldwide 
Azerbaijani miniature school (Tabriz school and Safavi 
school) was formed here. 
Ismail created another famous library in Ardebil in the memorial complex 
of Sheikh Safi ad-Din. This library was enriched by gifts of pilgrims, as well as by 
copies of the rare books in their atelier. The library was enriched until 1828, when 
it was confiscated as a contribution after the Russian-Persian war. 
Shah Ismail paid great attention to music, and he looked after musicians, 
singers and musicologists in every way, continuing the traditions of the Tabriz 
ruler Agh Goyunlu (about 100 musicians and musicologists worked in the palace 
of Uzun Hasan). 
In Shah Ismail's palace, there were famous poets such as Hagigi. Shakhi, 
Sururi, Tufeyli and so on. They participated in the literature majlis (meeting, 
assembly), founded by Shah Ismail, who was one of the first poet-agitators. His 
poems were declared and sung by wandering dervishes and ashugs, spreading the 
political and religious views of Shah Ismail all over the world. Under the influence 
of Sheikh Ismail, the poet Khatai wrote poems rich in ideas, as well as very 
musical and rhythmical verses, which Shah Ismail used for his political purposes. 
Khatai was an outstanding lyric poet. His poem "Deh-name", written in fine 
Azeri, occupies a special place in Azerbaijani poetry. The verses devoted to the 
spring awakening of nature find their way to all modern readers of Azerbaijani 
poetry: 
 
Winter's shaken off, and spring arrives!  
Rosebuds waken, garden plot revives,  
Birds all trill in aching harmony.  
Love's a thrilling flame, disturbing me.  
Earth is dressed in furry, downy green.  
218 
 
Whispers press the silence once serene,  
Water rills lap at the cypress root, 
 And turtle-doves coo plaintive notes that flute.  
Nature's budding smiles on meadow-grass  
Flash through dew-drop miles like beads of glass.  
Seaward rain clouds... rare as precious stones,  
Wings a crane and circles azure zones – 
Taloned falcon brings it down to earth.  
To silken blossom, apple-trees give birth;  
Playful, flees the Moon from clouds in vain,  
April showers drench the earth with rain.  
Nightingales in trilling song repine,  
Tulip petals hoard the dew's sweet wine.  
Steppe-quails deep and bookish thoughts pursue.  
Turtledoves keep cooing, loo-a-loo...  
Drunk a mite are violets, unaware. 
 
One Venetian merchant mentioned in his journey notes meetings with Shah 
Ismail in Tabriz. Devoted to the person of Shah Ismail, the notes are very 
impressive: 
"He is 31 now. He is of medium height, very handsome and brave. He 
shaves his beard but he has a mustache. One can be fond of him as of a girl. He is 
left-handed and stronger than all his own emirs. 
As a rule, music plays during the training in bow shooting, and dancing 
girls loudly stamp their feet and sing songs devoted to Ismail. Every day he comes 
to Meydan (the central square of the town) for the competition in bow shooting 
among emirs, and he gives out presents to the winners. At that time, everybody 
plays, sings and dances in honour of Shah Ismail. This sufi is loved and respected 
like a god, especially by his warriors. Most of them go to battle without armor and 
rely on Shah Ismail, who will protect them". 
There is a legend about Shah Ismail's extraordinary strength. The Turkish 
Sultan heard that Shah Ismail cut enemies' cannon muzzles with his unusual sabre. 
The Sultan took interest in this sabre and asked Ismail to send it to him. The Sultan 
received the sabre but he didn't succeed in cutting the cannon muzzle, and he 
reproached Ismail for substituting the sabre. In reply to the Sultan's letter, Shah 
Ismail convinced him that the sabre was the same but that unfortunately the arm 
was not. 
Shah Ismail was devoted to hunting and fishing until the end of his life. He 
took pleasure in the battle with beasts of prey. When he was 12, he scored a victory 
over a big bear that was frightening all neighboring inhabitants. At the age of 19, 
he killed a lion in the region of Baghdad. He was fond of big hunts too. That is 
why, apparently, they were often shown in the miniatures made in the atelier of his 
library. Ismail's final hunting spree took place in the region of Belocan during his 
stay in Sheki, where he fell ill. Then he arrived in Tabriz, being at death's door. 
219 
 
Shah Ismail was popular among the people for ages. Legends were 
composed about him, mugams and tasnifs were called by his name, and his heroic 
deeds were described in Azerbaijani fairy-tales, novels, dramatic works and operas. 
The manuscripts of Ismail's verses are kept in many museums and libraries around 
the world. The oldest of them is "Divan", which was copied by the famous 
calligraphist Shah Mahmud Nishapuri in Shah Tahmasib I's palace 11 years after 
the poet's death. It is kept in Tashkent. Nearly 500 years after seizing Baku, Shah 
Ismail returned there once again in June 1993 as a sculpture. He succeeded in 
coming only to the slums of the working suburb of Baku called by his name, but 
that time without horse. 
 
Son of the Great Shah Ismail 
and Father of Shah Abbas 
the Great 
 
Shah Tahmasib 
 
History is illustrative that most medieval rulers of big states failed, for some 
reason or other, to remain in power for a long span of time. A brilliant exception to 
the rule proved to be the reign of Shah Ismail Safavi's elder son Shah Tahmasib, 
who ruled for 53 years. 
The future Shah was born in Tabriz in 1506. When he was 10, Shah Ismail 
dispatched the boy to Herat to serve as governor of  Khorasan. The young prince's 
tutor was Turkic Emir Khan Mausillu. Prior to 1506, Herat was the capital of  
Timurid, a state that was notable for its high artistic traditions. This played a 
formative role in the development of  Tahmasib's taste. Of decisive importance 
there was his acquaintance with the richest Timurid court library or its remains 
(note that Herat was conquered by Shah Ismail in 1510), which kept a huge 
quantity of finely illustrated books. He probably studied calligraphy and painting in 
the studio under the library, which may have been headed by the famous Behzad. 
He moved to Tabriz in 1521 and taught Tahmasib the elements of art. 
Following Emir Khan Mausillu's dismissal in 1522, Tahmasib returned to 
Tabriz, where he proceeded with his education. He studied artistic mastery and 
calligraphy in the studios under the famous Shah library, which was headed by the 
outstanding Azerbaijani miniaturist Sultan Mahammed. Shah Ismail had appointed 
Behzad to head the library (Kitabdar). Following the death of the founder of the 
Safavid dynasty, the new Shah Tahmasib I reappointed his teacher Sultan 
Mahammed as kitablar. A manuscript that has survived is of  "A Ball and a Stick" 
by Arifi, rewritten by Tahmasib I, who had an excellent hand himself. 
220 
 
Shah Tahmasib. 1520-1530. 
Agha Mirek. 
 
Since the young prince was just 10 years old when Shah Ismail died in 
1524, it was emirs of various Gizilbash tribes that seized power through regency. 
Having lost some of their privileges under Shah Ismail, Gizilbash emirs now tried 
to restore them under the young Shah. Div Sultan, chief of the Rumlu tribe, be-
came the first regent of the Shah with the consent of the chiefs of the Takallu and 
Dulkadar tribes. However, did not last long, and the tribe of Ustajlu entered into I 
struggle for regency. An internal war began in 152 
which ended in the defeat of Ustajlu. The next year 
chiefs of the same tribes made an unsuccessful attemp 
to come to power. As a result, the power shifted over 
Div Sultan from the tribe of Rumlu and his rival 
Chukha Sultan from the tribe of Takallu. 
However, Div Sultan failed to remain a regent, 
Chukha Sultan Takallu persuaded Shah Tahmasib 
Div Sultan was guilty of splitting the Gizilbash trib 
As a result, the 13-year-old Shah shot an arrow into 
the chest of Div Sultan, who had just entered the 
assembly hall, and ordered to execute him 
immediately. Chukha Sultan took a position of single 
regent and thus assumed extraordinary power, 
especially in the beginning of his reign. 
Shah Tahmasib spent the subsequent years in 
military campaigns against Baghdad and Herat and 
succeeded in raising his authority. Meanwhile, Chukha Sultans authority 
increasingly decreased, especially as emirs of his tribe Takallu betrayed cowardice 
during their march against Herat and on the battlefield. Chukha Sultan was gravely 
concerned about it, so he decided to seize power but failed and was killed. 
Shah's brother Sam Mirza's tutor, Husein Khan Shamlu, had distinguished 
himself in action against the Uzbeks. He was directly privy to overthrowing the re-
gent and replaced him. However, court intrigues had come to no end. Emirs were 
dissatisfied with the growing independence of Shah Tahmasib; therefore, they 
hatched plots against him. In 1533/34, Husein Khan Shamlu was charged with an 
attempt to poison Tahmasib and for maintaining ties with Turks, with the purpose 
of replacing the Shah with Sam Mirza, Husein Khan's former pupil. 
Shah 1 Hussein Khan's younger brother (on his father's side) was accused of 
collision with the Turks, who had invaded Azerbaijan in 1533/34. In response to 
this, Shah Tahmasib nominated Persian dignitary (not Gizilbash emir) Kadi Jahan 
as regent, while his brother Bahram Mirza took the leadership of the Shamlu tribe's 
army. In doing so, Shah Tahmasib made it clear that the period of Gizilbash 
regency was over and that the almost mature monarch was at the head of absolute 
power. 
221 
 
While Shah Tahmasib was struggling for power against his internal enemies 
and the tribe of Takallu in Azerbaijan (Ulam Bey Takallu), who plundered Tabriz 
in 1531, Uzbeks headed by Ubeid Khan had invaded Khorasan five times (1514, 
1525/26, twice in 1528 and 1531/32). The struggle for Herat ceased only after the 
death of Ubeid Khan in 1559. While at Herat in 1534, the Shah was informed that a 
strong army of 100,000, headed by Ottoman Sultan Suleyman and assisted by 
Ulam Bey Takallu, had invaded and seized Tabriz and  were moving toward 
Baghdad. At forced march, Shah Tahmasib moved from Khorasan via Iran to face 
the Turks. 
Of interest was the fact that Shah Tahmasib tried in every possible way to 
drag out the confrontation with the Turks. By doing so, he created favourable 
conditions for his soldiers to rest and pull themselves together to thus avoid 
unnecessary casualties. In early November 1534, not far from the former capital of 
llkhans, Sultaniya, the army of Sultan Suleyman was caught in a terrible snow-
storm, lost their provisions and ammunition and had to retreat without action. 
By 1535, all the occupied territories had been fully returned. Shah 
Tahmasib declined from pursuing the Turks, which gave many historians occasion 
to put the blame on him for subsequent developments. The question is that Sultan 
Suleyman, having wintered in Baghdad, again attacked Tabriz. Using the so-called 
tactics of scorched earth, when all residents of Tabriz and its environs were 
evacuated deep in the heart of the country, their crops and water sources were 
destroyed. Shah Tahmasib had to retreat to Sultaniya. The Turks were forced to 
abandon Azerbaijan under the onslaught of Tahmasib' army. 
During the incessant passive and defensive wars against the Uzbeks and 
Turks, Shah Tahmasib proved his worth as a brave and physically sturdy warrior, 
capable of leading troops and inspiring fear on the enemy. He also proved a 
prudent tactician and strategist, well versed with the unfortunate experience of the 
Chaldiran battle of Shah Ismail. Now that the Turks had gone, the time was ripe for 
launching activity, and like his father, he began with Shirvan. 
 
I will not follow my father. This enemy (Ottoman Sultan) is very strong. 
I will not stand face to face to him but I will act like Hasan Padishah (Uzun 
Hasan Bayandur Agh Goyunlu) versus Abu Said when he was whirling 
around him and did not let people from that army out and into it. I will this 
way.                                                                                                                                                         
Shah Tahmasib 
 
Concurrently with the advent of Tahmasib to powf the activity of 
Shirvanshah Halilullah II (1524-1535) began in Safavid-subordinated Shirvan. 
Both maintained good relations. Of no small importance in this matter was the role 
of Shah Tahmasib's sister Peri Khanum, wife of Shirvanshah  Halilullah.  
222 
 
The Shah's Hunt. Tabriz. Early 
16th Century St. Petersburg. SPL. 
Dorn. 
 
However, in Halilullah died with no heir to succeed to his power. The Shirvan  
nobility elevated his near relative, young Sheikhshah Shahruh to the throne (1535-
1538) and actually exercised power in the country. It was the arbitrariness of 
Shirvan emirs that spread discord in the country, and Shah Tahmasib availed 
himself of the situation. Historical chronicles drop hints that according to the 
Shah's secret instructions, his sister Peri Khanum instigated troublemakers. 
In 1538/39, he sent an army headed by 
native brother Algas Mirza to conquer Shirvan. 
In several months. Algas Mirza succeeded in 
seizing all of Shirvan. The last stronghold of the 
Shirvanians - the fortress of Gulistan, which was 
to be surrendered at the discretion of the winner - 
was surrendered to Shah Tahmasib personally 
after the four-month siege. The latter arrived at 
the fortress from Merand and handed it over to 
Shirvanshah Shahruh, who in a year was secretly 
executed in Tabriz. 
During the short span of Safavid rule, a 
huge treasury of Shirvanshahs had for the second 
time been brought to Tabriz. Shah Tahmasib 
appointed Algas Mirza as senior ruler - 
Beylarbey of Shirvan, so the state of Shirvanshahs 
ceased to exist independently and turned into an 
ordinary Beylarbey of Safavid state. Next came 
Shirvan's neighbour Georgia. In 1540/41, Shah Tahmasib made his first march to 
Georgia. Tahmasib's army returned from Georgia with rich captured materials and 
a lot of captives - men, women and children. 
In 1546/47, Beylarbey of Shirvan Algas Mirza made an attempt to announce 
Shirvan an independent state. Shah Tahmasib immediately mustered troops to 
advance northward to keep down his brother's strength. The frightened Algas 
Mirza sent his mother Khanbeyim Khanum and elder son Ahmad to ask for the 
Shah's pardon. Having taken his brother on trust, the Shah marched toward 
Georgia; however, he soon after learnt that Algas Mirza, despite his assertions, 
began minting coins on his behalf as independent ruler of Shirvan. Shah Tahmasib 
at once sent troops, headed by Ibrahim Khan Zulkadar, Gekcha Sultan Qajar and 
Shahverdi Khan Ziyad-oghlu Qajar, to the region. The prince sustained a defeat 
and had to flee to Istanbul via Crimea to ask Sultan Suleyman for military support 
to deal with his brother. 
Meanwhile, Shah Tahmasib nominated his young son Ismail Mirza as 
Beylarbey of Shirvan, and Gekcha Sultan Qajar as his tutor. In the spring of 1548, 
Turkish troops headed by Algas Mirza invaded Azerbaijan and seized and ravaged 
223 
 
Chihil  Satun. The Royal Pavilion. Part of Shah 
Tahmasib's new palace complex. 1556. Qazwin. Iran. 
 
Tabriz. However, they had to retreat because of  lack of provisions and water. It 
was the so-called scorched earth tactics that enabled Shah Tahmasib to accomplish 
his goal. Meanwhile, Algas Mirza laid siege to Khamadan, holding the wives and 
children of his younger brother Bahram Mirza as hostages. Note that Algas Mirza 
failed to enlist support both in the country and abroad (Turks); soon after he was 
caught and executed. Following the results of confrontation, Shah Tahmasib 
decided to transfer the capital of the state to Qazwin, a little farther from the 
militant Turks. 
In 1551, Shah Tahmasib took the field against Georgia and again returned 
with rich spoils. Concurrently, he annexed the Sheki region and appointed Toygun 
Bey Qajar as ruler of the region. 
Two years later, the Turks 
invaded the boundaries of the 
Safavid Empire, this time towards 
the Caucasus. Again the scorched 
earth tactics yielded its results: 
weakened by hard marches via 
lifeless territories, the Turks were 
defeated by Tahmasib's second son 
Ismail Mirza and had to retreat 
towards Erzerum. 
Immediately after that, 
Sultan Suleyman at the head of big 
army marched toward Garabagh. 
This time, the Turkish army reached Nakhchivan absolutely wasted and finally had 
to turn to Erzerum. The war came to an end with no peace treaty concluded. 
Considering the superior forces and equipment of the Ottoman army, the peace 
treaty entered into between Turkey and Shah Tahmasib on 29 May 1555 in 
Amasiye proved very advantageous for the Safavid Shah, especially as the treaty 
was complied with up to the final days of Shah Tahmasib and Sultan Suleyman. 
Following the conclusion of the peace treaty, Shah Tahmasib move the 
Safavid capital to Qazwin and gradually lost his test for battle. It was no mere 
coincidence that the Shah took no part in suppressing the Turkmen in 1554 and 
1556, the Gilyans in 1567-1571 and the ever-restless Uzbeks.  From now on, the 
Shah was engaged in complying with behavior standards as forth in Shiism. During 
his Georgian campaigns, he banned attending taverns,   gambling  dens and 
brothels. Furthermore, he declined from using alcoholic drinks and prohibited 
depicting living thing. The famous artistic studio of Shah Tahmasib with its 
glorious manuscript  masterpieces, such as "Shahnama" by Firdousi and "Khamsa" 
by Nizami, which had been created by outstanding painters Sultan Mahammed, 
Agha Mirek, Mir Seyid Ali, Mirza Ali and Muzaffar Ali, ceased to operate. 
224 
 
The Shah focused on his family matters. Beginning in 1555, seven sons 
from six wives were born, not to mention daughters. By the end of his life, he had 
nine sons: Mahammed Mirza, Ismail Mirza (Shah Ismail II), Suleyman Mirza, 
Mahmud Mirza, Ahmad Mirza. Imam Gulu Mirza, Mustafa Mirza and Ali Mirza. 
Shah Tahmasib died during the 54th year of his reign in 1576. He was a 
gifted and highly educated person. Abbas Gulu Bakikhanov wrote, "He was a 
strong willed person, who liked justice". Guided by state interests, HE could be 
cruel and merciless even to his own people From this standpoint, his relations with 
native brothers and sons-successors were of interest. As has been noted above, his 
brother on his father's side, Algas Mirza, revolted against him and was executed. 
Another brother on his father's side, Sam Mirza, also disobeyed the Shah but was 
pardoned, departed from policy and lived about 10 years in literary work. 
Subsequently, in 1561/62 Sam Mirza was again involved in political intrigues and 
as a result, he was shut up, under the Shah's order, in the fortress Kakhkakha where 
died in 1566/67. 
Tahmasib's brother Bahram Mirza was absolutely faithful to the Shah and 
enjoyed his support and love. Shah Tahmasib appointed Bahrain Mirza ruler of 
Khorasan, Khamadan and Lahijan, and entrusted him with carrying on important 
military campaigns. What is more, he married one of his daughters to Bahram's 
son. Moreover, they had much in common regarding the arts, especially in regards 
to the collection of works of art. Both patronized painters, calligraphers, poets and 
musicians. 
Tahmasib's elder son, half-blind Mahammed Hudabende, was first ruler of 
Khorasan, then of Shiraz. Despite Hudabende's loyalty, one of his sons was kept in 
Qazwin as hostage. Another one of the Shah's son, Ismail (future Shah Ismail II), 
who replaced Algas Mirza in Shirvan, held out for just six years, after which he 
was imprisoned in the said fortress of Kakhkakh. Notable for his talent as 
commander, Ismail won several brilliant victories. Gekcha Sultan Qajar was his 
educator and tutor. The prince started his political career when he was 14 years old. 
As has been stated above, he was appointed Beylarbey of Shirvan in 1548 to 
substitute the rebellious Alkas Mirza. It was in Shirvan that he first proved his 
worth as warrior and commander. He was also skilful in combating Turks at a 
mature age. His unexpected tactical decisions and bold sorties inspired fear in the 
Turks, who named him "Dali Ismail". His exploits were legendary and frequently 
exaggerated; yet, his popularity among Gizilbash nobility increasingly rose. 
All of these facts put Tahmasib out. Not without reason, Tahmasib was 
apprehensive of Ismail Mirza's temptation to seize the Shah's throne, especially as 
the legitimate successor to the throne, his elder son, half-blind Mahammed Mirza, 
was not able to compete with Ismail because of his serious physical defect. In the 
end, Ismail Mirza was imprisoned in the unassailable fortress of Kakhkakh 
225 
 
A Camel. Sultan Mahammed (?). 16th Century. 
 
between Tabriz and Ardebil, on Mt. Savalan. He stayed there for 19 years, losing 
faith in humanity and justice. 
Many biographers are prone to think that Shah Tahmasib did not execute 
Ismail Mirza, as he believed him to be the most deserved and adequate pretender to 
the Shah's throne. However, his hopes did not come true. A person embittered by 
everything came out of the fortress. Besides Ismail Mirza, there was another pre-
tender to the throne, Heydar Mirza, born of a Georgian concubine and Shah 
Tahmasib's right-hand man during his last years. 
However, Ismail Mirza's supporters seized the Shah's palace on the day of 
the Shah's death, 14 May 1576. These supporters were headed by the Shah's 
daughter from a Circassian woman, Peri Khanum, Husein Gulu Khalife from the 
tribe of Rumlu, and other Circassians. They put to death Heydar Mirza and his 
supporters, mainly from the tribe of  Ustajlu. They also executed Georgian Guards, 
as well as the Shah's doctor, charging him with poisoning Shah Tahmasib. The 
prince was crowned under the name Shah Ismail II on 22 August 1576. 
 
Like the Light of the Sun 
 
Ustad Sultan Mahammad 
 
Most of the world's famous 
museums, libraries and private 
collections preserve manuscripts 
executed at the royal library's 
atelier instituted by Shah Ismail, the 
first Safavi Shah in the capital of 
Azerbaijan, Tabriz. These 
manuscripts were copied and 
illustrated by outstanding 
Azerbaijani calligraphers and 
miniaturists. The majority of these 
miniatures are known not only to 
experts, but also to a wide range of 
painting lovers. 
The Safavi School of Miniature, which is frequently defined as the Tabriz 
School (the Tabriz School was based much earlier), brought immortal glory to 
Azerbaijani art. This school of miniature exerted an appreciable influence on the 
development of miniatures in Turkey and India, as well as some methods of 
coloring used by French impressionists. The Tabriz School of Miniature was 
headed by its founder and most outstanding representative, Ustad Sultan 
Mahammed, who was a native of Tabriz. The entire period of the development of 
226 
 
Portrait of Shah Tahmasib 
I with a Falcon. Sultan 
Mahammed. 16th Century. 
 
Near East painting was connected with his name, just as it was with the name of 
Behzad. While both prominent artists embodied the highest achievements in 
Oriental painting of the 16th Century, Sultan Mahammed personalized all art 
tendencies of the Tabriz School, during the epoch of its utmost flowering. 
As is the case with several outstanding 
representatives of science and art of the East, the 
biographical data about Sultan Mahammed is scant. He 
was born in approximately 1490 and died in the middle 
of the 16th century. Kerim Kerimov, a well-known 
connoisseur of Sultan Mahammed's work, focuses on 
the scanty information about medieval authors. Among 
the manuscripts he found was "Khalat-e Hunarvaran", 
written by Dust Mahammed in 1544. 
Further, the author quotes "Gulistani honar dar 
khalat-i khatatan ve nakkashan", written by Gazi 
Ahmed in 1596: 
"Ustad Mahammed came from the capital city of 
Tabriz. When Ustad Behzad arrived in Iraq from Herat, 
Ustad Sultan Mahammed was in the Shah's Kitabkhane 
(library), whose tenement was paradise, and whose 
abode was paradisiacal gardens. Ustad Sultan Maham-
med represented Gizilbashes better than others. Death 
caught him in the capital city of Tabriz". 
Iskender Munshi, a well-known historian of the beginning of the 17th 
Century, said, "His majesty Shah Tahmasib was a pupil of the famous painter 
Ustad Sultan Mahammed". He then noted: "He (Shah Tahmasib) settled 
incomparable experts in art in the well equipped library. Among them were such 
masters as Ustad Behzad and Sultan Mahammed, who reached their top and gained 
wide popularity for the delicacy of their brush". It is possible to find out 
considerably more about Sultan Mahammed, or rather about his artistic ingenuity, 
from the analysis of his rich creativity. 
The magnificent court library, as referred to above, was similar to a modern 
art academy. The library was continuously filled not only with books from special 
buyers, but also with ones manufactured directly to the librariy's atelier. For this 
reason, the best calligraphers, miniaturists, experts in manufacturing, decorating 
and binding, manufacturers of inks and paints and experts in the preparation of 
paper were invited. The art of making the manuscripts, as A.Qaziev pointed out, 
was usually connected with the creation of calligraphers, miniaturists and 
bookbinders. Their activity was interconnected and complied with the aims of the 
manuscript and the status of the customer. Apart from this, the library was a good  
  
227 
 
Hunting. The left side of the miniature is from Golden Chain by Jami. 
Sultan Mahammed. 1549. SPL, St. Petersburg. 
 
  
228 
 
A Youth Reading a Book. 
Sultan Mahammed. 16th 
Century. 
 
school, where young painters, calligraphers and masters of various specialties 
trained. 
After Shah Ismail destroyed the power of Uzbeg ruler Shebbany Khan, he 
captured Herat in 1510 and many painters moved to Tabriz. Later, as Beisil Gray 
assumed, in 1521 the great Behzad came from Herat, having been invited by Shah 
Ismail. Masters from Isfahan, Qazwin and other cities of 
Iran worked there. At that time, Sultan Mahammed had 
already become the head of the library's atelier. He was 
the chief painter of this library and he taught painting to 
Prince Tahmasib. Within a year of Behzad's arrival in 
Tabriz, Shah Ismail nominated him as Kitabdar (curator 
of books) and chief inspector of arts by a special decree. 
However, after the death of Shah Ismail, his son Shah 
Tahmasib nominated Sultan Mahammed to hold the post. 
Budagh Qazwini (1530-1556) wrote that well-
known calligraphers and miniaturists had been working 
on the famous manuscript of "Shah-nama" at the palace 
atelier for 30 years. Thus, many manuscripts executed 
during Shah Tahmasib's reign dated back to Shah Ismail, 
before Behzad's arrival in Tabriz. In addition to 
miniatures with which the manuscripts were illustrated, 
Sultan Mahammed created a number of portraits and 
compositions on separate sheets. 
During the reviewed period, the court atelier was engaged not only in 
creating manuscripts, but also in manufacturing wares from ceramics and metals, 
carpets and silk fabrics. Rasim Effendy, a prominent expert in Azerbaijani deco-
rative and applied arts, said that Sultan Mahammed could have been the author of 
drawings that are included in some artistically outstanding exhibits kept at some of 
the world's museums. Sultan Mahammed's miniatures, illustrating various manu-
scripts as well as miniatures on separate sheets, are kept at the best museums in the 
world and private collections. At present, the best drawings of the master are kept 
at museums such as the Metropolitan Museum in New-York ("Shah-nama", 1573), 
the British Museum in London ("Hamsa" by Nizami, 1539-1543), and the Fogg Art 
Museum in Cambridge ("Divan" by Hafiz). 
"Khamsa" by Nizami, which was specially created for Shah Tahmasib I, is 
now considered by experts to be a supreme achievement in the history of book art. 
Sultan Mahammed shared the glory of the creation of such a masterpiece with the 
outstanding calligrapher Shah Mahmud Nishapuri and miniature-painters of the 
same atelier, Aqa Miraq, Mir Musavvir, Mir Seyid Ali, Mirza Ali and Muzaffar 
Ali. 
  
229 
 
Sultan Sanjar and an Old Woman. Khamsa, by Nizami. 
1539-1543. Painted by Sultan Mahammed.Tabriz. British Museum. London. 
 
  
230 
 
TahmuresDefeats the Divs (detail). 
Shahnama, by Firdowsi. Sultan 
Mahammed. 1520-1530. The 
Metropolitan Museum of Art. New 
York. 
 
 
There are no more than four miniatures of Sultan Mahammed:  "Khosrov  
Watching  Shirin   Bathing", "Buhram Gur Hunting the Lion", "Ascension of a 
Prophet" and "Sultan Sunjar and the Old Woman". However, they are enough to 
immortalize this manuscript. 
In contrast to Sultan Mahammed's time, 
many art critics from various countries are 
presently examining his creation. All scholars 
recognize Sultan Mahammed as the head of the 
Tabriz School of Miniature, as an outstanding 
miniaturist of the East and as the founder of the 
new trend in miniature painting of the 16th 
Century. Some of them regard Sultan Mahammed 
as an even more famous painter than Behzad. All 
three manuscripts illustrated by Sultan 
Mahammed - "Divan" by Khafiz, "Shah-nama" by 
Firdowsi and "Hamsa" by Nizami Ganjavi - were 
welcomed by them as masterpieces of medieval 
book art. Among these art critics are F. Martin, F. 
Shults, K. Keri-mov, A. Qaziev, G. Marteo. 
A.Vever, E. Qunel, 1. Schukin, B. Robinson and 
B. Vaimern. 
Sultan Mahammed, creator of Tabriz's 
miniature-painting school of the 16th Century, 
naturally had many pupils and followers. 
Therefore, he was named "Ustad". Among Sultan 
Mahammed's numerous pupils were his sons Mirza Ali and Mahammedi Bey, his 
nephews Mir Zeynal abd-Din and Mir Seyid Ali, Muzaffar Ali and Shah-
Mahammed. Each of the mentioned painters was, to a certain degree, great and 
made a valuable contribution to the further development of Azerbaijani miniature. 
Sultan Mahammed's pupils and painters of his school spread the tradition of the 
Tabriz Miniature School throughout the East. Some of these painters left for 
Turkey and India. Among them, Tabriz miniaturist Shah Qulu deserves special 
attention. He played a noticeable role in the development of miniature art in 
Turkey. Also, Mir Seyid Ali should be recognized, as he worked for a long time at 
the court of the Great Mughal Emperors of Humayun and Aqbar and left an 
appreciable vestige in the art of book miniature of India. 
 
 
 
 
231 
 
The Cavalier Lifting Clouds of Dust 
 
Garapiri bey Qajar 
 
Garapiri Bey Qajar was one of the most talented commanders of Shah 
Ismail. For his courage, resoluteness and lightning reaction, Garapiri Bey Qajar 
was nicknamed "Toz Goparan", which in Azeri literally means "The Cavalier 
Lifting Clouds Of Dust". Garapiri Bey played an appreciable role in founding the 
Safavi Empire. Shah Ismail's father Heydar had three sons, Sultan Ali, Ibrahim and 
Ismail. All his life Garapiri Bey mingled with these 
brothers. At first, he patronized and educated them; then 
he served them faithfully. 
In the 15th Century, the persistent struggle for 
power between the successors of Timur and the 
Padishahs of the Agh Goyunlu and Gara Goyunlu states 
was waged in Azerbaijan. During this struggle, one of 
the most influential rulers of Agh Goyunlu's state, Uzun 
Hasan, asked for support from the governor of Ardebil 
and the head of the militarized Sufi order Safaviyya, Sheikh Juneyd. 
He gave his sister, Khadija Beyim, in marriage to him. Then his daughter, 
Teodora-Alimshah Beyim (Tra-pezund Emperor Qomnen's granddaughter), 
married Sheikh Juneyd's son, Sheikh Heydar. After the premature death of Sheikh 
Heydar during the Shirvan campaign, an increased military power and the spiritual 
authority of the Safavids frightened Uzun Hasan's succsessor and son, Yagub Bey 
Agh Goyunlu. He therefore seized Ardebil and captured Sheikh Heydar's children. 
In 1490, Uzun Hasan's son Baysonqur came to power, but within in a year 
his cousin, Rustam Agh Goyunlu, overthrew him. Baysonqur, who was married to 
one of Shirvanshah Farruh Yassar's daughter, fled to Shirvan. 
After seizing power, Rustam released Sheikh Heydar's children. He gave 
Ardebil to them and asked the oldest son, Sultan Ali, to become Sheikh of the 
order Safaviyya to help him combat Baysonqur and Shirvanshah. 
Sultan Ali agreed to partake in the campaign and the name Garapiri Bey is 
first mentioned as a commander in connection with the battle of Rustam Agh 
Goyunlu against Baysonqur, in Shirvan. Rustam Agh Goyunlu joined Sultan Ali's 
troops to his army. The commander of one such group of Sultan Ali was Garapiri 
Bey Qajar. 
Sultan Ali and his troops demonstrated unusual daring and bravery. 
Baysonqur suffered a defeat. Sultan Ali displayed his versatile mind, courage and 
talent of commander, and there he signed his own death sentence. 
In 1494, Sultan Ali fell in action against Rustam. Before Sultan Ali's death, 
he had time to name his younger brother, Ismail, Sheikh of the order Safaviyya. 
232 
 
Iskandar captures a demon  in the battle 
against the Russians. 1525. British 
Museum. 
 
Before attaining his majority, Ismail had to be sheltered from Rustam Shah 
by numerous trustees and supporters. Garapiri was beside him the entire time. At 
thirteen, Ismail began tireless activity. Garapiri Bey, as well as his other trustees, 
supported him in every possible way. 
The first military campaign was decided to be led against Shirvanshah 
Farruh Yassar in Shirvan. There, in an attempt to subdue Shirvan, Ismail's father 
and grandfather perished; the young Sheikh saw this as further pretext for his 
campaign. 
At the end of 1500, near the citadel of 
Gulistan, a famous battle took place that 
determined Ismail's fate and the future of the 
Safavid Empire. The leaders of the Gizilbash 
tribes participated in the battle. They were 
faithful to Ismail and were hereinafter 
nicknamed the "Columns of Powe". Among 
the "Columns of Power" was Garapiri Bey, 
who did everything to raise Ismail as a 
warrior and ruler, and who applied 
maximum effort for Ismail's victory in the 
battle. The considerably superior forces of 
Shirvanshah suffered a shattering defeat in 
the battle with a commander who was under 
14. 
Shirvanians who survived were 
locked in the citadel of Gulistan. Ismail 
beleaguered Gulistan after a successful raid 
on Baku. This time he received disturbing news from Tabriz and invoked his 
"Columns of Power", including Garapiri Bey, for council. He asked them only one 
question: "What do you want, the throne of Azerbaijan or the citadel of Gulistan?" 
The answer was unanimous: "Azerbaijan". Tabriz was to be purged from the 
heretics of Agh Goyunlu. 
This time Alvend Mirza Agh Goyunlu, ruler of Azerbaijan, directed his 
army towards Ismail and arrived in Nakhchivan. Garapiri Bey and llyas Bey 
Khalvagi-oghlu acted as an advance guard of Ismail's army and moved in on 
Nakhchivan. They overwhelmed the troops, sent for Ismail and opened a way to 
Nakhchivan. 
In mid-1501 Alvend and his army of 30,000 troops met 7,000 troops of 
Ismail on the plains of Sharur. Ismail took his place in the centre of the army, and 
Garapiri Bey Qajar was placed on one of its flanks. Ismail's victory was complete; 
then he entered Tabriz with flying colours and was crowned on the Shah's throne 
of Azerbaijan. 
233 
 
Portrait of Fizuli. Azim 
Azimzade. Begining of the 
20th Century. Baku. 
Museum of Fine Art. Baku. 
 
That year Ismail moved his army to conquer Iraq. Shah Ismail's army and 
the ruler of Iraq, Sultan Murad, met in Hamadan on June 21, 1503. Garapiri Bey 
was kept in reserve with 1,500 soldiers. The governor of Qum, Islamish Bey, was 
in the advance guard of Sultan Murad's army. He stopped Gizilbash
`
s attack and 
rushed into the centre of their army, where Shah Ismail was. 
Shah Ismail's life and the fate of the battle were under threat. Garapiri Bey 
entered into battle in an ambush, and the troops of Ismail Bey were completely 
defeated, and taken into captivity. Demoralized as a result of this attack, Sultan 
Murad's army was completely annihilated and Shah Ismail invaded Persian Iraq 
and Phars. 
Even the brief  information about the commander and warrior Garapiri Bey 
Qajar, nicknamed "Toz Goparan", is an eloquent testimony to his prominent 
abilities and his great role in the fate of Shah Ismail and in the formation of the 
Safavid Empire. 
 
The Titan of all 
Turkic Poetry 
 
Mahammad Fizuli 
 
Fizuli is one of the most outstanding poets and thinkers of Azerbaijan. He 
wrote his poetic and philosophical works in Azerbaijani, Persian and Arabic, which 
have made them extremely popular with the nations of 
the Near and Middle East. 
Fizuli's numerous gazals and his famous poem 
"Leyli and Mejnun" take a special place in the life of 
the people of Azerbaijan. For many centuries, Fizuli's 
deep, thought provoking and poetically rhythmical 
gazals have been the foundation of the repertoire of 
khananda, singers of classical Azerbaijani mughams. 
Many Azerbaijanis love such gazals as "Who loves his 
soul for the sake of his beloved, believe me, does love 
her", "I am richer than Mejnun with my passionate 
love", and "I weep like a delicate reed, and passionate 
is my cry...", even before going to school. 
Mahammed ibn Suleyman Fizuli came from the 
famous Azeri-Turkic family of Bayat and was born in 
approximately 1493/94. The date of the poet's death is 
more exact, as it is known that he died during the bubonic plague in Baghdad in 
1555/56. In many tazkira, Fizuli is mentioned under the name of Baghdadi. How-
234 
 
"Benq and Bade". Qasan-pasha. 1599-1600. 
Baghdad. Dresden State Library. 
ever, he was not born in Baghdad itself, but in the nearby town of Karbala, the 
burial place of the son of Iman Husein ibn Ali, revered by Shiite Muslims. 
After Iraq was conquered by the 
Seljuks in the 11th Century, and later by 
Mongols and Timurids, the number of 
Turks in Baghdad rapidly increased. The 
process continued afterwards. In 1509 
Shah Ismail annexed Baghdad to 
Azerbaijan, having triumphantly entered 
the city. Later in 1534 the city became part 
of the Osman Empire. 
According to some sources, 
Mahammed's father Suleyman moved to 
Iraq from the area of Arash in the territory 
of Azerbaijan. Later, Fizuli's son Fazli 
returned to Arash, where he stayed with 
his close relatives. His knowledge made 
him famous there. Based on the fact that 
Fazli was well educated, it is possible to 
assume that his father was well to do. The 
fact that he lived in the centers of the 
Muslim pilgrimage - Khilla and Kerbala 
points to his possible involvement in religious service. In fact, it is believed that 
Fizuli's father was a mufti in the town of Khilla. 
Fizuli completed his primary education in Kerbala, and he later continued 
his studies in one of the medreses (university) in Baghdad. In the introduction to 
his "Divan", the poet describes his school years as follows: "School was a horizon 
of the new-born bright-shining star of my happiness, where the most beautiful 
women, slender like cedars, whispered to my soul heavenly joyful news... at times 
my love for poetry took over my other studies and then the beauties with faces 
resembling the face of Leyli would gather around me to hark to my poems like 
Mejnun. My calling to become a poet has been realized, I have become one. The 
entire world has been filled with the sounds of my poetry and I have climbed to the 
top of fame". 
As we can see, Fizuli had already realized that he was called to become a 
poet and a singer of love when he was at school. Fizuli's love lyrics became the 
crown of his creative life. The unusual poetic symbols, delicate lyrical feelings and 
emotional experiences of his poetry fascinate the reader. His gazals are quite 
different from those of his contemporaries. 
  
235 
 
Divan. Fizuli. 1628. Institute of Manuscripts. Baku. 
  
236 
 
A portrait of Fizuli. A manuscript 
of the 17th Century. State 
Library. Krakow. 
 
However, Fizuli realized that love lyrics not based on deep scientific and 
philosophical knowledge were shortlived, so he constantly deepened his scientific 
knowledge. 
At that time Baghdad was a big center of 
science and culture. There were many schools, 
universities and public and private libraries in the 
city. Scientists from different parts of the East 
came to Baghdad to work in its universities and to 
participate in various scientific disputes and 
discussions. A lot of famous Persian, Turkic, 
Hindu and even Chinese scientists and poets lived 
and worked in the city. Excellent conditions for 
science were created in Baghdad. In the 
introduction to his Persian "Divan" the poet wrote: 
"the decorator of my logics insisted on the beauty 
of my poetry to shine on the bosom of the beauty 
of enlightenment. The jeweler of my talent did not 
agree to the beads of my poems becoming the 
necklace of the entire world without the pearl of 
science in it. For poetry without science is like a 
wall without foundation, it will not stand. 
Considering sinful the lack of scientific beauty in poetry, despising poetry without 
scientific knowledge, like a body without a soul, I have spent the treasures of my 
life on the study of theoretical and applied sciences. I have invested my life in the 
study of logics and geometry. Gradually, I have minted artistic laals, in order to 
enrich my poetry". 
The years Fizuli spent on obtaining knowledge were very fruitful. He won 
fame as the most "educated master of poetry of his epoch", and just like Jalal ad-
Din Rumi, his contemporaries called him "Movlan" ("Our lord"). Doubtlessly, 
Fizuli was one of the most highly educated men of his time. His works testify to 
the fact that besides languages, Fizuli knew theology, philosophy, poetry, 
mathematics, medicine, history, astronomy and astrology, as well as the theory of 
music. 
Fizuli was familiar with literature of the entire Muslim world. In the intro-
duction to the same "Divan", the poet himself stated with pride that he was 
informed about all sciences and languages. 
The names of Abu Nuvas, Hasan, Khagani, Nizami, Alisher Navoi,  Jalili, 
Salman Savaji, Kamal Khojendi, Ahmedi, Sheikhi and many other poets are 
mentioned in his works. 
  
237 
 
Mejnun in the Steppe. Fizuli. Divan. 1628. Institute of Manuscripts. Baku. 
 
  
238 
 
Expulsion from Paradise. The Garden of 
Happiness. Fizuli. Paris National Library.  
 
Though Fizuli's works were very popular throughout the entire Middle East, 
the poet suffered hardship most of his life. First of all, this had to do with the fact 
that the poet tried to be independent of the court, convinced that "he could not bear 
the burden of thankfulness to the Shahs". According to some scholars, Fizuli 
worked as a schoolteacher in his youth and for some time served at the tomb of 
Imam Ali in the town of Najef. He was enti-
tled to a certain salary, but due to corruption 
and bribery in the country, he never 
received the money. Dwelling on the 
matter. Fizuli wrote a brilliant satire called 
"Shikayat nama" (The Book of Complaints). 
Fizuli never left Iraq. This could 
have been because of the material hardship 
he suffered. Fizuli, however, denied this 
assumption: "I was born in Arabic Iraq and 
when it becomes known that I have not 
travelled outside its borders, let it not be 
considered to be an indication of my lack of 
credibility". 
Fizuli's creative life is usually 
divided into two periods- Safavi and 
Osman. By 1534, when Baghdad joined the 
Osman Empire, the poet had written his best 
gazals, gassids, imams' biographies, 
allegorical poems and novels, such as "Bang 
va Bada" ("Hashish and Wine"), dedicated to Shah Ismail and "Sehbet-ul-Ismar" 
("The Talk of Trees"). During the same period he worked on the prosaic religious 
novel "Khadiket-us-Suada" ("The Garden of the Happy"), which he later dedicated 
to the Turkish Sultan Suleyman (1520-1566). 
In 1537 the poet finished his famous poem "Leyli and Mejnun". Fizuli 
continued writing his gazals and kasids in three languages. Later, Fizuli primarily 
wrote philosophical works, among which are "Haft jam" ("Seven Cups"), "Anio ul 
kalb" ("The Affection of the Heat"), "Sihhat va maraz" ("Health and Ailment"), 
"Rind-u-Zahid" ("Tramp and Ascet"), as well as "Matla-ul-etikad" ("Ascent of 
Convictions"), a philosophical treatise composed in Arabic. 
During that period Fizuli wrote his Persian Divan, kasids and his Azeri 
"Divan". Fizuli composed an Azeri-Persian dictionary in poems. He wrote the 
poetic charades "Muamma" ("Treatise on Charades") in Azeri and Persian. He also 
translated "Forty Khadises" by Abd ur-Rahman Jami into Azeri. 
239 
 
Mahammads Fizulis Mausoleum. 
Kerbala, Iraq. 
 
The treatise "Ascent of Convictions" takes a special place in the creative life 
of Fizuli. It is an encyclopedia on the history of philosophy of Ancient Greece and 
the Medieval East. The outstanding poet was the first among numerous Azeri 
scholars to write a book on the history of philosophy. Fizuli wrote the treatise 
either as a textbook for his students and followers or as a tool to promote 
philosophical knowledge in general. The treatise allows researchers of Fizuli's 
creative life to define the foundations of the deep 
philosophical reasoning of Fizuli. The volume of 
his knowledge of philosophical and theological 
teachings popular in the Muslim East and 
philosophical teachings of Ancient Greece is 
evident. 
The ideology of Sufism influenced the 
framework and creativity of Fizuli. In the 1920s 
Keprulzade wrote: "As sensitivity and intellectual 
upbringing harmonically blended, being free from 
dogmatic concepts, the perception of the absolute 
love (which was put by many Sufi poets in the 
frames of dry lifeless forms) obtained a new form 
full of life in Fizuli's works". 
Fizuli is considered to be the founder of 
Azeri artistic prose. His scientific treatise 
"Metleul-etikad", introductions to divans, "Rind-u-Zahid". "Health and Ailment" 
and "Shikayatnama" were written in prose. His translation of  "Khidiket-us-suada" 
by the Persian writer Husein Kashifi is considered to be the first prosaic translation 
into the Azeri language. 
Though Fizuli wrote in almost all poetic genres of his time, he is famous in 
Azeri literature as the greatest lyric poet. According to the famous literary critic, 
Rustam Aliyev, "The key theme of Fizuli's lyrics is the description of the suffering 
experienced by a man in love, his tortures when his beloved is not near, his 
thoughts and dreams, the caprices and cruelty of his beloved, her mercy and 
responsiveness... Fizuli's poetic images are original and emotionally influential. 
These images impress the reader with their depth, vividness and unexpectedness; 
they become rooted in our memory and create a visual impression". 
 
My pain and sorrow none. I fear me, can dispel;  
That you have cast me off I know, my love, too well. 
 
And yet I am, in truth, reluctant to complain. 
For though you flee from me, you flee, my love, in vain. 
 
I feel that you are near no matter where you are;  
240 
 
Your lovely image sears my spirit from afar. 
 
And should I early die of love, of love and grief. 
At least, sweet love, my life would have been full if brief. 
 
That 'tis for love alone, as 1 have wished, I live. 
 My warm and humble thanks to Heaven do I give. 
 
My love for you is fierce; it turns my heart to flame;  
1 fear lest all of me the fires of passion claim. 
 
One wish was ever mine - to love you unto death;  
If this be not the truth, embrace my soul, o death! 
 
The heart of Fisuli would long have burnt away 
Had not the tears he shed kept love's hot flames at bay. 
 
A number of Fizuli's gazals are written in the form of reply to gazals by 
outstanding classic poets of the East, such as Khafiz, Saadi, Nizami, Nasimi and 
Navoi. The creative life of the great Azeri poet Mahammed Fizuli is the greatest 
achievement of humanistic thought of the first half of the 16th Century, and it 
played an import role in the development of all Turkic literature. 
In a Moscow University textbook on literature of the East in the Middle 
Ages, the creative life of Fizuli is summarized as follows: "Having synthesized and 
processed the artistic experiences of his great predecessors in the Near and Middle 
East, Fizuli set a path for the future development of the poetic culture in 
Azerbaijan, Turkey and Central Asia. Being a lyrical and epical poet, an 
outstanding master of all literary genres known to him, who wrote his works in 
three languages, Fizuli is indeed a titan of the Renaissance". 
Husein Ali Makhfuz, a well-known Iraqi writer, a famous Arabic scientist 
and a scholar of London, Teheran and Cairo Academies, said the following: "When 
speaking about the poetry of the East, three names remain sacred to me: the Iranian 
poet Saadi, the Arabic poet Mutanabbi and the Azeri poet Mahammed Fizuli... 
Back home, Fizuli bears the following three titles: the best poet of the East, the 
greatest master and the head of poets... The works of the great poet have existed for 
four centuries. They have not been eroded by time: the works of his genius are 
imperishable. I was in Karbala, where Fizuli is buried. More than 1 million people 
visit the poet's mausoleum annually. I saw crowds of people coming to his tomb to 
bow down before the creator of immortal lines". 
The famous Iranian literary critic, M. Kh. Faridani wrote, "It is difficult to 
find a person in Iran who would not know Fizuli's poems. His brilliant works are 
the spiritual wealth of our Iranian nation". 
 
 
241 
 
The author of a Medical 
Treatise Written in Verse 
 
Yusif Mahammad ibn Yusif Tabib 
 
Information about a famous scientist and physician of the late 15th and 
early 16th Centuries,Yusif  Mahammed ibn Yusif  Tabib, is reflected in a book by 
the first researcher of the history of medicine in 
Azerbaijan, I.Efendiyev. There was no biographical 
data about Yusif Tabib, so the author confined himself 
to the analysis of his work. Just a few works on 
medicine by Yusif Mahammed ibn Yusif Tabib have 
survived. The earliest of them is "Jame ul-Fevaid", 
written in 1513 and dedicated to Shah Ismail Safavi. 
This work was written in verse. Hence, it is possible 
to assume that it was designed for students of 
numerous medical educational centres. 
The book consists of 11 chapters. The first 
chapter deals with questions of the symptomatology 
of diseases, the means of eliminating diseases and the 
methods of preparation of these medical drugs. The second chapter discusses the 
utility of various foodstuffs of vegetative and animal nature. The third chapter 
sheds light on the rules of individual hygiene, the question of salutary rest and 
movement. 
The fourth chapter focuses on the norm of behaviour in society, and the fifth 
chapter quotes the contents of the well-known philosophical treatise "Tekhfet ul-
Muluk". The sixth chapter examines the curative properties of mafirfin, and the 
seventh chapter analyses the rules of writing prescriptions. 
The eighth chapter considers the effect of some medical drugs, and the ninth 
chapter focuses on the regulation of personal hygiene. The tenth chapter covers 
harmful habits and methods of avoiding them, and finally, the eleventh chapter 
deals with the state of a person depending on the arrangement of stars. 
Yusif Mahammed established the principle of opposite effect in the 
treatment process: "Each disease may be removed by antipodes". He also focused 
on the principle of the prophylaxis of diseases: "First of all, it is necessary to 
explain to everybody how to preserve their health; this is the main thing". Thus, for 
the prevention of illnesses, he considered it necessary to watch air, meals, 
movement and rest, sleep and rest, vomit and the excretory abilities of an 
organism. 
Tables of medicaments compiled by Tabib enjoyed wide popularity. Each 
table consisted of five columns and included the names of medical remedies, their 
242 
 
properties, whether they were healthy or destructive, and the methods of removing 
the destructive effect. He wrote: "Useful medicine is a substance, the destructive 
nature of which could be easily removed, and the best is innocuous medicine. You 
see, water, earth, sun and air are useful in one place, but harmful in another". 
Yusif Tabib paid great attention to the collateral effect of medicine. The 
tables are very clear and easy to use. For a long time, they served as visual aids 
when training students. 
 
The author of the 
Best Histories 
 
Hasan bey Rumlu 
 
Eminent historian of the 16th Century and author of the famous multi-
volume work "Akhsatan at-Tavarikh" ("The Best of Histories"), Hasan Bey Rumlu 
was born in the city of Qum in 1530/31. At an early age he lost his father, of whom 
we have no information. 
Hasan Bey was brought up by his grandfather, Amir Sultan Rumlu, who he 
frequently refers to in his works. For example, he wrote that when in 1536/37 the 
younger brother of Shah Tahmasib I came to Qazwin, he lived at Amir Sultan's 
place with his mother. She made him presents, among which were "tents, money, 
thoroughbred horses and dear things". It is evident that Rumlu was brought up in a 
rich and gentle family and had a good education. 
In 1539/40, his favourite grandfather died and his quiet life was over. It was 
necessary to ensure his own future and he joined the equestrian guards of the Shah. 
The young man then participated in all of the Shah's campaigns and became 
closely acquainted with court life. 
During the campaigns, Hasan Bey showed his worth as a courageous and 
quick-witted warrior. He joined the campaigns of 1546/47 in Georgia and of 
1550/51 in Kurdistan. Hasan Bey's participation in court receptions was confirmed 
by Azerbaijani historian Iskender Munshi, who wrote about his presence at the 
state reception in the Palace during the presentation of gifts to Shah Tahmasib from 
Shah Humayun of the dynasty of the Great Mughals. 
In his works Hasan Bey mentioned that he continued his education with the 
help of well-known scientists of that time, Abdulhasan and Mahmud Shirazi. After 
the death of Shah Tahmasib I in 1576/77, Hasan Bey came back to his native Qum 
and wrote the last book of his work, which was devoted to one of the most fero-
cious Safavi Shahs, Shah Ismail II. He wrote this despite his not being a direct 
participant in the events. After the death of Shah Ismail II, Hasan Bey returned to 
the palace at Shah Mahammed Khudabande's invitation. 
243 
 
Of the 12 books of "Akhsatan at-tavarikh" just two books survived. They 
were devoted to the history of Iran and Azerbaijan during the reign of Shahs 
Tahmasib 1 and Ismail II. Modern historians who study the history of Iran and 
Azerbaijan think that this work is the most complete source of the reviewed period. 
In these books, Hasan Bey presented political events in these countries, as 
well as the biographies of feudal rulers, scholars, theologians and poets. Moreover, 
this work described events that took place in the neighbouring states of Timur, Agh 
Goyunlu and Shirvanshahs. 
As well-known historian Oktay Efendiyev pointed out, "No historian of that 
time had ever described in detail the half-century period of Shah Tahmasib's reign, 
as Hasan Bey Rumlu did". 
 
The Leading the Great Architect of the  Great Mughals 
 
Agha Mirek Mirza Ghiyas 
 
In India in the beginning of the 16th Century, the eminent political 
personality and scientist Babur, a descendant of the great Timur, created a new 
state that was later named the Empire of Great Mughals. Unable to cope with the 
powerful Uzbek rulers, the Sheybanids and the governor of the Fergana region, 
Babur fled to Kabul without weapons and with 
200 relatives and devoted people. Having seized 
Kabul and having created an army, Babur moved 
to India instead of Fergana, where the Sheybanids 
were waiting for him. 
In 1526, after a complete victory over the 
local Sultan, Babur captured Delhi and made it the 
capital city of the new state - the Empire of Great 
Mughals (Baburids). Having strengthened his 
authority, Babur carried out a number of martial 
and economic reforms. To continue the traditions 
of Timur, he did a lot for the development of 
science and culture. In every possible way, he 
encouraged the flowering of poetry, literature, painting and architecture. Babur was 
the author of many writings in the Old Uzbeg (Jaghatay) language. 
After him, his son Humayun ruled. In 1544, Humayun suffered a defeat in 
the struggle against the Afghan governor, Shir Khan. He fled with his wife and 
close people to Safavi Shah Tahmasib, who received him very solemnly on his 
approach to Tabriz. Humayun presented Tahmasib with extraordinary and valuable 
souvenirs, including a huge diamond, "whose equal was not held by the eye of 
fortune for centuries and centuries, and which was unlike any that the ear of time 
244 
 
Humayun's tomb. 1562-1571. Agha Mirek Mirza Ghiyas. 
Delhi. 
 
had ever heard about". In turn, Tahmasib gave a reception in honour of Humayun 
and presented him with souvenirs. 
Humayun asked Tahmasib to help him in his struggle for authority. For 
several years, Shah Tahmasib had been collecting an army, which consisted of 
12,000 Gizilbashes led by the talented commander Budagh Khan Qajar. This army 
made its way to India. Shir Khan suffered a defeat and Humayun was placed on the 
throne of Great Mughals. 
While in Tabriz, 
Humayun became acquainted 
with the art of miniaturists, 
calligraphers and architects of 
Azerbaijan, and he became a 
devout admirer of them. After 
returning to power, Humayun 
invited a great number of 
Azerbaijani foremen to Delhi. 
Among them was miniaturist 
Mir Said Ali Tabrizi. 
In what would end in a 
twist of fate, Humayun chose 
a small pavilion for 
astronomical observation of 
the sky (Humayun showed a great interest in astrology). This pavilion was built by 
Shir Khah and was called Shir Mandal. There, he kept a library of his valuable 
collection of manuscripts. 
On Friday, 24 January 1565, Humayun was waiting for Venus to rise. He 
came out onto the roof of the library and blessed the people who were assembled at 
the nearby mosque. With the approach of dusk, Humayun decided to go down. 
When he was on the second step of the staircase, he heard the muezzin's call and 
wanted to bow. His foot caught his robe and he fell headfirst down the steps, 
receiving a mortal blow. Three days later, Humayun died. 
Humayun became a great admirer of Safavid architecture after his return 
from Azerbaijan. Therefore, when his senior widow, Hamida Bano Beyim, 
returned that same year from a pilgrimage to Mecca, she brought with her an 
architect from Azerbaijan named Agha Mirek Mirza Ghiyas. He was entrusted with 
the construction of a mausoleum for the late Emperor Humayun. 
The mausoleum was completed in 1573, after eight years of construction. 
Agha Mirek demonstrated that his significant efforts were not made in vain. Art 
critics in India point out that this mausoleum became a turning point in the 
construction of such buildings in India. It was the first garden mausoleum that the 
Great Mughals built. This series culminated in the masterpiece of world archi-
245 
 
tecture - the Taj-Mahal in Agra (1630-1652, by Turkish architect Mahammed Isa 
Efendi). 
While Agha Mirek preserved the monumental spatial structure of similar 
Safavid, Central Asian and Turkish buildings, he also added a lot of Indian aspects 
to Humayun's mausoleum. Instead of bright colour tiles, which Safavid and Central 
Asian architects used for the ornamentation of mosques, palaces and mausoleums, 
Agha Mirek applied a combination of white marble with stones of different hues. 
The mausoleum was designed as a square building (52 x 52 sq. m.). Four small 
chambers were adjoined to the central octagonal hall. 
Agha Mirek laid out a garden according to the best Safavid traditions. The 
mausoleum was placed in the centre of the garden at the intersection of two wide 
pathways. Such palatial gardens were known in Tabriz, Qazwin and Ardebil under 
the name of Chakharbag (Four Garden). In the same garden there was the 
octagonal mausoleum of Isa Khan (1547). The mausoleums of such form had been 
spread earlier in India. They strongly resembled the octagonal Diwan-Khane of the 
Shirvanshahs' Palace. 
Agha Mirek's name is well known in India, and the mausoleum constructed 
by him remains one of the most famous monuments of architecture in the country. 
In Indian history, tragic events of the struggle for independence and the last days of 
the Dynasty of Great Mughals are connected with this monument. In 1857, the 
great poet King Bahadir Shah Zafar from the Dynasty of Great Mughals headed 
Muslim and Hinduid mutineers against the British. When the revolt was subsided 
and the English seized control over the situation, Bahadir Shah took refuge with his 
family in Humayun's mausoleum. On September 22, 1857 the English charged into 
the garden, captured two young sons and one grandson and assassinated them. 
Bahadir Shah was exiled to Rangun in Birma, where the last of Timur's 
descendants died. 
The name of the prominent architect Agha Mirek Mirza Ghiyas, the 
architect of Emperor Humayun's mausoleum, will forever survive in the history of 
Indian culture. At the same time, the name of Emperor Humayun will forever 
remain in the culture of Azerbaijan in the name of one of six main mughams. 
Mugham "Humayun" was formed during Humayun's stay in Tabriz under the 
Court of Shah Tahmasib. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
246 
 
The Faithful Son of 
Three Countries 
 
Mir Seyid Ali 
 
"The eye of time has never seen anything similar to this!" - Nishapuri 
The British Museum in London houses the manuscript of "Khamsa" by 
Nizami, which was performed at the Shah Library for Shah Tahmasib I in 1539-
1543. Experts consider that this book is one of the most remarkable manuscripts of 
all times and peoples - a masterpiece of book art of the Orient. 
The manuscript has richly decorated title pages. Wide margins on each page 
of the manuscript are decorated with traditional silhouette drawings and executed 
in gold. 
The book was decorated with a large format miniature by famous 
Azerbaijani painters of the 16th Century': Sultan Mahammed, Agha Mirek, Mir 
Musavvir, Mirza Ali, Mir Seyid Ali and Muzaffar Ali. On one of the pages of the 
manuscript, khattat, copyist Shah Mahmud Nishapuri left an inscription, the 
accuracy of which has survived to the present: "The eye of time has never seen 
anything similar to this!" 
One of the best miniatures of this manuscript, "Majnun at the tent of Leyli", 
was completed by the magnificent painter from the school of Sultan Mahammed, 
Mir Seyid Ali. Highly artistic miniatures of this painter, such as "Matchmaking of 
Leyli", "Musical Majlis" and "Bahrain Gur and Choban", are kept at the best 
museums of the world. 
Mir Seyid Ali was born at the beginning of the 16th Century to the family 
of a well-known painter and miniaturist named Mir Musavvir. He was well 
educated and wrote verses under the pseudonym Judai (from word separation), and 
he enjoyed popularity among his contemporaries. His first teacher was his father; 
then he continued his studies at the Shah's library. 
Prominent masters, such as Behzad, Sultan Mahammed and Agha Mirek, 
worked during the reviewed period, so Mir Seyid passed through a good school. 
He started his work in the early thirties of the 16th Century. An illustration for the 
manuscript of "Khamsa" by Nizami is attributed to him. Well-known Azerbaijani 
painter, art critic, poet and tazkirist Sadiq Bey Afshar wrote the following about 
him: 
"Mir Seyid Ali was the son of Mir Musavvir, an excellent master and a 
library employee of the deceased Shah Tahmasib. Mir Musavvir was also a very 
skilled ornamentalist (nagkash) and painter (musavvir). Because of grievances he 
left Azerbaijan, migrated to India and attained high honours in Jalal ad-Din Agpar's 
service. 
247 
 
Nomadic Encampment. Mir Seyid Ali. 
The 1440s.  Harvard University 
Museum. Cambridge. 
Little is known about the creative activity of his father, Mir Musavvir. 
Today, only one of his miniatures is known. The superintendent of court ceremony, 
Sirkhan Bey Sufrachi, is represented on this miniature. From sources of that time, 
it is known that Mir-Musavvir was among the teachers of Shah Tahmasib, who 
showed great interest in painting and calligraphy. 
Indian Emperor Humayun from the 
Dynasty of Great Mughals was expelled from 
India and lived at Shah Tahmasib's court in 
Tabriz from 1540 to 1549. After having been 
acquainted with the palatial library and art 
atelier, Humayun wanted to return to India to 
create something similar. While in Tabriz, Mir 
Seyid Ali came within sight of Humayun, who 
entrusted him to illustrate a dastan "Amir 
Khamza". 
After coming to power, Humayun invited 
Mir Seyid Ali and other masters to Delhi. In 
India, Mir Seyid Ali and Samed Shirazi from 
Tabriz created a well-known work. It was a 
panel titled "Timur's House", on which portraits 
of representatives of Timurid's Dynasty were 
depicted. 
For this picture, Humayun gave Mir Seyid 
Ali the title "Nadir ul Mulk Humayun Shahi" 
("Rarity of the Empire of Shah Humayun"). He also entrusted him with the general 
guidance over the illustration of the unique edition of the dastan "Amir Khamza", 
which consisted of 16 large books with 2,400 pictures. Each book was kept in a 
specially designed art chest. 
The size of sheets in the books reached nearly one metre.  Under Mir Seyid 
Airs guidance, 30 artists worked on this edition. Despite these efforts, when Mir 
Seyid Ali left for his pilgrimage to Mecca in 1570, just four books were ready. 
Mir Seyid Ali's name has since remained in the history of art in Azerbaijan, 
Iran and India. His creative activity and the Tabriz school of miniature painting. 
which he represented, significantly influenced the Mughal school of miniature 
painting in India, just as the development of Turkish miniature influenced Tabriz 
artists, such as Shah Gulu Tabrizi, Velijan and Kamal Tabrizi. 
 
 
 
 
 
248 
 
A Prominent King 
Of Garabagh 
 
Sultan Imam Gulu Khan Qajar 
 
The Safavi (Gizilbash) Empire created by Shah Ismail in the 16th Century 
was divided into 13 regions, the so-called Beylarbeys, which were headed by a 
Beyiarbey. During the reviewed period, Azerbaijan included four Beylarbeys: 
Tabriz, Chukhursaad, Garabagh (including Ganja) and Shirvan. 
The Beylarbeys of Garabagh and (Ganja had for a long time been populated 
by different Turkic tribes, many of which were Qajars. The Beylarbeys of Gara-
bagh and Ganja came from the Qajar family of Ziyadoghlu. The first Beylarbey of 
the region was Kamal ad-Din Sultan Ziyad-oghlu Qajar. Later Beylarbeys included 
Ibrahim Sultan Ziyad-oghlu Qajar, Yusif Sultan Ziyad-oghlu Qajar, Peyqar Sultan 
Ziyad-oghlu Qajar and Imam Gulu Khan Ziyad-oghlu Qajar. 
Imam Gulu Khan Ziyad-oghlu Qajar was an unusually distinguished figure, 
an outstanding statesman and a talented commander. No biographical data on him 
is available. Some manuscripts refer to Imam Gulu Khan, largely due to military 
campaigns conducted by him when he was Beylarbey of Garabagh and Ganja. 
On 22 August 1576, the son of Shah Tahmasib, Shah Ismail II, came to 
power in the Safavi Empire. At that time, the country was being weakened by the 
Gizilbash Emirs' struggle for power. Shah Ismail II took some measures to limit 
the exclusive powers of the Emirs, and he replaced some of the rulers with 
Beylarbeys. 
In particular, he dismissed Yusif Khalil Ziyad-oghlu Qajar from his post as 
ruler of Garabagh and Ganja. Peyqar Sultan, a representative of the same family, 
became ruler of the region. However, by order of Shah Ismail II, Imam Gulu Khan 
Qajar soon replaced him. This choice proved to be rather successful. Thanks to his 
far-sighted policy and large military talent, Imam Gulu Khan Qajar managed to 
preserve the independence of Garabagh, when the whole of Azerbaijan was under 
Ottoman occupation. During 10 years of struggle against the Ottomans, Imam Gulu 
Khan Qajar followed the tactics of forestalling the enemy, and he always tried to 
combat outside Garabagh. Also, Imam Gulu Khan created a mobile army that was 
capable of retreating, where appropriate, with insignificant losses. 
Shah Ismail II did not stay on the throne for long. His follower, Shah 
Mahammed Khudabende, reaffirmed the assignment of Imam Gulu Khan as ruler 
of Garabagh. Meanwhile, the Ottoman army invaded Shirvan. The Turks, who 
were allies in the campaign against Georgia and Shirvan, tried to attract Crimean 
Tatar Khan Girey, Daghestan feudals and part of the Shirvan nobility in an attempt 
to restore Shirvan's independence. 
249 
 
In 1578 and 1579, a strong Ottoman army of 100,000 troops marched 
against Shirvan, under the command of Mustafa Lala Pasha. Imam Gulu Khan's 
first battle, which was in alliance with Governor of Chukhursaad Turkman Khan 
against the Ottomans, took place near Tiflis. The battle was a failure for the allies, 
so Imam Gulu Khan came back to Garabagh. It is probable that during this period, 
Imam Gulu Khan was given the title of Sultan; it was no mere coincidence that 
Imam Gulu Khan was called Imam Gulu Sultan.  
Having restored his army, Imam Gulu Khan marched against the Ottomans 
again, this time joined by Azerbaijani ruler Amir Khan. The Ottomans were 
defeated, and Imam Gulu Khan and Amir Khan seized a lot of plunder from the 
war. The Gizilbashes captured 1,000 camels and 3,000 horses, and they took 
several Turkish commanders as prisoners. The Turks elected Osman Pasha as ruler 
of Shirvan. 
Near Tiflis, the joint troops of Imam Gulu Khan and King Simon defeated 
Mustafa Lala Pasha's army. More than 20,000 soldiers were killed and plentiful 
body was seized from there. Imam Gulu Khan then set out for Aresh, which had 
earlier been fortified by the Ottomans. A strong garrison of 5,000 troops, led by 
Kitay Pasha, was defeated. Kitay Pasha was killed and Ottoman Commander Abd 
ur-Rahman was taken prisoner. 
Part of the garrison was defeated, and attempts of the joint armies of the 
Gizilbashes to liberate Shirvan from the Turks were prevented by Crimean Khan 
Adil Girey. In pursuing the joint troops, Adil Girey came up to the Mughan steppe, 
crossed the river Kura, defeated the enemy and returned to Shamakha. On 28 
November 1578, the confronting parties clashed near the village of Mollahasan on 
the banks of the Aghsu. This was one of the most famous battles in the history of 
Shirvan and Garabagh. 
The battle lasted from early morning to late evening. As a result of the 
battle, Adil Girey was taken prisoner; the same was true for Ottoman Commander 
Kitay Pasha. The Tatar army had to flee, the Gizilbashes seized a lot of valuables, 
and nearly all of Shirvan was liberated. Only Derbent remained in the hands of 
Osman Pasha. 
In 1755 Crimean Tatars raided Shirvan, overran it and came back. In 
1580/81, they marched against Shirvan for the third time. This time, the Gizilbash 
army forced the Tatars from Shirvan rather easily. However, a famine broke out in 
Azerbaijan soon after, and the Turks again invaded Shirvan. The Safavi leaders 
decided to continue their struggle for Shirvan. 
Peikar Ziyad-oghlu Qajar was nominated as the new ruler of Shirvan. He 
was granted the title of Khan. The tribes of Qajar and Otuziki, among others, made 
their way to Shirvan from Garabagh. In the spring of 1581, Crimean Tatars led by 
Qazi Girey and Safi marched against Shirvan for the fourth time. The battle 
occurred at a location between Shamakha and Shabran. The armies of Qajars, 
250 
 
Jigurlues, Garamanlis, etc., headed by Peyqar Khan Qajar, won a victory. The 
Qajars captured Qazi Girey. However, the death of Peyqar Khan a year later 
enabled the Turks to restore their power in Shirvan. 
In the spring of 1583, Imam Gulu Khan made an attempt to force the Turks 
out of Shirvan. In a battle near the village of Niyazabad, the Turks suffered a 
decisive defeat, and many Turkish commanders fell in action. Imam Gulu Khan's 
army pursued the retreating Turks up to Derbent. On the banks of the Samur, the 
Turkish army, reinforced by troops from Derbent, tried to tight Imam Gulu Khan's 
troops. The "battle under torches" lasted for a few days, and was lit day and night 
by torches. On the fourth day, the advantage of the superior forces of the Ottomans 
became obvious, so Imam Gulu Khan had to retreat. 
In the summer of 1584, the Ottomans again marched to the Chukhursaad 
region. The Beylarbeys of Chukhur-saad applied for help from Imam Gulu Khan. 
However, taking into consideration the overwhelming superiority of the enemy, 
Imam Gulu Khan did not want to take the risk. The Turks, therefore, first occupied 
Irevan, and a year later they seized Tabriz. Only Garabagh remained independent. 
At the same time, some Gizilbash tribes rebelled against the Shah. After 
suppressing the revolt, the Shah and his follower Khamza Mirza arrived in 
Garabagh, escorted by Imam Gulu Khan's warriors. Following talks with the 
Turkish Pasha near Ganja, Khamza Mirza's personal barber assassinated him, and 
disorder broke out in the country. Soon, the son of Iranian Shah Mahammed 
Khudabende, aged just 16, was proclaimed Shah Abbas I, 
The new Shah transferred the capital of the country to Isfahan. According to 
Azerbaijani historians, the Gizilbash state of Azerbaijan founded by Shah Ismail I 
ceased to exist. It is symbolical that this event coincided with the death of the 
outstanding commander and patriot Imam Gulu Khan Sultan Ziyad-oghlu Qajar. 
Mahammed Khan Ziyad-oghlu Qajar replaced him as ruler of Garabagh. However, 
the days of Garabagh were already numbered. 
Meanwhile, Turkish commander Jafar Pasha attacked Garabagh in 1588/89, 
and the aged Mahammed Khan Ziyad-oghlu Qajar surrendered his country to the 
enemy without any resistance. The Turks conquered a large part of Azerbaijan. 
However, the Qajar tribes besieged Ganja a year later, but it brought no desirable 
results. In order to preserve his power, Shah Abbas signed a peace treaty with the 
Turks and persuaded the residents of Garabagh to remove their siege of Ganja and 
yield Garabagh to the Turks. When Shah Abbas I won a victory over Garabagh and 
Ganja in 1605, he nominated Mahammed Khan Qajar from the same family of 
Ziyad-oghlu to rule these regions. 
At the end of the 16th Century, nearly all of Azerbaijan was occupied by 
Turks-Osmans. The famous Tabriz library with art ateliers was ruined. Painters, 
miniaturists, khattats and other masters had to move first to Qazwin, and then to 
Isfahan because of the transfer of the capital cities of the Safavid state. 
251 
 
Gates of Shah Abbas the Great in the fortress of 
Baku.  17th Century. Post-Card, Late 19th Century. 
 
The Greatest Among 
The Greats 
 
Shah Abbas The Great 
 
In the last quarter of the 16th Century, there was a serious crisis in the great 
Safavi Empire, which was created by Shah Ismail and extended from the borders of 
the Osman Empire to the borders of India. The continuous destructive intertribal 
wars of Turkic-Gizilbash emirs resulted in the easing of royal authority. Shah 
Mahammed Khudabende, who was almost blind, weak and flabby, came to the 
throne. The state was actually ruled by his wife, Kheyr an-Nisa Beyim, who had 
the nickname Mahdi Ulya ("A High Cradle"), and her son Khamza Mirza, who was 
a talented commander and gained a number of victories over the Turks. 
They unsuccessfully aspired 
to strengthen central authority in 
the struggle with the Emirs of the 
Gizilbash tribes, who were almost 
completely independent and 
continuously hostile among 
themselves. The treasury was 
devastated, and the people were 
ruined. Using the country's difficult 
situation to their advantage, Osman 
Turks and Crimean Tatars 
repeatedly invaded Shirvan and 
Azerbaijan. The aggravated relations between the Gizilbash Emirs and Mahdi Ulya 
weakened the struggle  against the occupants. She was accused of infringement of 
the Turkic Emirs' rights and of promoting Persian nobility. Eventually, the emirs 
organized a conspiracy against Mahdi Ulya, killed her and her mother in the 
palatial harem, and again became sovereign owners of the country. 
Khorasan was also experiencing hard times. Shah Mahammed Khudabende 
appointed the vicegerent of Khorasan, Ali Gulu Khan Shamlu, to the post of 
governor of Herat. He also appointed him as mentor of his son, Abbas Mirza. In 
union with Murshid Qulu Khan Ustajlu, Ali Gulu Khan Shamlu refused to submit 
to royal Qazwin's government, and they chose Ali Gulu Khan as their leader. They 
called him "Khanlar Khani" ("Ruler of the Rulers"). In response, the Qazwin 
Emirs, who were supporters of the Shah, put to death the mother and father of Ali 
Gulu Khan, as well as other members of his family. 
Then, in 1581, the Emirs of Khorasan announced the prince Abbas as Shah. 
A struggle arose between the leaders of the families of Shamlu and Ustajlu, the 
victor of which was Murshid Qulu Khan Ustajlu. At this time, Khamza Mirza ruled  
252 
 
Shah-nama" of Shah Abbas I. Kay Khosrov offering the Crown to Luhrasp. 1614. 
The Spencer Collection, New York Public Library. 
 
  
253 
 
Shah Abbas and a young man. 1628. 
Mahammed Hasim. Opaque watercolour on 
paper. Shah Abbas' audience. Second half of 
the 18th Century. Opaque water colour and 
gold on paper. 
 
in Qazwin with variable success, beating off attacks of the Osman Turks and 
Crimean Tatars. 
In the autumn of 1585, the Turks seized Tabriz. In the city, they destroyed 
palaces, mosques and houses, and they carried out a terrible massacre. Tabriz, 
which had been one of the most beautiful cities in the Middle East, turned into a 
dead city. 
Because of the policy of Khamza 
Mirza, dissatisfied Gizilbash notables 
killed him. They sent a barber - an 
Armenian from Khoy to kill the sleeping 
prince. It happened near Ganja in 
December of 1586, during peace 
negotiations with Turkey, near the 
entombment of the great Azerbaijani 
poet, Sheikh Nizami. At that moment, 
taking advantage of the confusion in the 
courtyard after the assassination of the 
prince, the Turks occupied almost all of 
Azerbaijan. 
Meanwhile, Uzbeks invaded 
Khorasan, and Shah Mahammed 
Khudabende crossed swords with them. 
At the height of the war with the Uzbeks, 
Abbas Mirza invaded Qazwin and 
accepted the title of Shah. The old Shah, 
his father, was persuaded to abdicate in 
favour of Abbas Mirza. The new Shah 
took about 12,000 Georgians, who 
adopted Islam and reformed their military 
and civil administration. 
Don Juan Persian (Oruj Bey Bayati), a participant in these events wrote: 
"On the first day, when the new monarch took oath, Shah Abbas ordered all 
Khans and commanders to come unarmed to his palace the following day to begin 
planning the parliament's foundation. On the next day, when all were gathered in 
the palace, Shah Abbas gave a secret command to his Georgian guards to close all 
entrances and exits. Then he asked them how a person who killed his own prince 
would be punished. Eventually, everybody agreed that such a person must be 
killed. As soon as this sentence was pronounced, the Georgian guards attacked the 
attendants and killed all of the mutineers. Then 22 heads on spear heads were 
exposed from the palace windows in view of the people - an awful show causing 
irrational fear in the hearts of even the most self-confident". 
254 
 
Shah Abbas and Khan Alam. 1633. 
Rizayi Abbasi. SPL, St. Petersburg. 
 
After this, the young king, who was only 15 years old, killed the claimant to 
the regency, Murshid Gulu Khan Ustajlu, and others, desiring to rule from his 
name, and he completely took authority in his own hands. However, the basic 
struggle was way ahead. Turks seized 
Azerbaijan, and Uzbeks seized Khorasan with 
the cities of Merv, Herat, Meshhed and 
Nishapur. The long-time internal areas of the 
country left from the submission of royal 
authority. The first thing Shah Abbas did was to 
promulgate a number of laws, which limited the 
rights of Gizilbash Emirs and expanded the 
rights and privileges of Persian civil 
bureaucracy. Thus, he carried out a number of 
military and civil reforms. 
However, it is impossible to exaggerate 
the process of Persia-fication of the country and 
army carried out by Shah Abbas, as some 
historians do. The Turkic-Azerbaijani language 
remained the official language of the courtyard 
and army, as many European travellers wrote. 
Don Juan Persian, a contemporary of Shah 
Abbas, wrote, "Now with us are 32 clans of noble families, who are recognized in 
Persia and have huge superiority in the country". All 32 families, including Ustajlu, 
Shamlu, Afshar, Turkoman, Bayati, Tekelu, Kharmandalu, Zulkardarlu. Qajar, 
Qaramanlu, Beyburtlu, Isnirlu, Oryat, Chaushlu, and others, kept their Turkic -
Azerbaijani surnames. Many names of military and courtier grades also remained 
Azerbaijani. Some examples were Khan, Beylarbey, Gizilbash, Qullar, 
Eshikaghasibashi, Kurchi, Kurchibashi, Yasavul, Ovchibashi, Munajimbashi, 
Cufrachibashi, Kanugi-bashi and Chalchibashi. 
Azerbaijan remained the major administrative unit of the country, and the 
governor of Azerbaijan was considered to be the successor of the throne and 
commander-in-chief of the army. If one may put it that way, the Safavi Empire 
ceased to be Azerbaijani, but Safavi Iran, created by Shah Abbas, still remained, to 
any degree, a Turkic-Gizilbash State (Memleket-i Gizilbash). 
To gain a foothold in Qazwin, Shah Abbas set off on the first of numerous 
victorious campaigns. In a short time, he released Khorasan from the Uzbeks and 
he dreamed of releasing his native Azerbaijan. However, for this purpose, it was 
necessary to win time, and in 1590. Shah Abbas concluded a peace treaty with the 
Osmans. Up to this point, he had in every possible way limited the struggle for 
independence on occupied territory. So, before signing the treaty, the Gizilbash 
tribes, Qajar and others led by Mahammed Khan Ziyad-oghlu Qajar, won 
255 
 
Shah Abbas` audience. 
Second half on the 18th 
Century. Opaque water 
colour and gold on paper.  
Shah Abbas' Georgian 
guard. 
 
Garabagh from the Turks and besieged Ganja. Under 
the request of Shah Abbas, which the Turks 
complained  about, the siege was removed. Under the 
treaty, a large part of the country passed into the 
hands of the Osmans. They received Shirvan, 
Garabagh, Tabriz and neighboring areas. 
The territory Shah Abbas called "Azerbaijan" 
remained in his hands as one entire administrative 
unit Iskender Munshi, an Azerbaijani historian of the 
16th Century, wrote that Shah Abbas kept "proud the 
name Azerbaijan - hereditary possession of the 
Safavids". Ardebil was announced the capital of 
Azerbaijan. Zulfugar Khan Qaramanlu was nominated 
as the first Beylarbey of Azerbaijan in 1592. A year 
later, Shah Abbas solemnly entered Ardebil. In 1598 
Shah Abbas transferred the capital to Isfahan, which 
was in the centre of the state. 
Shah Abbas received news that Uzbeks had 
seized Meshkhed and had put to death more than 
40,000 people there. Shah Abbas did not have enough 
means for the recruitment of an army, and he gave the 
order make coins out of all available magnificent gold 
and silver crockery. He said, "My father, blind king 
Mahammed Khudabende, frequently said that good 
payment will bring many more victories than the best 
luck can bring". 
On September 14, 1603 Shah Abbas began a 
military campaign to liberate Tabriz. For 14 days the 
young commander brought his army from Isfahan to 
Tabriz, unexpectedly for the Turks. On the road, the 
troops of Amir Gulu Khan Qajar and Zulfugar Khan 
Qaramanlu joined him. When the army approached 
Tabriz, the people of the city rose, which helped Shah 
Abbas take the city in a short time, and in a month the fortress. 
After that, by defeating the Osman army to the west of Tabriz, Shah Abbas 
moved his army in the direction of the Araks River. Nakhchivan and Julfa were 
surrendered to him without a struggle. Soon Ordubad joined them. Under the 
petition of Shah Abbas's Grand Vezir, Ordubadian Hatem Bey, the city of Ordubad 
was declared all tax-free. 
256 
 
Shah Abbas' mosque. 17th Century. Tiflis. 
 
Shah Abbas I's edict on limestone. 1615. Usta Sayid Taa 
ben-Sayyid Amir Badkui. Friday Mosque. Icheri Sheher, 
Baku. 
 
It was the most difficult to 
take the strongly fortified Irevan, 
the siege on which began on 
November 16, 1603. Here Shah 
Abbas used for the first time guns 
of large caliber, which had been 
cast by the known Azerbaijani 
foreman and gunner, Bahadir Bey 
Topchibashi. For the first time in 
about 100 years, the army of the 
Safavi State was attacking, and the 
Turkish army was defending. At 
the head of the army stood a clever, vigorous, courageous and ambitious 16-year-
old man, who set for himself the noble task of restoring the huge Safavi Empire of 
Shah Ismail. The fortress was taken in the summer of the next year. Amir Gulu 
Khan Qajar was appointed governor of Irevan's region, and Magsud Sultan 
Kengerli was appointed 
governor of Nakhchivan. After 
this, Georgia recognized the 
vassalage of Shah Abbas. Now 
all that remained was to return 
Garabagh and Shirvan. 
Beforehand, Husein Khan 
Musahib Qajar was nominated 
as Beylarbey of Garabagh. 
However, confrontation with 
the general forces of the 
Osmans was still waiting 
ahead. 
Understanding the danger of the forthcoming battle for the fate of the entire 
country, Shah Abbas used traditional tactics of the Safavids - tactics of "scorched 
earth". On the scale of cruelty, however, he exceeded all that had been done until 
that time. The vast territory that divided Turkey and Shirvan was devastated; the 
cities were destroyed and the people resettled in the central regions of Iran. Julfa, 
Nakhchiwan and Irevan were destroyed. After coming to Irevan, Turkish troops 
headed by Jalal-oghlu Sanan Pasha ended up without food and habitation and were 
compelled to return to Van. The troops of Shah Abbas launched an unexpected 
attack on the road to Van and defeated the army of Jalal-oghlu. 
Then and there Shah Abbas used the tactics of "scorched earth". On the way 
from Salinas to Tabriz, a distance of almost 250 km, the country was turned into 
257 
 
Shah Abbas Meydani. Esfahan. Pascal Coste. 1847. 
 
 
scorched desert. Despite this, Jalal-oghlu again collected a huge army of almost 
100,000 people and moved in the direction of Tabriz. On 7 November 1605, one of 
the largest battles in the history of Shah Abbas' wars took place. Here his military 
talent was discovered especially brightly. All of the battles were conducted under 
Shah Abbas' command. He distributed the basic forces and reserves, which 
managed to overpower the superior forces of the enemy. He used unexpected 
military cunning. The army of Shah Abbas seized many trophies, including about 
100 cannons. 
At once after the victory, Shah Abbas invaded Garabagh and besieged the 
fortress in Ganja. The capture of the fortress became possible after only four 
months, in the summer of 1606. Mahammed Khan Ziyad-oghlu Qajar was 
nominated as governor of Garabagh, taking the place of former governor, Husein 
Khan Musahib Qajar. Afterwards, Shah Abbas took Lori, Dmanisi and Tiflis, and 
he directed the army to Shirvan. The siege of Shemakha lasted almost half a year. 
At this time the people of Baku and Derbent rose and executed the Turkish 
garrisons. Thus, in the middle of 1607, all of Azerbaijan, East Kurdistan, Armenia 
and Georgia had ended up in the hands of Shah Abbas. Turkish historian Ibrahim 
Pechevi wrote about it with despair: "Thus, all that was conquered by Islam 
warriors in 10-12 years was completely lost. This godless Shah won all from the 
Turks in two years". 
The Turks could not agree to the loss of the territories won by Shah Abbas, 
and they required a return to the treaty that was signed in 1590. This led to 
continuous wars, which ended in the signing of a new peace treaty in 1612, fixing 
258 
 
borders. Actually, the Osman government recognized Shah Abbas' conquest. After 
the signing of the peace treaty, Shah Abbas invaded Georgia, ruined East Georgia 
and took prisoner 30,000 of the peace inhabitants. In reply to this, the huge Turkish 
army of 100,000 troops was directed to the Caucasus. 
In 1615, following traditional tactics, Shah Abbas ordered Mahammed 
Khan Ziyad-oghlu Qajar, Beylarbey of this region, to destroy the Ganja fortress 
and to move the capital city area to the Tiflis fortress. Shah Abbas avoided battle 
and limited his own actions by blocking communications of the Turkish army with 
back areas. In the winter of 1616-1617, the Osmans, who were suffering from 
famine and epidemics, retired, carrying huge losses. 
During the next year, Khalil Pasha, with a huge army of Turks and Crimean 
Tatars, was directed to Tabriz, and then to Ardebil. Shah Abbas had previously left 
both cities without battle, by evacuating the population. After refraining from the 
general's battle, Shah Abbas at last decided to launch a battle near the place Siniq 
Kerpi. Tired by their long march, the Osmans and Tatars suffered a shattering 
defeat. Commander of the Osman army, Hasan Pasha, died in the battle. 
After that, the Turks agreed to sign the next peace treaty, in September of 
1618. Peace, however, was not kept for long. This time, the treaty was violated by 
Shah Abbas. In 1622-1623 Shah Abbas invaded Arabian Iraq, including the cities 
Baghdad, Kerbala, Najaf, Mosul, Kirkuk and others, as well as Akhaltsikh in 
Georgia. In a year, Georgia, under the command of George Saakadze who had 
received good military training from Shah Abbas, rose in a struggle against the 
Safavids. Saakadze's troops liberated East Georgia and invaded Ganja. 
To suppress the revolt, Shah Abbas sent a huge army, which won the battle 
over Georgia at Gumushlu on 30 June 1625. Shah displaced the governor of 
Garabagh, Mahammed Gulu Khan Ziyad-oghlu Qajar, for cowardice. 
Shah Abbas died on 19 January 1629 in the city of Ashraf in Mazandaran at 
the age of 58. 
An outstanding historian, poet and public figure of Azerbaijan in the 19th 
Century, Abbas Gulu Agha Bakikhanov, summarized Shah Abbas's government in 
his widely known work, "Gulistan-i Irem". In it, he wrote: 
"Shah Abbas, known by his wise management and organization of the state, 
constituted civil and military rules and laws, by which Persian Shahs have been 
guided until now. Even in European histories, where the advantage of governors is 
strictly understood, Shah Abbas, patron of sciences and arts, deserved a name - 
Great. The people of Asia, for whom the memory of this great person has become 
an ideal of justice and wisdom, deify him. He erected so many public buildings that 
any King of the East cannot be compared to him in this respect. 
Mosques and schools in cities, caravanserai and waterworks in the desert, 
which spread out over all of Persia and the Caucasus, will yet for a long while 
testify about his benefactions. Shah Abbas lived in friendship with all 
259 
 
contemporary writers and scientists of Persia, who appeared in greater number in 
his time. He himself also sometimes composed verses, which have been highly 
esteemed in Persia until now". 
Shah Abbas was so popular that he became the hero of Azerbaijani dastans 
and fairy tales. He himself wrote verses and patronized scientists, physicians, poets 
and painters. It is enough to say that in different times at the Court lived such 
known figures of Azerbaijani culture as the poets Masihi and Saib Tabrizi, and the 
painters Sadiq Bey Afshar, Ali Riza Tabrizi, and Mir Mahammed Qazwini "Imad 
ul Muluk" ("The Support of Power"). There was a palace orchestra conducted by 
"chalchibashi". In Shah's library were a lot of religious and everyday books. It was 
dignified by the name Blooming Library. The first guardian of the library was the 
famous poet, painter and historian, Sadiq Bey Afshar, who obtained the name 
Sadiq Kitabdar. After him, it was led by the poet Ali Riza Tabrizi, who was 
dignified by the title Abbasi and otherwise known as Shah Navaz (Shah's flatterer). 
Shah Abbas completely re-planned Isfahan. On the straight and wide streets, 
he had constructed magnificent palaces, mosques, caravanserais, and public houses 
embellished by multicoloured tiles. In the center of Shah Abbas's capital was a big 
rectangular Royal Square, Shah Meydani, which looked onto Shah's mosque, 
palace and park. Shah's mosque (Mosjid-e-Shah) was constructed in 1616 and was 
one of the best architectural monuments in the world. All buildings and mosques 
were decorated with extravagant gleaming compositions of flowers, geometric 
designs and Koranic inscriptions in the distinguished style that started at the Gey 
Masjidi (Blue Mosque) in Tabriz. At the time of Shah Safi, the mosque was 
decorated with silver gates and marble. Military parades and games of chovqan 
(polo) took place on the square. By the planning and structure, and even by the 
names of the buildings situated here, the square looked like the squares of 
Azerbaijani capitals Tabriz and Qazwin, also called Shah Meydani. There were 
also Shah masjide (Shah's Mosque), Chehel Sotun (Forty Columns), Ala Gapi 
(palaces) and Haft Beheshi (Eight Paradises). The architects, calligraphers and 
builders from Azerbaijan—Shams ad-Din Mahammed Tabrizi, Qasim Tabrizi, 
Abdulatif Tabrizi, Molla Abdulla Tabrizi and others - actively participated in the 
construction of Esfahan. Shah Abbas built a special quarter in Esfahan for 
craftsmen and masters resettled from Azerbaijan. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
260 
 
Rustam Kills a Dragon. Shahnama. Sadiq Bey Afshar. Qazwin. 
1576/77. Opaque watercolour and ink on paper. Collection of 
Prince and Princess Sadruddin Aga Khan. 
A Star of First Magnitude 
in the Constellation of Talents 
 
Sadig Bey Afshar 
 
Without art, a life is not a life.  
Sadiq Bey Afshar 
 
Eminent painter and miniaturist Sadiq Bey Afshar stands out as a star of 
first magnitude in a constellation of talents, which Azerbaijan is rich in. As a 
prodigy, Sadiq Bey could not limit his creative work to only painting. He tried his 
hand in calligraphy (his name is mentioned among the calligraphers of Shah Abbas 
I), music, verse, prose, historical chronicles and tazkiries (biography, history and 
memoirs). Sadiq Bey was just as talented in all of these areas as he was in painting. 
The biography of this 
unusually talented man is 
reminiscent of an adventure 
story. During his life, he was 
a wandering dervish, as well 
as a manager of property for 
a minor ruler. Through some 
time, he became a battle hero, 
and in intervals between 
palace carousals and battles, 
he became a hard-working 
disciple and apprentice. At 
last, he was appointed 
manager of a famous library and art atelier in the royal palace. 
Historians who were Sadiq Bey's contemporaries highly valued his poetry. 
He wrote under the penname Sadiqi, which means Devoted. Sadiq Bey was the 
author of 10 various literary essays in prose and in verse, including "Divans" ("The 
Corpus of Poetry"). He also wrote Azerbaijani and Persian verses, as well as a his-
torical epic poem called "Fathname Abbasi-nama" ("The Book of Victories of a 
Famous Abbas"), which consisted of several thousand accurate verses about the 
campaigns of Shah Abbas I. A well-known Azerbaijani historian from the 17th 
Century, Iscander Munshi, compared this poem with Firdowsi's "Shah-Nama", 
which was written in the same metre. 
In Sadiq Bey's book, "Tazkire Mejmaul-havas", written in Azeri, a lot of 
valuable information is given about 480 poets, painters and calligraphers of the 
Safavid epoch. This tazkire presents significant interest for those who study 
  
261 
 
Balqis and the Hoopoe. Sadiq Bey Afshar.Qazwin. 1590. Opaque watercolour and ink on paper.  
British Museum, London. 
   
262 
 
Dervish. Sadiq Bey Afshar. 16th Century. 
Separate Miniature. 
 
 Azerbaijani and Persian literature and art. Only recently was it translated into Farsi 
and issued in Teheran. 
The treatise "Ganun as-Sovar" 
("Canon of the Images"), written in verse, 
was devoted to the technique and practice of 
painting and had a character of pedagogical 
edification. It brought fame to Sadiq among 
experts. Such treatises in the East were scarce 
(the majority of the treatise was devoted to 
the art of calligraphy encouraged by the 
clergy). Consequently, it became a significant 
piece of work used in the study of the theory 
and practice of medieval painting. 
Furthermore, for modern copyists and 
restorers, this is an invaluable handbook that 
permits reproduction using the techniques of 
miniature painting - from the preparation of 
brushes and papers to the manufacturing of 
natural pigment and glue paints. This is 
clearly one of the reasons for the increased 
interest in this treatise among scholars in 
Europe. 
Sadiq Bey Afshar was from a noble family of the Azerbaijani-Turkic tribe 
Afshar. He was born in Tabriz in 1533, and during his childhood he took a great 
interest in poetry and painting. At the age of 20, he lost his father and began his 
pilgrimage through the Arabian world, dressed in the garb of a dervish.After Sadiq 
Bey returned home, he worked in the palaces of various minor rulers. Due to the 
vigorous and gifted nature of Sadiq Bey, he soon found palace life idle and dull, 
whereupon he wrote, "As long as you live, go for craft and art, and improve your 
skill in them as much as you are able. Without art, a life is not a life". 
He decided to continue his education and became a pupil of the famous 
Tabriz miniaturist, Muzaffar Ali, who was the nephew of the great Behzad. 
Sadiq Bey said, "Any work, in my hands, seemed to me simple and easy. 
My only dream was possession by Behzad's art...and I spent many years looking 
for an ustad (master) similar to Behzad before 1 found him. At last, I found a 
teacher ... who is a rare ustad and one of the pupils of Behzad's brush". 
During his years of training, Sadiq Bey found time to earn fame with his 
own courageous, daring and reckless bravery in the battle against the Astrabad 
Turkmans. Sadiq Bey explained that these distinctive features of his temperament 
came from his Azerbaijani-Turkic origin. He said that displaying a "Turkic nature 
263 
 
Old Man on a Mule. Sadiq 
Bey Afshar. Late 16th/early 
17th Centuries. Bibliotheque 
Nationale. Paris. Separate 
Miniature. 
 
Teymur Khan Turkmens' 
Portrait. Sadiq Bey Afshar. 
1594. Separate Miniature. 
 
and following a gizilbash tradition", he considered himself a very soldierly and 
courageous person. 
Eight years of training did not pass in vain. 
Sadiq Bey, as wrote one of his contemporaries, "has 
reached huge success and has become an 
unsurpassed painter with thin brushes. He depicts 
thousands of amazing portraits". 
Sadiq Bey was invited to the royal palace, 
and under Shah Ismail II, he worked in the atelier of 
the royal library. Then under Shah Mahammed 
Khudabende (1578-1587), he was in charge of this 
famous library and accepted the name Sadiq 
Kitabdar (Sadiqi-Curator of Books). This library, 
which had in previous times been headed by the 
great artists Behzad and Sultan Mahammed, was 
considered to be the Academy of Arts. In the 
library's workshops and ateliers, books were 
rewritten, illustrated and embellished. Also, 
technologies of manufacturing paints and paper were 
developed, and art bindings were manufactured. 
The staff, consisting of a calligrapher, an ornament 
maker, painters and a gilder, prepared bookbinders 
on cardboard and on leather. 
For some time he worked in this position 
and under Shah Abbas I. Then he was replaced by 
a talented calligrapher and an even more talented 
courtier, Ali-Riza Tabrizi, called "Shah-Navaz" 
("Flatterer of the Shah"). However, as wrote 
Iskander Munshi in "Tarich-e Alem ara-e Abbasi", 
Sadiq Bey formally stayed in his position as 
kitabdar. 
Sadiq Bey's works were highly appreciated 
in his country and beyond. He presented some of 
his drawings to the poet Goruri, who had written a 
panegyric in his honour. Upon seeing the drawings, 
Goruri forewarned Sadiq Bey: "merchants 
purchased each sheet of my work for three tuman for delivery in India. Be careful: 
I would not sell them cheaper!" 
Among the well-known pictures by Sadiq Bey are portraits of Imam Gulu 
Khan, Teymur Khan Turkoman, Emir, vagrant dervishes and others. They are 
stored in museums in Istanbul, Paris, Boston and St. Petersburg. All of them are 
264 
 
Seated Prince. Sadiq Bey 
Afshar. Separate Miniature. 
 
executed in a manner characteristic of Sadiq Bey, 
transmitting the individual features of each particular 
person. Some books illustrated by Sadiq Bey have 
disappeared. 
Sadiq Bey died at the age of about 80. In the 
history of Azerbaijani miniature painting, Sadiq Bey 
has remained a magnificent portraitist and innovator in 
the realistic reproduction of his surroundings, and he 
showed an aspiration to represent perspective. Modern 
experts believe that his creative activity has played a 
significant role in the evolution of miniature painting in 
general, and in particular, in the evolution of the 
Isfahan School of Miniature Art in Iran. 
 
 
The Sheikh of Calligraphers 
 
Ali Riza Tabrizi 
 
At the end of the 16th Century nearly the whole Azerbaijan was occupied 
by Turks-Osmans. Famous Tabriz library with art atelier was ruined. Painters 
miniaturists, khattats, other masters had to move at first to Qazwin, then Isfahan 
due to the transfer of capital cities of Safavid state. 
Among these refugees was a very talented calligrapher, decorator, painter-
miniaturist and poet, Nizami ad-Din Ali Riza Tabrizi. He wrote in seven scripts but 
succeeded in nastalig and naskhi-suls. His biographical data is very scarce. It is 
only known that Ali Riza Tabrizi spent his youth in Tabriz, where he learned the 
naskhi-suls script from Al ad-Din Mahammed Tabrizi, and nastalig from 
Mahammed Husein. The latter wrote in verses to teach Ali Riza about the role of 
handwriting in art. 
After the Turks captured Tabriz in 1585, Ali Riza moved to Qazwin and 
settled there. He participated in the decoration of the mosque of Qazwin, rewrote a 
few highly artistic copies of the Koran and started teaching. 
Soon Ali Riza took service with the Khorasan sardar, Abul Mansur Farhad 
Khan Garamanlu. Stones about the works of the talented master reached the court, 
and Shah Abbas took on Ali Riza. 
Ali Riza succeeded not only in the art of calligraphy, but also in the art of 
intrigue and flattery. His success was so great that he was titled Abbasi. Besides, 
Ali Riza Tabrizi wrote verses and had the literary pseudonym Shah-Navaz 
(Flatterer of the Shah). 
265 
 
Sufi Poem by Jami. Ali Reza Tabrizi. 1598. Isfahan. Opaque watercolour, ink and gold on paper. 
 
Ali Riza was nominated as the head of the Shah's library, which had been 
managed quite deservedly by the well-known poet and painter Sadiq Bey Afshar 
since the time of Mahammed Khudabende's rule. Straight after his appointment, 
Ali Riza, by order of Shah Abbas, created an album composed of the best works of 
famous calligraphers and painters. 
From 1602 to 1604, Ali Riza was in Meshhed, where he made inscriptions 
and ornaments on the entombment of the eighth Shii imam-Musa ar-Riza. The 
work wa s done on such a highly artistic level that Shah Abbas asked Ali Riza to 
decorate the most important governmental buildings and mosques in Isfahan. 
Among them were inscriptions in large suls on the gates of the mosque of Magsud 
Bey, the mosque of Sheikh Lutfullah and the mosque of Shah Abbas I. 
Several manuscripts executed by Ali Riza are presently well known. Among 
them are medieval manuscripts of Azerbaijan, in which the scholar Kaziyev 
mentioned "Timur-nama" by Khatifi, 1568; a book of conversations between Shah 
Tahmasib I and Ambassador of Turkey Sultan Suleyman I, which was copied with 
the nastalig script in 1601/02; "Sahbat ul-Abrar" by Abd ur-Rahman Jami, 1613; a 
corpus that consists of different verses; and a copy of "Mehr-i Shafai". 
In 1616, Ali Riza and other masters and astronomers designed the plan of 
the restoration of the Maragha observatory. He also tried his forces in the art of 
miniature and poetry. 
One of his biographers, Mirza Sanglah, wrote that Ali Riza died at the age 
of 125 and was honoured one more title: Sheikh-ul Khattatin (Sheikh of 
Calligraphers). 
Ali Riza Tabrizi's son, Badi az-Zaman Tabrizi, choose his father's path and 
became known as a talented calligrapher. He possessed perfect nastalig handwrit-
266 
 
Mahammed Riza Bey - 
Safavid ambassador in 
France.  1715. Jermen Gilon. 
 
ing and was nicknamed Nikni-gar (Having Beautiful Handwriting). Badi enjoyed 
authority among scientists, due to his deep knowledge of Persian, Azeri and 
Arabic. Badi was also a well-known poet. A fragment of his verse, which he wrote 
on a separate sheet, is stored in the Institute of Manuscripts of Azerbaijan. 
If you go to Meshhed or Isfahan, please look at the arabesques that decorate 
the mosques and entombments of these famous cities, and take note of our 
outstanding countryman Ali Riza Tabrizi.  
 
Azerbaijani Don Juan 
at the Spanish Royal Court 
 
Don Juan Persian 
 
Oruj Bey, an Azeri from the Turkic-Gizilbash'sian tribe Bayat, wrote "Don 
Juan Persian", which was published in 1604. The book was written in Spanish and 
published in Valladolid, the capital of the Spanish 
Kingdom, just one year before the appearance of 
"Don Quixote", by Servantes. Oruj Bey arrived in 
Spain as a secretor of the Safavid Embassy, and he 
decided to stay there for good. The publishing of the 
book was an outstanding event because it was the first 
book by an Azeri writer to be published in Europe. In 
addition, the issue of the book and the reception for 
Oruj Bey at the Royal Court proved to be the highest 
level of education of Azeri graduates of universities 
of that lime. The sonnets written in honour of Oruj 
Bey at the Royal Court of Spain described his 
aristocratism, his high level of education and his love 
of painting. The members of the Royal family sought 
out his company. 
In 1926, after long years of oblivion, the book was translated into English 
and published in London, and in 1959, it was translated into Persian. The book was 
translated into Russian and published in Baku by the famous Azeri historian-
medievalist Octay Effendiev, with the help of Akif Farzalliyev, with comments and 
introduction. 
The biography of Oruj Bey (Don Juan), included afterwards, was made on 
the basis of the information given by Oruj Bey himself in his book. Oruj Bey, as 
some researches had supposed, was born in 1560. His father, Sultan Bey Gizil, a 
noble representative of the Turkic-Gizilbash an tribe, was a close retainer of 
Mahammed Khudabende, Safavid Shah and his son Khamza Mirza. 
267 
 
Mahammed Riza Bey - 
Safavid Ambassador in 
Paris. 1715. Jermen Gilon.  
 
Shah Abbas I with Osman Ambassadors. 1609. 
During the years of Khudabende's rule of the 
country, Osmans occupied almost all parts of 
Azerbaijan. Therefore, the Safavid government 
concentrated all their forces on releasing Tabriz from the 
Osmans. Young Oruj Bey and his father participated in 
the battles for Tabriz. Sultanali Bey sacrificed his life 
heroically in one of those struggles in 1585, and Oruj 
Bey took the detachment of 300 people under his 
command, which was gathered by his father's own 
account. Oruj Bey participated in most of the military 
actions led by Hamza Mirza. After Shah Abbas, an 
outstanding general and statesman, took the Safavid 
throne, Oruj Bey participated in a lot of his military 
actions. After taking Gerat, Oruj Bey was promoted to a 
higher post in the army. 
As Oruj Bey's authority of honorable military and 
political figure was strong enough at that time, he was 
the first candidate nominated by Shah Abbas for an anti-
Osmanian Embassy directed to Europe. The Embassy, 
headed by Huseinali Bey, left the country in 1599. The 
mission consisted of four secretors and five service 
assistants. Oruj Bey was assigned first secretor of the 
Embassy. The diplomatic mission, authorized by Shah 
Abbas, was to visit eight European countries, including 
Russia, Germany, Spain, France, 
Poland, Venice, England and 
Scotland.  
The Embassy went from 
Esfahan through Qum and Qazwin, 
directly to Gilan, and from there, to 
Astrakhan by ship. Then they sailed 
along the Volga to Kazan, and 
continued in a sledge through Nijniy 
Novgorod and Vladimir to Moscow. 
Tsar Boris Godunov warmly 
accepted the delegation in Moscow. Because of the rain and snow, they had to stay 
in the city for five months. 
In the beginning of 1600, the Embassy, with many presents received from 
the Tsar, continued to the West. From Arkhangelsk, the mission went by ship to 
the mouth of the Elba and sailed up the river to Emden. They went through 
268 
 
Shah Ismail I with Osman 
Ambassadors. Zeynalabdin Tabrizi. 
 
 
Germany in eight coaches. During their entire journey to Prague, they were greatly 
accepted by all the landowners in Bohemia. 
The Embassy was solemnly met in Prague 
by Emperor Rudolf II (1576-1612), grandson of 
Ferdinand I. The travelers rested in the Imperial 
Palace for three months, and in the spring of 
1601, their path led through Nuremberg, Munich 
and other towns in Germany, to Italy. The 
Embassy was met by the duke of the famous 
family Bonzaga in his residence in Mantua. Then 
Oruj Bey went with other delegates through 
Verona and Ferrara to Florence. They stayed for 
two days in the palace of the Grand Duke of 
Tuscany, Ferdinand I. The Prince himself and his 
wife Christine, granddaughter of Queen 
Catherine Medici, met them in Pisa, where the 
delegation stayed for 10 days. From there, the 
mission went to Rome to visit the Pope. More 
than 1,000 carriages, 4,000 riders and crowds of 
people met them in front of the gates of the city. 
The delegation paid a visit to the Pope and stayed in Rome for two months. 
From Rome, Huseinali Bey and the rest of delegation went to Florence on 
freighted galleys, and then on horseback through Avignon, Montpelier and 
Perpinian to Barcelona. From there, they took occasional breaks to the capital of 
the Spanish Kingdom, Valladolid, There, having given the message of Shah Abbas 
to the King of Spain, Philip III, the diplomatic mission had accomplished its task, 
and having made the trip around Spain, the Embassy arrived at the time to return 
home. Everything was well except for one unpleasant surprise: three secretors of 
the Embassy decided to convert to Christianity and to stay in Spain. 
King of Spain Philip III himself became godfather to Ali Gulu Bey and 
gave him the name Don Philip Persian. Bunyad Bey was the second christened and 
was given the name Don Diego Persian. Our Oruj Bey turned out to be the last 
apostate and was named in his new religion Don Juan Persian. Margarita Austrian, 
the Queen of Spain, was his godmother. 
Almost nothing is known about the further life of Oruj Bey in Spain. There 
is only one piece of information from his contemporaries: Oruj Bey had a 
bickering with the Persian Ambassador on 15 May 1605 and killed the latter in a 
duel. 
The information about the historical events, gathered from Oruj Bey and his 
travel notes, show him as an observant person with the habit of generalising sub-
stances. For example, speaking about Safavid Iran, he wrote: "Now we have 33 
269 
 
clans of noble families, having been recognized in Persia, and they have had a 
great influence in the country". Here he named the following: Ustajlu, Shamlu, 
Afshari, Turkomani, Bayati, Tekelu, Kharmandalu, Zulkardarlu, Qajar, Garamanlu, 
Beyburtlu, Ispirlu, Oryat, Chaushlu, Asoyishlu, Chamish-Kazaklu, Saruzolaklu, 
Garabajaklu, Bakhaarlu, Kuyniorilu, Kirklu, Boshalu, Haji Phakilu, Hamzalu 
Zolahlu, Mahmudlu, Garachomahlu, Gara Goyunlu, Gezi-Bayizlu, Peiklu, Inazlu 
and Khuh-Giluyalu. Referring to this, he stated that even with Shah Abbas, who 
always tried to decrease the authority of the Gizilbashian noble society, the ruling 
of all of Iran was still in the hands of the Azeris. 
The lines written by Oruj Bey about Spain were very similar to what was 
reported on television from the Olympic Games in Barcelona in 1988, although 
they were written almost 400 years ago: "All those folk festivities, as it seemed to 
us, were celebrated in Spain much better than in any kingdom or country we had 
visited before, because Spanish people inherent a magnificence and self-mastery 
which most people lack". 
Reading Oruj Bey's description of the life in Moscovia, we are reminded of 
the past years: "Nobody is accepted to be treated if he is a foreigner. Nobody, in 
the scare of death, is allowed to go to a different country and to have 
communication with other people and to study there". About Persian people, he 
wrote, "They are always jealous of their wives. This is their ancient characteristic 
feature". 
In conclusion, it must be stated that Oruj Bey was, no doubt, an outstanding 
personality, and his work, written without the conventional Shah's censorship, is a 
valuable source of historical information about Azerbaijan, Iran, the Caucasus, and 
other bordering countries. 
Oruj Bey himself compared his traveling, without a sense of confusion, with 
the travels of Marco Polo and Magellan. However, there is one more question 
which still remains unclear: if Oruj Bey could have served as a prototype of the 
Ladies'man, Don Juan, described by the Spanish dramatist Tirso de Molika in his 
1630 drama "Sevilian Mischief-Maker or Stone Guest". Or, vice versa, if during 
his christening, Oruj Bey was given the name popular in Spain due to some 
resemblance to the real hero. 
 
A Famous Doctor and Poet 
 
Rugn ad-din Masud Masihi 
 
Masihi is one of the most outstanding poets and physicians of the 17th 
Century. He came from a hereditary family of physicians. His father Nizam ad-Din 
Ali was the court doctor of various governors of Iran and India. His brothers Nasir 
and Qutba and son Mahammed  Husein also were doctors. All of them like most 
270 
 
Mughal Miniature. 18th Century. 
Jahangir seated next to Safavid 
Emperor Shah Abbas I and attended 
by Asaf Khan, the Queen's brother; 
Nur Jahan (left); and Khan-i Alam 
(right), the Mughal ambassador to 
Persia. 
educated people of their time wrote verses. Nizam ad-Din Ali dealt with medical 
education of his son and from young age Masihi not only began medical practice, 
but also wrote for physicians- practician, a book called "Zabitat ul-alaj" ("Rules of 
the Treatment"). However, Masihi is now known more as poet, though a large part 
his poetic heritage was lost. Except for number 
of lyrical and epic writings, there servived and 
brought him glory the only poem " Varga and 
Gulsha ", written in 1629 in Azeri. Unique 
manuscript copies of the poem are kept at the 
British Museum and the library of Teheran 
University. 
The second manuscript, as it follows 
from an inscription, belonged first to Beylarbey 
of Garabagh, Ughurlu Khan Ziyad-oghlu Qajar 
(appointed as Beylarbey in 1664), who always 
patronized scientists and poets and was not a 
bad poet. Then somehow it got in Moscow, 
whence a certain Huseingulu, son of 
Mahammed Khatamis Kadkhamini in 1749/50 
redeemed it and brought to Teheran. 
The London manuscript was copied in 
17 years after the completion of the poem, but 
the Garabagh copy in four years. Copyist's 
name became known from Ughurlu Khan's 
manuscript. It was well-known Khabibullah ibn 
Asadullah Dumbuli. The work "Dane va Dan" (" Grain and trap") and " Zanbur 
vaasal " (" Bee and Honey "), written also in Azeri, havn't been discovered so far. 
Works of Masihi written on themes of Nizami's poems are not found either. 
The information on life and creativity of Masihi is collected on the basis of 
the analysis of medieval tazkirists' works by Aliyar Safarly. 
The time of life of the physician - poet goes back to approximately 1579/80 
- 1655/56. Masihi was born in Tabriz. It is known that Masihi's father at first 
removed from Tabriz to Qazwin after removal of the Court of 
Shah Tahmasib, and then, when the Shah Abbas transfereed the capital 
further away east wards, the court doctor appeared in Isfahan. 
Full name of the poet was Ruqn ad-Din Masud Masihi. Frequently he was 
called simply doctor Ruqna. Masihi (Masikh, Masikha) -is his literary pseudonym. 
Masihi was educated in Isfahan. He perfectly knew Azeri, Persian and Arabic, 
studied medicine, philosophy, logic, astrology, theology and versification. Like 
many of his contemporaries, Masihi was devoted to calligraphy, gained great 
271 
 
successes on this track. Verses he wrote in Azeri and Persian. His writings number 
about 100,000 beyts(distich). 
Like his father, Masihi as court doctor of Shah Abbas came to the Palace. 
Owing to his erudition high level of poetical skill, Masihi became closer with 
Shah, became his nearest adviser. 
Medieval tazkirists wrote, that Shah frequently stayed at Masihi's home and 
attended his majlises. Masihi was regarded as Shah's adviser and accompanied him 
in many campaigns. After quarrel with Shah, Masihi left for India together with an 
other doctor Heydar. 
Doctor Heydar, like Masihi, was talented poet, writing in Azeri. It is known 
that Shah Abbas issued a decree of the translation of his poetical stories into 
Persian. 
In India, Masihi held medical practice under the court of hakims of different 
ranks, including Shah Akbar and Shah Jahangir from dynasty of Great Mughals. 
The authority of Masihi as doctor, at the court was very great. A testimony to the 
fact is an episode from his life under the court of Shah Jahangir. 
Following an insignificant fault, proud doctor Ruqna was asked to leave the 
court. However, in a year, when Shah was gravelly ill and no court doctors could 
help him, he with apologies was invited to return and continue to perform his as 
doctor. 
He lived and worked in Agra, Allahabad, Jeypur, other towns of India. Here 
he frequently met with his countrymen. In particular, Masihi met well-known 
Azerbaijan poet Saib Tabrizi. Many tazkirists considered Saib as Masihi's disciple. 
Their friendship had a positive effect on the creativity of both poets. 
One of the first "Divans" of Masihi after his death was compiled by Saib 
Tabrizi. Tazkirist Mirza Tahir Nas-rabadi, familiar with Masihi, wrote that in 
Saib's home there were ten "Divans" of Masihi. In Bengal, Masihi met with Azeri 
scients Husein ibn Kalar Burkhan Tabrizi, author of the dictionary "Burkhane-
Gate". 
In 1632, Masibi came back home from India, after having stayed there for 
more than 20 years. On the occasion of his return, poet Ovji Nazari wrote verses: " 
Thousand gratefulness to God that I had saw doctor Ruqna. His treatment, like old 
wine, is fresh and perfect, gives doctors an idea of natural life. Let wine cup be 
filled who helped my hands reach up to wineglass ". 
On return home, Masihi presented his poem " Varga and Gulsha " to Shah 
Sefi. The court, however, him did not recieve him properly, he spend the rest of his 
life in poverty. Doctor Ruqna died at the age of 81 in the town of Kashan, not 
decliming from medical practice to last days of his life. 
 
 
 
272 
 
The Last 
Great Classical Poet 
of Iran and Azerbaijan 
 
Saib Tabrizi 
 
One of the most prominent poets of the Orient of the 17th Century was Saib 
Tabrizi, who wrote in Azeri and Persian. Mirza Mahammed Ali Saib Tabrizi was 
born in 1601 in Tabriz, the capital of Azerbaijan, where he received primary 
education. His father, Mirza Abdulrahim, was a merchant and, as well known 
tazkirist Nasrabadi pointed out, was a reputed bargainer, "worthy of trust". His 
paternal uncle, Shams ad-Din Mahammed Tabrizi, was a magnificent calligrapher, 
famous under the name of Shirin-Kalam (Sweet Pen). 
The Osmans invaded Tabriz 
during the reign of Tahmasib at the end 
of the 16th Century, after which Shah 
Abbas moved many Tabrizians to 
Isfahan. Among them was Saib's father. 
There, Saib continued his studies and 
poetic activity. His teachers were 
prominent scientists of that time, Kashi 
and Shafai. By the end of his studies, he 
was already well known in Isfahan as a 
well-educated figure and a talented poet. 
Further, as it was accepted in that period, Saib started his life of wandering. 
He visited Mecca and Adina, and he went to Turkey, where he met scientists and 
poets and acquainted them with his own poetry. In Isfahan, where Saib soon 
returned, the poet faced a cold reception, and in 1625 he left for India. From 
Isfahan, he moved to Kabul. Governor of Kabul Mirza Ahsanulla Navvab, who 
was known in the poetic world under the pseudonym Zafarkhan, received Saib as a 
respected guest in his palace. 
In 1630, Zafarkhan brought Saib to the Palace of the Great Mughal Shah 
Jahan. (Later, Shah Jahan became known throughout the world as the creator of the 
mausoleum for his wife, the Taj Mahal). Shah Jahan received the poet with 
significant homage and honoured him with high status. 
At this court, Saib met Masihi, the famous Azerbaijani physician and poet 
who wrote the poem "Gulshen and Varga". Masihi performed the duties of the 
Shah's chief physician. 
The friendship between the poets lasted for many years and positively 
influenced the creativity of both of them, though many tazkirists considered Masihi 
to be Saib's teacher. Saib highly appreciated the poetical talent of Masihi and was 
273 
 
one of the first people to put together his "Divan" straight after his death. Tazkirist 
Mirza Tahir Nasrabadi wrote that there were 10 of Masihi's "Divans" in Saib's 
house. A few years later, Saib's father arrived in India, bringing with him 
permission for the poet to return to Isfahan. Zafarkhan, already governor of 
Kashmir, let Sahib go home in 1633. However, for some reason the poet did not 
stay in Isfahan for long and again started travelling. 
He visited Meshhed, Qum, Qazwin, Yezd, 
Ardebil and Tabriz, and then came back to 
Isfahan. There, Saib was received with great 
honours and was invited to the palace of Shah 
Abbas II (1642-1666). In the palace, Saib was 
given the title Maliki-Shuara, or head of court 
poets. He composed several lyrical verses and 
kasids. Saib Tabrizi created a new trend in poetry, 
which Iranian scholars define as the Isfahan style. 
Here it would be appropriate to note that he is 
known in India as the founder of the Indian 
school Persian poetry. 
While at the court, Saib wrote about the 
Shah's feats of arms in his kasids and epic poems. 
Of particular significance from a literary 
standpoint was the poem Kandahar-name. It was devoted to the military campaign 
of Shah Abbas II in Afghanistan and the capture of Kandahar in 1649. 
After the advent of the rule of Shah Suleyman (1666-1694), Saib's status at 
the court weakened and he had to leave Isfahan. 
Saib devoted the last 10 years of his life to putting his own works in order 
and classifying them. He compiled thematic volumes of verses: Mir'atul-Jamal, 
Arayishenigar and Vajibul-Khifz. 
Saib created a huge poetic heritage. Some scholars  believe that he was the 
author of about 300,000 beyts (couplets). The well-known Azerbaijani scholar 
Mahammed Ali Tarbiyat wrote about Saib's Divan in his book "Prominent Figures 
of Azerbaijan", indicating 120,000 beyts (not including poems). 
Saib Tabrizi died in 1677 in Isfahan, where he was buried. 
Seyid Azim Shirvani, Husein Efendi Gayibov, Firidun Kocharli, the scholar 
Arasli and Azeroghlu all studied Saib Tabrizi's creativity. His poetry was carefully 
analysed in Iran, India and in the West. Saib's talent and his leading position in the 
poetry of the Orient are generally recognised. Czech orientalist Yan Rinka 
considers that after Hafiz and Saadi, Saib Tabrizi was the brightest poet in Iran. 
Crimski believes that Saib was the teacher of the Iranian poets of the 17th Century. 
Bertels saw Saib as the Hafiz of the 17th Century. Outstanding Indian scholar 
274 
 
Shibli Neman considers Saib to have been the last great poet of Iran. Saib Tabrizi 
was the last poet of the old school. 
The history of literature is noted for its regularity. The higher the authority 
of the poet, the more cities and countries regard him as their own poet. So it was 
with Homer, Nizami, Nasimi, Shakespeare and many others. These disputes have 
proceeded for many centuries, and it will probably never be resolved as to where 
each personality belongs. The destiny of Saib developed a little differently. The 
poet is considered to be native Azeri, Iranian and Indian. Nobody casts doubt on it, 
since Saib did so much for each of these nations. Saib, however, always empha-
sized the role of Tabriz in the formation of his poetic talent, and he stressed his 
Tabriz origin. He praised the beauty of this city: 
 
If Saadi is from the clay of Shiraz,  
Saib is from the clean ground of Tabriz. 
 
The Shah of Persia Elected by the 
Great Azeri-Turkic 
Gurultay (Congress) 
 
Nadir Shah Afshar 
 
Safavi Iran experienced a terrible economic and political crisis at the end of 
the 17th and beginning of the 18th Centuries. The central and eastern parts of the 
country fell under the authority of the Afghans. Turkey had occupied Azerbaijan, 
Shirvan and neighboring provinces. Russia had intensified its activities in the 
Caucasus. In 1723, Peter I launched a campaign against Baku and occupied the 
entire Caspian area. 
Only Mazandaran actually remained independent. Governor of Asterabad, 
Fatah Khan Qajar, ruled there. He received prince Tahmasib, son of Sultan Husein 
Shah, who had escaped from the Afghans and soon after proclaimed himself Shah.  
In the country, tensions intensified between the nobility and both peasantry 
and the urban population. There was no leader to take the lead of the struggle 
against the conquerors. Such a person soon appeared. It was the little known Nadir 
Gulu Khan Afshar. 
Nadir Gulu Khan, future Shah of Iran, came from the Qirqlu family of the 
Azeri-Turkic tribe Afshar, who had been resettled by Shah Ismail I from 
Azerbaijan to Khorasan. Nadir Gulu was bom in 1688 to a poor family of sheep 
skinners. 
 When the young man was 18 years old, he and his mother were abducted 
into slavery, after the raid of Khorezm Uzbeks. Nadir Gulu soon escaped from 
captivity and on his way back to Khorasan, he joined the army of Baba Ali Bey, 
275 
 
Nadir Shah Receiving an Ottoman Envoy. 1730s-
1740s. Opaque watercolour and gold on paper. 
Private  Collection. 
 
Nadir Shah's Equestrian Statue. Meshhed, 
Iran. 
 
governor of Abiverd. He mastered a small army and gradually subordinated a few 
provinces of Khorasan. 
Nadir Gulu Khan's further 
victorious drive on Khorasan was 
stopped by the powerful feudal lord 
Melik Mahmud. 
Nadir Gulu Bey sought help 
from Tahmasib. When Shah Tahmasib 
and Fatali Khan Qajar arrived with 
troops in Khorasan in 1726 to 
overthrow Melik Mahmud and restore 
the power of the Shah in Iran, Nadir 
Gulu and his soldiers joined the Shah's 
army. 
Tahmasib nominated Nadir Gulu 
as vicegerent of Khorasan, and he adopted the name of Tahmasib Gulu Khan. Shah 
Tahmasib needed Nadir Gulu Khan, among other reasons, to neutralize Fatali Khan 
Qajar, whose influence was quickly growing. However, it seemed insufficient for 
the Shah, and not to a smaller degree to 
Nadir, and during the siege of Meshhed, 
Fatali Khan Qajar was killed on Shah 
Tahmasib's order. Nadir's report to the 
Shah that Fatali Khan had allegedly held a 
secret alliance with Melik Mahmud served 
the occasion. 
Nadir Gulu Khan was appointed 
commander-in-chief of the Shah's army. 
Soon Nadir defeated Melik Mahmud's 
army and killed Melik Mahmud. 
Afterwards, Nadir's standing at the court 
strengthened significantly. In 1727, Nadir 
completely broke off with Shah Tahmasib and began his struggle for power in the 
whole of Khorasan. 
Nadir gained a number of victories over Kurdish and Turkman tribes who 
got out of his control, as well as Shah Tahmasib's army. 
The Shah recognized his defeat and searched for ways of reconciliation. By 
that time, Nadir had united all of northeast Iran by launching a number of 
successfııl campaigns. His success greatly worried the Afghan Shah in Iran, 
Ashraf. The latter moved his army to Khorasan for the struggle against Nadir. 
On 30 September 1729, Ashraf was overwhelmed in a battle on the river 
Mihmandost. This battle of Nadir was a brilliant victory to liberate the country 
276 
 
Battle Scene with Nadir Shah on 
Horseback. Ali Qulu Jabbadar. 
Isfahan. Mid-18th Century. Opaque  
watercolour and gold on paper. 
Museum of Fine Art. Boston. 
 
from forcigners. Ashrafs army receded to Teheran, and then to Isfahan. The 
Turkish Sultan sent a large army to the aid of Afghan Shah Ashraf, realising 
correctly that having fınished with the Afghans, Nadir Shah would make his way to 
Azerbaijan. 
The decisive battle between Nadir and 
Ashraf occurred on 13 November 1729 near 
Isfahan. This time, Nadir gained a victory over 
a united Afghan-Turkish army. Thc chaotic 
escape of Afghans began. They were so 
frightened that they left Isfahan without a battle. 
Nadir solemnly entered the city and, with his 
own hand, he put an Iranian crown on Shah 
Tahmasib's head. After some time, Nadir 
directed his troops after the Afghans to the 
province of Fars. Nadir again won a victory, 
and Ashraf died during the escape. The eastern 
part of the country was completely liberated. It 
was then necessary to liberate Azerbaijan and 
some neighboring regions from the Ottomans. 
In 1731, Nadir Gulu Khan defeated the 
Turks and liberated Azcrbaijan, Hamadan and 
Kermanshah. Turks remained only north of the 
Arax. 
In an attempt to enhance his authority, Tahmasib decided to liberate the 
region using his own forces. 
Tahmasib suffered a defeat, and in 1731 he concluded a shameful peace 
treaty for his country, under which all of the areas north of the Arax and some 
areas of Kermanshah were to pass over to the Turks. Nadir Gulu Khan did not 
recognize this treaty. Observing an ancient Turkic custom, he invoked in 1732 a 
Gurultay (congress) of Kfıans and nobility, which overthrew Tahmasib. His eight-
month-old son Abbas III was announced Shah. All power fell com-pletely in thc 
hands of Nadir. Then he won victory after victory, and within two years he had 
liberated all of Azerbaijan and East Georgia from the Turks. 
Bakikhanov wrote that the military talent of Nadir Gulu Khan manifested 
itself during the siege of Ganja, where there was a Turkish garrison to defend it. 
The siege was delayed, however, and the garrison did not surrender hoping to get 
aid from Turkish Commander Abdulla Pasha. He camped in Kars and supported 
the spirits of the besieged troops by constantly promising to help. 
Leaving a part of the army at the walls of Ganja and blocking the road to 
Daghestan, Nadir and 15,000 soldiers moved to Kars. Not wanting to risk entering 
into battle with Nadir, Abdulla Pasha proved his worth as a gifted warlord and 
277 
 
Abbasi. Silver. Nadir Shah 
Afshar. Daghestan. 1154 
(1741). 
The throne of Nadir Shah. 18th Century. 
This throne was presented by Nadir Shah to 
Ottoman Sultan Mahnıud I (1730-1754). 
Gold, precious diamonds and enamel 
embelish the throne. 
 
locked in the fortress to prepare for a long siege. Wishing to speed up events, Nadir 
lifted the siege at night and fell back. 
Abdulla Pasha swallowed this bait and began pursuing Nadir up to Irevan 
with a strong army of 100,000 troops. There, in the south-west of Ichmeadzin 
Nadir unexpectedly turned back and came upon the 
Turkish army. The unexpected attack brought panic to 
the Turkish soldiers and Nadir Gulu Khan won a 
complete victory. After this, the garrisons of Irevan 
and Tiflis surrendered at the discretion of the victor. 
By the end of 1735, the Caucasus were 
completely cleared of Turkish troops, which was 
possible due to the great victories of Nadir. It is 
important to stress the local population's help to Nadir 
Gulu Khan in his struggle against the Turks, and their 
later struggle with Nadir Gulu Khan. In this struggle, the future independent 
Azerbaijani Khanates were shaped. The fırst that came out of submission to Nadir 
Shah became the Sheki Khanate. 
According to the Ganja treaty of 
1735, Russia ceded Baku to Nadir, and 
Peter I seized Derbent on condition that he 
would continue the struggle against Turkey 
and not make a separate peace agreement 
with Ottoman Turkey. 
In 1736 a peace treaty was 
concluded, under which all the territories 
within the borders of Safavi Iran in 1722 
were returned to Nadir. Only the peoples of 
Daghestan remained recalcitrant, always 
orientating towards Sunni Turkey. Nadir 
directcd troops to Daghestan, nearly 
reached Qazy Qumukh and came back. 
Nadir nominated his native brother Ibrahim Khan as Governor General of the 
newly established areas of Azerbaijan. 
For the first time in many years, the huge territory of Great Azerbaijan was 
administratively subordinated to one person. Now the borders of Safavi Iran had 
almost completely been restored, and it was necessary to restore its destroyed 
economy. 
The representatives of the old the Safavi Dynasty had lost their authority 
among the feudal nobility and people, and they were hardly capable of saving the 
country from breaking up. Nadir decided to choose the next Shah. For this purpose, 
278 
 
he again invoked the Gurultayin the Mughan steppe, observing ancient Turkic 
customs. At the Gurultay, he gathered military, civil and religious nobility, as well 
as town and country leaders. On the whole, there were about 100,000 people there, 
including servants. About 12,000 temporary buildings were erected for them out of 
wood and reed, including mosques, bath-houses and bazaars. 
On the New Year holiday, Novruz Bayram, on 21 March 1736, Nadir Gulu 
Khan suggested that the Gurultay select a Shah from their people, as Shah Abbas 
III was a baby and Nadir Gulu Khan had become tired from the affairs and 
declined from authority. 
The Gizilbash (the Azerbaijan military nobility) was obliged with their rise 
to the Safavids and, certainly, opposed to changing the dynasty. However, it was 
only Beylarbey of Garabagh and Ganja Ughurlu Khan Qajar who spoke openly 
about it; as a result, he lost a greater portion of his possessions. He owned the 
region of Ganja and therefore bore the title of Ganja Beylarbey. A larger part of 
Qajars from Garabagh was resettled in Khorasan. 
When the Gurultay crowned Nadir under the name Nadir Shah, he had to be 
entreated for a long time before he agreed to accept this title. Then Nadir gavc all 
the participants of the Gurultay expensive souvenirs, including slaves that were 
mainly of Armenian and Georgian origin. 
After the advent of his power, Nadir Shah waged war and his military 
genius did not let him down. During his campaigns, Nadir Shah hoped to restore 
the national economy and win over the Gizilbash nobility, who were dissatisfied by 
the change in the dynasty. 
In 1737 Nadir Shah marched out against the rebellious Afghans and 
occupied Herat and Kandahar. Then he started a campaign in India, which received 
the Afghan refugees. Without difficulty, Nadirs army approached Qarnalu 
(northwest of Delhi), where on 24 February 1739 he defeated the army of the Great 
Mughal Mahammad Shah, and on 20 March he occupied Delhi. 
The Mughal State paid a huge contribution worth 6 million rupees in cash 
and 500 million rupians in precious stones. The military booty was estimated at 
700 million rupees. A greater portion of the riches was taken to Qelat, where it was 
kept until the death of Nadir Shah. Nadir Shah withdrew some precious stones and 
kept them for himself. This displeased the warriors. The contribution included a 
diamond called Qukhi-Nur (A Mountain of Light), which was famous throughout 
the world. It also included a "peacock throne", which was spangled with precious 
stones. After conquering India, Nadir subjugated Sind and undertook an expedition 
to Central Asia. 
Despite persistent resistance, Nadir Shah annexed Bukhara and Khiva 
Khanates to his state in 1740. In 1741 Nadir Shah launched a campaign in 
Daghestan. The fact is that while Nadir Shah was capturing India, the highlanders 
had got out of subordination. Their troops regularly made attacks on Derbent, 
279 
 
Shemakha, Kakheti and Jaro-Belokan. In 1738 during the battle of Janika, the 
troops of Ibrahim Khan, Nadir Shah's brother, were defeated by allied troops of the 
highlanders. Ibrahim Khan and Uhurlu Khan Qajar, Beylarbey of Ganja, were 
killed. 
In Daghestan, Nadir Shah met persistent resistance. Despite a number of 
victories in the beginning of 1743, Nadir Shah had to retreat from Daghestan. 
However, in order to maintain his prestige in Daghestan, a coin with the name of 
Nadir Shah was made. 
Aspiring to restore his reputation that had been undermined in Daghestan, 
Nadir Shah waged war against Turkey with the purpose of occupying Arabian lraq. 
However, this war proceeded with variable success and did not lead to a victory, 
since part of the army had to be transferred to Iran and neighboring countries to 
suppress overt actions against Nadir. 
In 1746 Nadir concluded a peace treaty with Turkey, under which the 
previous borders remained as they were. Nadir Shah transferred the capital from 
the ruined Isfahan to Meshhed, where he built the fortress Qelat on an 
unapproachable mountaintop and where he kept treasures. For the construction of 
the fortress, Azerbaijani peasants dragged marble blocks weighing up to 15 tonnes. 
Approximately at the same time, hc began building a fleet in the Persian 
Gulf and the Caspian Sea, hoping this re-equipped army would attract European 
experts. A special place in the army was occupied by artillery and tufankchi 
infantrymen armed with heavy muskets. Ahuge fortifıed centre was created in 
Merv to cast new guns, mortar and cannonballs. Nadir Shah's only interest was 
war. When he learned that there was no warfare in paradisc, he asked, "How then 
can there be any delight there?" 
All this entered into Nadir Shah's extensive plans for further conquest. He 
dreamed of seizing the entire coast of the Caspian Sea, subduing China aııd 
creating a large state. However, his plans failed to come true. 
The policy of centralization, which he pursued, did not coincide with the 
interests of the determined feudal nobil-ity. In 1741, when he was moving through 
the Mazandaran forest, an attempt was made on him. Then the failures in 
Daghestan and a number of uprisings in 1743-1747 followed. Disappointed by 
these misfortuncs, Nadir Shah began to resort to mass execution, which involved 
members of his own family. As part of a conspiracy in June 1747, Nadir was killed 
at night in his tent. So tragically came the end of the life of the Napoleon of the 
East, as many historians titled him. 
 
 
 
 
 
280 
 
Panel on the wall of the central 
hall on the first floor in the palace 
of Sheki Khans. 
 
Abbasi. Silver. 
Sheki. 1189 (1775). 
Sheki Khanate.
 
 
 
The Courageous 
Freedom Fighter 
 
Haji Chelebi 
 
The outstanding political figure and 
talented commander Haji Chelebi Shekili entered 
into history as the founder of the independent 
Sheki Khanate. He was a distant relative of 
Danish Khan, who in 1551 led the revolt of 
Shekinians against Safavi Shah Tahmasib I. 
Haji Chelebi was one of the first Khans 
who ceased to obey Nadir Shah and announced 
the Sheki Khanate as independent. Everything 
began with mass protests against Nadir Shah's 
severe tax policy in Shirvan and Daghestan. The 
wave of disorder went beyond the boundaries of 
Sheki. 
Melik Najaf was appointed by Nadir Shah 
to govern the region, but by unreasonable 
exaction and cruelty he managed to get the local population against himself. The 
inhabitants of Sheki lodged their complaints to Nadir Shah, who at that time was 
near Derbent. Nadir Shah was frightened by the growing discontent of the people 
and decided to smooth out the incident. 
He offered the Sheki dignities to choose an authorized 
person to send to his encampment. At the end of 1741 a 
representative was chosen: it was the prosperous Haji 
Chelebi, who enjoyed high authority. The Shah nominated 
him as vekil of the Sheki region, and he was authorized to 
supervise Melik Najaf `s taxation. 
Hence, Haji Chelebi actually seized power in Sheki. 
He openly interfered with affairs, compromising Melik    
Najaf `s competence. Najaf, in turn, lodged a complaint 
against Haji Chelebi. Nadir Shah, not desiring to lose such a rich territory, 
demanded Haji Chelebi to come to the camp, where Nadir sentenced him to death 
by hanging. However, the courageous Haji Chelebi, with the noose around his 
neck, convinced Nadir Shah of the falsity of the accusation: "Melik", he said, 
"having any order from the Shah always adds to it his own orders". Nadir Shah 
excused Haji Chelebi and conferred to him even larger authority than before. Also, 
he addressed the emirs with reproach: "While nobody dares to even give a hint to 
281 
 
Panel on the wall of the palace of 
Sheki Khans. I8th Century. Wall 
painting. 
me, this Chelebi from Nukha (Sheki) ventured with a noose around his neck to 
offer me his own opinion". 
When Nadir Shah left Shirvan in 
1743, new disorder began. Profiting by 
it, Haji Chelebi and people faithful to 
him attacked the residence of Nadir 
Shah's protege Melik Najaf and killed 
him. Then Haji Chelebi announced the 
Sheki region as an independent 
Khanate. 
Fuad Aliyev wrote, "This act 
saw the beginning of the establishment 
in the territory of Azerbaijan of small-
sized state formations - independent Khanates. It is remarkable hat while an 
overwhelming majority of independent khanates was formed after the 
disintegration of the state of Nadir Shah, the Sheki Khanate declared its 
independince during the reign of Nadir Shah". 
In the winter of 1744 Nadir Shah sent an 
army to suppress a rebellion of Haji Chelebi. The 
latter anticipated such a step and urged the people 
of Sheki to go to a newly fortified citadel that was 
supplied with provisions. After he arrival of Nadir 
Shah, this fortress was called Gelersen-Gorasen" 
("Come and see"). 
Nadir Shah went to the citadel with a group 
of 15,000 well-trained warriors. However, he 
retreated a few days later, not even having 
organized a siege. Nadir Shah's army suffered 
essential losses as a result of frequent attacks from 
the Shekians. The people of Sheki seized rich 
trophies. Nadir Shah hardly escaped death. After 
this, Nadir Shah withdrew his army to Barda. 
From there, he went to Derbent with an army of 30,000 troops at the end of 1744. 
In February, he again marched against Haji Chelebi. The siege of the 
"Gelersen-Gorasen" stronghold gave no results. Then Nadir Shah burnt ancient 
Sheki and adjacent villages. For nearly three years, the people of Sheki suffered 
terrible deprivation in the citadel "Gelersen-Gorasen", struggling with the superior 
forces of Nadir Shah. 
Finally, in March 1746, Haji Chelebi concluded an agreement with Nadir 
Shah. The latter sent a new Melik to Sheki; it was Najaf's nephew. However, at the  
  
282 
 
The Fortress Galarsan Gorarsan. 18th Century. Sheki Khanate. 
 
  
283 
 
Woman's highly decorated 
headdress. 19th Century. 
Village of llisu, Gakh region. 
Gilt silver with semiprecious 
stones. Museum of 
Azerbaijani Crafts and 
Carpet-making,Baku. 
 
Gulu beys House. 19th Century.   
 
same time he entrusted Haji Chelebi with the powers of a Melik and sent him 
money as compensation. It was a far-reaching victory for Haji Chelebi. 
A year later, after a sharp rise in taxes, 
Ganja, Nakhchivan, Tiflis and Irevan disobeyed 
Nadir Shah; Haji Chelebi was prepared to act 
against the Shah. Haji Chelebi's popularity was so 
high, and his army was so mobile and well armed, 
that various regions of the Caucasus offered to help 
him. Historical chronicles wrotc that representatives 
of Ganja asked him to come to Ganja, for fear of 
the Gizilbashes. He arrived there in the middle of 
the summer of 1748 with Ali Khan Qajar, and both 
stayed there. 
When Panah Ali Bey received the title of 
Khan and began the construction of a citadel in 
Bayat at the end of 1748, his hostile neighbours 
asked for Chelebi's help. A Garabagh historian of 
that time, Mirza Adigezal Bey, pointed out that they 
addressed Haji Chelebi Shekili as the sovereign ruler 
of Shirvan. 
However, Panah Khan was able to organize 
a reliable defense, and Haji Chelebi and his army 
had to recede. Coming back, he said: "Panah Khan 
has so far been similar to silver without 
hammering. We have come and hammered the 
silver and have returned back". 
Haji Chelebi continued strengthening the 
military and economic power of the Khanate, 
frequently on account of his neighbours. After lea-
ving Garabagh, Mahammed Hasan Khan Qajar 
failed to beleaguer Shusha. Panah Khan 
Garabaghli, Kerim Khan Garadaghli, Heydar Qulu 
Khan Nakhchivani and Shah-verdi Khan Qajar 
Ganjali arrived at the meeting, which condemned 
the behaviour of Haji Chelebi, who was 
inconsiderate of them and "did not go with them to 
the part of peace and friendship". 
They brought their notice of their decision to begin a struggle against Haji 
Chelebi to the Georgian King, who invited them for negotiations. In 1752 near 
Ganja, Georgian King Teymuraz and his son Irakli took into captivity all four 
284 
 
Sheki Khans' Palace. 18th Century.  Sheki. 
Common view. 
 
Sheki Khans' Palace. 18th 
Century.    Sheki. The central hall 
on the first floor. 
 
Khans and arrived in negotiations to seize Ganja and Garabagh. One of Shahverdi 
Khan Qajar's servants informed Haji Chelebi about it. Haji Chelebi, therefore, 
moved towards the allied forces with 
a strong army and settled on the 
opposite bank of the Kura river. 
(According to another version, the 
informant was one of Panah Khan's 
sons named Ibrahim Khalil Khan.) 
Before the meeting with his 
emirs, Haji Chelebi said a famous 
phrase: "Whatever decision you 
adopt: the Kura shall be crossed". 
The Meliks said, "We came to 
this meeting only to solve this problem 
without crossing the Kura. But if you wish, let it be so. Order your army to act". 
Haji Chelebi led his army across the Kura and started fighting near the mausoleum 
of the great Azerbaijani poet, Sheikh Nizami. "At the sacred entombment of 
Sheikh Nizami, bless him the Most High God, 
from whence emanates celestial light to illuminate 
the hearts and heads of people. Two armies have 
confronted each other and the battle has started". 
The Georgian army suffered a terrible 
defeat. Irakli II sought safety in escape. Chelebi 
pursued the Georgians almost up to Tiflis and 
nominated his son Agha Kishi Bey as governor of 
all the liberated regions, Ganja, Gazakh and 
Borchali. It was already the second confrontation 
between Chelebi and the Georgians. 
Earlier, a united Georgian-Kakhetian army 
under the command of Kings Irakli II and 
Teymuraz II had marched against the Khan, who 
was rapidly becoming stronger. In the first battle 
against the Georgians, the Shekians retreated; this was a military trick. The 
Georgian army lost vigilance, was suddenly attacked by Chelebi and had to retreat 
in disorder. 
In 1755, Haji Chelebi moved to Shirvan with a huge army and began to 
attack Aghsu. Guba Khan Husein Ali came to Shirvan's aid. Chelebi suffered a 
defeat and had to retreat. 
Haji Chelebi died in 1755. At that time, the Sheki Khanate was one of the 
most powerful and advanced Khanates in Azerbaijan. Chelebi did a lot for the 
285 
 
Panahabadi. 1199 (1785). 
Silver. Panahabad. Garabagh. 
 
reconstruction of the capital city of Sheki; mosques, caravanserai, bathhouses, 
schools and a madrasah were built in the city.  
 
The Great Khan 
of the Garabagh Khanate 
 
Panahali Bay Javanshir 
 
Panakhali Bey Sarijali Javanshir, the founder of Garabagh Khanate, an 
outstanding commander and renowned statesman, was born in 1693 in a noble 
family of the Javanshirs tribe in Garabagh. Being still very young, Panakh Khan 
joined the army of the Iranian Shah Nadir Afshar. It 
should be noted that Nadir-shah was one of the most 
talented commanders of his time; under his leadership, 
Panakh Khan gained all the necessary skills of military 
strategy and tactics - but not only that, under him, 
Panakh Khan learned to rein a state. 
Having noticed the outstanding abilities and 
high personal courage of Panakh Khan, Nadir Shah 
drew him to the close circle of his entrusted people. 
However, soon after, as a result of the court intrigues, 
Panakh Khan fell into disfavor and had to return to 
his motherland escaping from the Shah's wrath. 
Having formed mobile detachments from people loyal to him, Panakh Khan hid in 
the mountains of Garabagh and Sheki region. 
In 1747 after the assassination of Nadir Shah, Azerbaijan split into the 
independent Khanates of Ganja, Shirvan, Sheki, Guba, Baku, etc. Having defeated 
Garabagh emirs and meliks fighting against the centralization of power, Panakh 
Khan founded united Garabagh Khanate. 
Garabagh-Ganja Beylarbeynate, established in 1551 split into Garabagh and 
Ganja Khanates. Power in Garabagh Khanate passed from the Qajars to the 
Javanshirs (the Ziad-oghlu Qajars remained the rulers of Ganja Khanate). Before 
mass expulsions of Gizilbash tribes from the Caucasus by Shah Abbas and Nadir 
Shah this Beylarbeynate had been mainly inhabited by the Turkic tribes of Qajar, 
which were led by the descendants of Ziad-oghlu Qajar who in 1547 was awarded 
the title of Sultan. Qajars could not put up with the loss of their dominion over 
Garabagh and tried to gain it back during numerous military campaigns. 
The Bayat Fortress, which was built in an impressingly short period of time, 
became the capital of the Khanate. Hoping to play the leading role in the region, 
the Sheki Khan, Haji Chelebi, formed an alliance with the Khan of Shirvan and 
besieged the young capital. However, the Bayat Fortress did not surrender even 
286 
 
The Askeran Fortress. 18th Century. Garabagh. 
 
after a month of siege and the enemies had to move back. According to the 
historian Mirza Jamal, Haji Chelibi Khan said the following, leaving the foot of the 
Bayat Fortress: "When we came, 
Panakh Khan was a Khan. We fought 
with him and could not win. We are 
going back having made him a 
Shah". Later Panakh Khan built a 
new capital in a place called 
Shahbulagh, near modern Aghdam. 
He continued to unit and expand the 
territory of his Khanate, annexing 
neighboring Khanates. The authority 
of Panakh Khan grew. The Khans of 
Sheki, Ganja, Irevan and Tabriz 
sought after his friendship and union 
with him. 
Panakh Khan matured grand plans for the future; however, he needed to be 
sure that his family and treasure were safe. Thus, he decided to build a third 
fortress for the capital - quite impregnable this time. The place for the fortress was 
picked by specialists invited from all over the region. In 1750 the foundation of the 
fortress, initially named Panakhabad in honor of Panakh Khan, was laid in dense 
forest, surrounded by rocks. Later the fortress was called Shusha after the name of 
a nearby village. Architects and constructors were invited from all over Azerbaijan 
to build the fortress and the city. Inhabitants of the neighboring settlements and 
villages moved to the newly built capital. Magnificent Khan's palace, mosques, 
bathhouses and mints were erected in it. The coins of Garabagh Khanate 
"Panakhabadi" were minted there. These coins were in use all over Azerbaijan and 
Iran. 
At that time in Iran, representatives of the tribes of the Afshars, Qajars and 
Zends were fighting for power. Mahammed Hasan Khan Qajar was the most 
successful among them. He controlled the largest part of Iran, considered himself 
to be the Shah of the country and even minted his own coins. 
In 1751 Mahammed Hasan Khan Qajar led his army to Garabagh. He with 
his numerous troops planed the siege of Shusha for over a month. However, having 
received the news that Iran had been attacked by Kerim Khan Zend, he with his 
army had to return home. Panakh Khan followed him and conquered the province 
of Ardebil. 
The people of Garabagh had not yet recovered from the campaign of 
Mahammed Hasan Khan, as they met one of the most prominent commanders of 
Nadir Shah, the ruler of Urmia, Fatali Khan Afshar with his thirty thousand army at 
287 
 
School in Shusha. 19th century. Garabagh.  Drawing by Vereschagin. 
 
the walls of Shusha. Having suffered defeat in the first battle, Fatali Khan 
promised to give his daughter as a wife to Panakh Khan's son as a sign of rec-
onciliation, if the captives were released. Panakh Khan accepted Fatali Khan's 
proposal and sent his son together with the freed captives to the camp of Fatali 
Khan. However, Fatali Khan broke his promise and having captured Ibrahim 
Khalil, the son of 
Panakh Khan, fled 
to Urmia. Heart-
broken Panakh 
Khan sought for a 
chance to revenge 
Fatali Khan on the 
battlefield. Soon he 
was granted the 
chance. Kerim Khan 
Zend, having been 
defeated in the fight 
for the Shah throne 
by Fatali Khan at 
Isfahan, proposed to Panakh Khan establishing an alliance against their common 
enemy. Panakh Khan accepted the proposal and the united troops of these two 
khans defeated Fatali Khan's army in Urmia. Fatali Khan was captured. 
The authority of Panakh Khan as a statesman and commander in Iran and 
the Caucasus rapidly grew. Being worried of the fact, Kerim Khan Zend sent Ibra-
him Khalil to Garabagh, "invited" Panakh Khan to Shiraz. 
Soon in 1758 Panakh Khan died in Shiraz, not being able to cope with the 
compulsory "hospitality". He was buried not far from Aghdam with great honors. 
There is a legend, according to which, "Panakh Khan decided to lake opium ami 
fell asleep, pretending to be dead. In his "will" he asked to bury him in his 
motherland. Only a handful of very close to him people knew of the real plan. 
However, as it was summer, Kerim Khan ordered his court doctor to dissect his 
stomach, after which Panakh Khan died". 
According to the above-mentioned historian, Mirza Jamal, "for the twelve 
years of Panakh Khan's rein after the death of Nadir Shah, he proved to be an 
outstanding commander and statesman. The biggest part of the territory called 
Azerbaijan was under his dominion". 
 
 
 
 
288 
 
Aga Mahammed Shah. 
Shahinshahnama. Shaba. 1810. Opaque 
watercolour on paper.  
 
The One Who Restored 
Azeri Iran 
 
Agha Mahammad Shah Qajar 
 
The Turkic-Qipchak tribe of Qajars, 
like the tribes of Afshar, Bay at, Kengerli, 
Zulkadar, Shamlu and others, played a 
significant role in the origins of the 
Azerbaijani people. The history of the Qajars 
is fascinating and dramatic. They went 
through a difficult period of centuries of 
struggle, accompanied by brilliant victories 
and crushing defeats, prompt rises and even 
faster falls. The Qajars lived, basically, in the 
northern part of Azerbaijan in the regions of 
Garabagh, Ganja and Irevan. 
Outstanding Azerbaijani historian 
lskander Bey Turkman Munshi (1560-1634) 
wrote the following in his famous work, 
"Tapikh-i alam arayi Abbasi": "Garabagh is a gorgeous territory with gishlaghs and 
yaylaghs, clean air and luscious greenery. The ancient inhabitants of Garabagh 
Qajars and their kindred tribes cultivated here perfect gardens". The memory of it 
was saved in the name of a village Qajar near Fizuli, a city in the Zangezur region 
Qajar (at present Qajaran). 
During the last six to seven centuries, the best representatives of Qajars 
have engaged in the most active participation in the tempestuous historical events 
occurring in the territories of Iran and Azerbaijan. According to the Qajar 
chronicle: 
"The noble tribe of the Kajars, forming a part of the body of the Eel and 
Alous in the regions of Turkistan, had long spent their lives happily, passing the 
summers amongst the pasturages of the mountains, and descending in the winter to 
the southern plains of those delightful countries. The commencement of their 
power begins with a family of five brothers, who were uniformly ambitious of 
greatness and elevation, and who attained celebrity in battles and daring exploits. 
On account of their inbred valour and innate magnanimity, every one, without 
premeditation, exclaimed, agreeably to the purport of this tetrastich: 
 
We five Brothers spring from one root:  
We are the five fingers in the hand of Fortune:  
When erect, we form the standards of victory;  
289 
 
Image of the Qajar 
symbol of Lion and Sim 
on a coin of Seljuqs. 
1234/35.  Sivas. Private 
Collection. 
 
When collected, we inflict blows on the faces of our enemies. 
 
The eldest brother was named Qajar Khan; and his tribe, the Qajar Khani; 
just as the Seljuk Turks are called Seljuki, after the name of Seljuk Bey: and the 
Oguz Khan are called the Oguz Khani: so (the tribes of) Jen-gheez Khan and 
Jagatay are called the Jengheez Khani and the 
Jagatayi; the Beydali Khan, the Beydali; and the 
Afshars are so named after Afshar Khan, the fourth 
son of Oguz Khan. At the period of Oguz Khan's 
invasion from Turkistan, for the purpose of subduing 
Persia, this tribe served under his orders, and formed 
part of his army; so that, in the course of time, their 
abode, and summer and winter cantonments, were 
fixed in the districts of Diarbekr and Erlat". 
During the reign of Sultan Hasan Bey Agh 
Goyunlu (1453-1478), Qajars were rehoused from 
Diyarbakir to Azerbaijan. During the rule of Sultan 
Yaqub and Alvend Mirza, the noble rulers of Qajars 
tribe governed the majority of the cities in Azerbaijan, 
Iran and Phars. 
According to the same Qajarian legends and chronicles, the Shah's dynasty 
of Qajar descended from Kaan Loo, the son of Chingiz Khan. One of the Qajars' 
ancestors married his son to the daughter of Kaan Loo. Allegedly, since then they 
were referred to as Kaan Loo Qajar, as opposed to Dovanlu Qajar the other branch 
of the tribe. According to another legend: " Qajars are the descendant of Qajar 
Noyan son of the Mongol general Sertaq Noyan son of Saba Noyan". Abbas Gulu 
Agha Bakikhanov (1794-1847) Azerbayjani scientist and historian, states that 
Qajars are originaly Jalayers that came to the Caucasus at or (and) before the time 
of the Mongol inroad. Jalayer, whom the Jalayer, a dinasty of rulers of Azerbaijan 
(1336-1432) are named was great-great grand father of Qajar Noyan. 
Available historical documents testify that the last time the Qajars came to 
Near Asia was as part of the army of Hulagu Khan, grandson of Chingiz Khan, in 
the 13th Century (1256). These groups of Qajars settled in Iran and then, after the 
fall of the Ilkhans' rule, they migrated to Syria (or rather to Armenia, between 
Syria and Iran). During Timur's rule they were relocated to the regions of 
Garabagh, Ganja and Irevan, among their kindred tribes. The influence of the 
Qajars increased during the first Safavids. 
Shah Ismail transferred to them the captured grounds, legalising their 
possessions. The Qajars joined the number of Gizilbash tribes, with the help of 
whom the Safavids had established their authority in Azerbaijan, and then in 
Safavids' Iran. By then, there was no city or province in either Iran or Azerbaijan, 
290 
 
in which at some point in time a representative of the Qajar family had not ruled. 
Thus, Toygun Bey Qajar was nominated the first Safavids ruler of Sheki (16th 
Century). 
Approximately at the same time, Kamall ad-Din Khan Ziyad-oghlu Qajar, 
an important Safavids political leader who had received the title of Sultan in 1547, 
became the governor of Garabagh and Ganja. The first governor of the Irevan 
region was Gulu Khan Qajar, and the first governor of Irevan Khanate became 
Hasan Ali Khan Ziyad-oghlu Qajar (d. 1783). 
Representatives of the Ziyad-oghlu Qajar family ruled these regions with 
almost no interruption from the 16th Century to the beginning of the 19th Century, 
when the regions were joined to Russia. Beylarbey (the governors) of Shirvan in 
the years during the Safavids were Ali Gulu Bey Qajar and Peyqar Khan Ziyad-
oghlu Qajar, and the Beylarbey of Azerbaijan was Murtuza Gulu Khan Qajar (d. 
1664). 
Shah Abbas, who decided to weaken the increasing authority of the Qajars 
and at the same time strengthen the borders of Iran, relocated them from the 
Caucasus to the border regions of Iran. Some Qajars moved to Khorasan to protect 
the northeast borders from the Uzbeks; some migrated to Astrabad on the river 
Gorgan, separating Iran from bellicose Turkmen; and some remained on the 
borders of Georgia. 
The Khorasan Qajars quickly assimilated, and the Astrabad and Garabagh 
ones started active participation in the political life of Iran and Azerbaijan. There 
were many eminent people who came out of these branches of Qajars. The 
Astrabad Qajars, who lived on the right high coast of the river Gorgan, were 
referred to as Yukhari-bash, or Dovanlu (upper), and the ones living on the left 
coast were called Ashaghi-bash, or Govanlu-Goyunlu (lower). There was a 
continuous struggle between them for leadership in Astrabad. The Govanlu Qajars 
happened to win more often. 
The first outstanding representative of this family was Fatali Khan Qajar 
Govanlu (1685/6 or 1692/3-1726). He became governor of Astrabad and 
successfully expanded his properties. Shah Tahmasib II (1722-1732) appointed 
him commander-in-chief of the army, and he conducted a successful fight with the 
Afghans. However, when Nadir Quly Khan, future Shah Nadir, presented himself 
as a candidate for the post of commander-in-chief, Tahmasib hastened to get rid of 
the Qajar who had risen too quickly and too high. In 1727, under Tahmasib's order, 
with a hint from Nadir Quly Khan, Fatali Khan was killed. 
The next rising of the Govanlu Qajars occurred during the rule of 
Mahammed Hasan Khan (b. ca 1722-1758/1759), son of Fatali Khan. He seized 
authority in Astrabad and expelled the administration of Nadir Shah. In response, 
Nadir Shah sent his army, and Mahammed Hasan Khan was compelled to run to 
Turkmen. He returned to Astrabad only after the death of Nadir Shah. 
291 
 
Agha Mahammed Shah's capture and the sack of Kirman. Shahinshahnama. Shaba. 1810. Opaque 
watercolour on paper. Copies of this manuscript were sent by Fatali Shah to English, Russian and 
Austrian rulers. 
 
  
292 
 
For the purpose of attracting the powerful Qajars to his side, the successor 
of Nadir Shah, Ali Gulu Khan Afshar (Adil Shah), nominated Mahammed Hasan 
Khan Qajar to be the Eshikaghasibashi (Great Master of Ceremonies) at his Court 
in Meshhed. However, Hasan Khan, who was independent and accustomed to 
managing, soon quarreled with the Shah and had to flee to Turkmen. The young 
sons of Mahammed Hasan Khan, however, fell into the hands of Adil Shah. The 
cruel Adil Shah, who destroyed almost all the relatives of Nadir Shah, did not 
govern for long. 
Mahammed Hasan Khan helped Shahruh Mirza, grandson of Nadir Shah, to 
come to the throne. The new-Shah, therefore, gave him expensive gifts and 
nominated him as governor of Astrabad. Shahruh Mirza, however, did not hold 
authority for long either. He was blinded and displaced from the throne by 
Suleyman, grandson of the Safavid Shah Suleyman, who accepted authority under 
the name of Shah Suleyman Sani. 
Suleyman Sani Shah nominated Mahammed Hasan Khan to be the sardar 
(military ruler) of Astrabad. This allowed Hasan Khan to gather forces and 
strengthen in Astrabad and Mazandaran. He restored Shahruh Mirza to the throne 
and began a struggle with Kerim Khan Zend, who fought to restore the authority of 
the Safavids. For a long time, Mahammed Hasan Khan enjoyed success in this 
struggle. 
Mahammed Hasan Khan had two daughters and nine sons from five wifes. 
From Fatima (Jeyran) he had Agha Mahammed Khan and Husein Gulu Khan 
(Jahansouz Shah). From other marriages he had Murtuz Gulu Khan, Mustafa Gulu 
Khan, Jafar Gulu Khan, Mehdi Gulu Khan, Abbas Gulu Khan, Reza Gulu Khan 
and Ali Gulu Khan. His son, Agha Mahammed Qajar, founder of the ruling 
dynasty of Qajars in Iran, was born on 26 October, 1741. 
Hasan Khan's wife, Fatima Khanum, was the sister of a nobleman from 
another Dovalu Qajar family, Mahammed Khan Dovalu. 
Fatima Khanum was a very beautiful, brave and clever woman. She was 
well educated and did everything possible to educate her son, Agha Mahammed. 
She helped her husband manage Astrabad and, being a perfect horse rider, she 
always tried to be beside her husband in important battles. Many historians believe 
that if it was not for Fatima Khanum, Mahammed Hasan Khan could have never 
reached a position of importance, and Agha Mahammed Khan would have never 
become the Shah. 
Hasan Khan literally possessed all of central Iran (Irak-a-Ajam) and 
Azerbaijan, and he was considered the non-crowned Shah of Iran. Coins were even 
minted under his name. His thirteen-year-old son, Agha Mahammed Khan, 
participated for the first time in one of his campaigns: he commanded the advanced 
troops. After that, young Agha Mahammed Khan frequently accompanied his 
293 
 
Murtuza Qulu Khan's Portrait. 1796. 
Borovikovskiy. Oil on canvas. Russian 
Museum. St. Petersburg. 
father in war campaigns, and at different times his father even entrusted him with 
the management of Azerbaijan and Astrabad. 
In 1759 Mahammed Hasan Khan died 
in a fight with the Zends for Shiraz. This 
transferred the struggle for authority in Iran 
from the father to his oldest son, Agha 
Mahammed Qajar. It is clear from the above 
mentioned that the struggle of Agha 
Mahammed Khan Qajar for the throne did not 
start from scratch. His father's authority was 
very high and the road to the throne was 
thoroughly paved. Thus, for a successful 
struggle for the throne, Agha Mahammed was 
only required to display high personal 
qualities. 
After his father's death, Agha 
Mahammed fled to the Turkmen steppe, where 
he assembled a group consisting of his 
tribesmen and Turkmen. He began a guerrilla 
war against the Zends and even tried to seize 
Astrabad. In 1761 or 1762, a 4,000-troop army 
of Kerim Khan Zend surrounded Agha 
Mahammed Khan's group. About 500 of Agha 
Mahammed Khan's cavaliers decided to break 
through the surrounding enemy. The battle continued almost a full day. Only 10 
young men led by Agha Mahammed Khan succeeded in surviving. Agha 
Mahammed Khan received 10 bad wounds but forced himself to remain in the 
saddle until the end of the battle. 
The tired and wounded warriors stationed themselves overnight near the 
city of Najaf, leaving one guard. There, they were found by the troops of the gov-
ernor of Mazandaran, who awoke them. Agha Mahammed Khan tried to resist, but 
his strength left him. He was fettered and sent to Tehran to Kerim Khan Zend, who 
kept Agha Mahammed Khan as either a hostage or an honorary "guest" for 16 
years. Historians are still wondering why Kerim Khan Zend did not take Agha 
Mahammed Khan's life, or at least blind him, which would have been the usual 
way for rulers to deal with their contenders in those times. Legends explain it 
rather simply. 
According to one legend, after Kerim Khan Zend learnt that Agha 
Mahammed Khan was castrated, he ceased viewing him as a competitor for the 
throne and let him live. During the whole time of his captivity, Agha Mahammed 
294 
 
Portrait of young Agha Mahammed Khan. 18th 
Century. Iran. Mahammed Sadiq. Oil on canvas. 
Collection of Amery. 
 
Flags of Irevan Khanate and Iran (above). Early 19th Century. 
 
Khan conducted himself in such a way to convince Kerim Khan Zend that he had 
lost any interest in politics. 
The circumstances of the 
emasculation of Agha Mahammed 
Khan are described very poorly in 
different sources. Some say that 
Adil Shah castrated Agha Ma-
hammed Khan when he was seven 
years old. However, if that is the 
case, why was his brother Husein 
Gulu Khan not castrated as well? 
Also, the change in the looks of 
Agha Mahammed started 
unusually late, so other versions of 
the sad circumstance also deserve 
attention. According to one of these versions, his emasculation took place as the 
result of a vital wound in the pubic area in the battle near Najaf. 
Another version says that Agha Mahammed Khan fell in love with the 
beautiful daughter of Zaki Khan Zend. They had intimate pre-marital relations and 
the dishonoured father of the girl swore to revenge Agha Mahammed Khan. 
During the battle with the Zends, in which Mahammed Hasan Khan died, both 
Agha Mahammed Khan and Fatima Khanum were captured. Despite the mother's 
begging, Zaki Khan Zend, obeying the rule of vengeance of those times, 
emasculated the young man, who had dishonoured his family. Then the mother and 
son were released. Agha Mahammed Khan here swore to revenge Zaki Khan and 
to destroy his whole family. When he came to power, Agha Mahammed Khan 
fulfilled his oath. 
In his aspiration to neutralise the Qajars, Kerim Khan Zend married 
Mahammed Hasan Khan's sister, Khadija Beyim, and sent the rest of the relatives 
to Qazwin. He also appointed Husein Gulu Khan, Agha Mahammed Khan's 
brother, as ruler of Damghan. In Damghan, Husein Gulu Khan got married and had 
a son, Baba Khan, who would become the King of Iran known as Fatali Shah. 
295 
 
Husein Qulu Khan Govanlu (Goyunlu) Jahansouz, brother of Agha 
Mahammed Khan Qajar. This painting was presented by Fatali Shah to 
Napoleon. Thirty years ago the painting from Bonaparte family return 
back to the Qajar family. "Journal of the Internatioal Qajar Studies 
Association" 
 
Kerim Khan Zend ordered Husein Gulu Khan to create an 
army and subdue the governor of Astrabad, Mahammed 
Khan Qajar, from the Dovalu family branch. 
Husein Gulu Khan conquered Astrabad and 
immediately got out of Kerim Khan Zend's control. He 
announced himself as Shah and built the plans for con-
quering Mazandaran and Gilan. Kerim Khan Zend could 
not allow this to happen and in 1755, he sent an assassin 
to kill Husein Gulu Khan. Husein Gulu Khan was buried 
next to his father in Astrabad. In the meantime, Fatima Khanum and the younger 
brother of Agha Mahammed Khan, Abbas Gulu Khan, died. 
As mentioned above, Kerim Khan Zend kept Agha Mahammed Khan in 
Tehran without the right to leave. In those years, Agha Mahammed Khan 
conducted a very modest life and began to visit the university (madrasa) where a 
known theologian and philosopher, Sheikh Ali Tajrimi, was a teacher. Every day 
he rose early, exercised and went to the madrasa, where he listened to lectures and 
participated in disputes. He also kept constant correspondence with his relatives 
and countrymen. 
Agha Mahammed believed in his lucky stars. Thanks to being incredibly 
moderate (he was very undemanding in food and consumed it by weight rather 
than taste) and constantly exercising, he kept a youthful stature and was in fighting 
shape. Agha Mahammed Khan passionately loved hunting. He especially liked to 
hunt foxes with falcons. He gave the killed foxes to his neighbours as a symbol of 
luck a belief existing at that time.  
When Kerim Khan Zend transferred the capital of the Khanet to Shiraz, he 
took Agha Mahammed Khan with him. Now that Agha Mahammed Khan was in 
one of the ancient cultural centres of Iran, he continued his studies and achieved 
great success. He studied theology, philosophy, mathematics, astronomy, astrology 
and poetry. In the future, due to his outstanding memory, Agha Mahammed Khan 
could easily quote the Koran, fragments from philosophical works and even verses 
of the least known poets. In literary Majlises, he had great authority and was 
sought after for advice and information. 
Ibn Tufail, an Andalusian philosopher of the 12th Century, became his 
favourite philosopher. Intense interest in this philosopher remained with Agha 
Mahammed Khan for the rest of his life. Ibn Tufail's philosophical novel, "Khay, 
296 
 
Agha Mahammed Shah in Battle. 
Shahinshahnama. 1810. Opaque 
watercolour on paper. 
 
son of Yakzan", was always with Agha Mahammed Khan, both in campaigns and 
in the Palace. He quoted it and constantly referred to it. 
When Agha Mahammed learnt about a threat to his life, as well as the lives 
of his brothers and a small group of servants devoted to him, he pretended to go 
hunting and escaped from Shiraz to Mazandaran. 
By the beginning of 1780, he had won a 
long lasting struggle with one of his brothers, 
Rza Gulu Khan, for the government of Qajars 
and subordinated all of Mazandaran and 
Astrabad. The rest of his brothers stood on his 
side in this struggle. In 1782 Agha Mahammed 
came to Astrabad with all of his brothers and 
relatives to visit his father's tomb. 
After the death of Kerim Khan Zend, 
his relatives started a fight for authority over 
the country. The fight among them went on for 
several years. Agha Mahammed Qajar took 
advantage of this and went from Mazandaran to 
Esfahan with a small group of 500-600 people. 
In 1785 he took this city, expelled the Zend governor and then, after a number of 
brilliant victories over the representatives of the Zends, he released almost all of 
Central Iran. 
Important help came from a talented commander, Jafar Gulu Khan, brother 
of Agha Mahammed Khan. The small town of Tehran, which in 1786 was an-
nounced to be the capital of the new state, was chosen to be the residence of Agha 
Mahammed Khan. In the same year, he won a victory over Jafar Khan Zend, who 
considered himself the Shah of Iran. The defeated Jafar Khan fled to Shiraz, where 
he died as a result of a conspiracy. 
After conquering Gilan, Agha Mahammed Khan nominated his brother, 
Murtuz Gulu Khan Qajar, to be the hakim of both Gilan and Astrabad. However, 
his brother turned against him and joined the side of the Zends. From here, he fled 
to Talish and asked for protection from Catherine II. With the support of the 
Russian flotilla, Murtuz Gulu Khan came back to Gilan, but after receiving news of 
the approaching large army of Agha Mahammed Khan, he fled to Russia again. He 
died in 1798 in St. Petersburg. 
In 1795 after the campaign in Georgia, Agha Mahammed Khan punished 
the Talishs for supporting Murtuz Gulu Khan. This time many rulers of Azerbaijan, 
Kurdistan and Central Iran (Iraq-eAjam) joined the side of Qajars. By the 
beginning of the 1790s, almost all of Iran was under the authority of Agha 
Mahammed Qajar. 
297 
 
Presentation coins of Aga Mahammed Shah 
and Fatali Shah. Teheran and Esfagan, Iran. 
Gold. 1795-1797. Heberden Coin Room, 
Ashmolen Museum. Oxford. 
 
The Turkman-Yomuds, who refused to accept the Qajars' authority, were 
crushed in a fight, and the heads of the killed warriors were piled up in a pyramid. 
The remains of Kerim Khan Zend, whom Agha Mahammed fervently hated, were 
dug out from the grave and buried under the doorway of the Shah's Gulistan Palace 
in Tehran. 
In 1791 Agha Mahammed proclaimed himself the Shah of Iran, but he 
postponed the coronation. He took measures to consolidate his royalty by disposing 
of the disobeying Khans and restoring economic and trade communications inside 
the country. No serious administrative reforms, however, were conducted. 
The last battle between the 
Qajars and the Zends took place in the 
summer of 1794 in Kerman and ended 
in a complete victory by Agha 
Mahammed Qajar and the 
dethronement of the Zends dynasty in 
Iran. In Kerman, Agha Mahammed 
learnt about the intentions of Georgian 
King Irakli II to go under the protection 
of Russia and (not without the 
assistance of Ibrahim Khalil Khan 
Garabaghli) to transfer to Russia 
Garabagh and Irevan Khanates, as well 
as Ganja hereditary lands of the Qajars. 
Agha Mahammed perceived the intentions of the Georgian King as treason 
of the subject of Iran and the interference in the internal affairs of Azerbaijan Kha-
nates, which for many centuries had been populated and controlled by the Qajars. 
In April 1795, Agha Mahammed Shah Qajar directed an army of 60,000 to 
the Caucasus. A small part of the army moved through Mughan to Daghestan, 
while Agha Mahammed himself led the main part of the army to Shusha. Shah's 
brothers led the third brigade to the Irevan Khanate. To occupy the inaccessible 
Shusha in a short time without special preparation was impossible, and Agha 
Mahammcd Shah turned in the direction of Tiflis. Almost effortlessly, Agha 
Mahammed's troops put to rout the militiamen of Irakli II and entered Tiflis. Irakli 
fled to the mountains, and 22,000 civilians were sold into slavery. Tiflis was 
plundered and completely destroyed. 
The reason for the quick removal of the Shusha siege and the campaign 
against Tiflis was the military expedition against Ganja, organised by Irakli II 
during the siege of Shusha. The most active support for Agha Mahammed was 
offered by the Ganja Khan Javad Khan Ziyad-oghlu Qajar, who wanted to get back 
at Irakli for continuous predatory forays on Ganja. After the rout in Titlis, many 
298 
 
Azerbaijani Khans announced their obedience to Agha Mahammed Shah. Only 
Irevan and Garabagh Khans did not want to recognize him. 
In the summer of 1796, an army of 20,000, under the command of Agha 
Mahammed Shah's brothers, approached Irevan. The siege there lasted fıve weeks, 
after which the fortress surrendered and a peace agreement was signed. 
Finally, while returning from the campaign, Agha Mahammed Khan 
organized the solemn ceremony of his coronation in the Mughan steppe. He 
refused to put on the crown of Nadir Shah, whose coronation also took place in this 
region of Azerbaijan. The crown contained four feathers symbolising the 
domination over Iran, India, Afghanistan and Central Asia. Agha Mahammed 
Khan was coronated with a small diadem and a shah's sword, consecrated on the 
entombment of the Sheikh Safi ad-Din in Ardebil. This symbolised the transfer of 
the Safavids' authority to the Qajars. Agha Mahammed-Shah dreamt of restoring 
the Great Safavids Empire. 
In every possible way, Agha Mahammed Khan emphasised the leading role 
of the representatives of the Qajar family in the state affairs. In his struggle for 
authority, he leaned on the Azeri-Turkic tribes of Afshar, Khalaj, Bayat and 
Garagezlu. 
In his verbal will about the succession of the throne, Agha Mahammed Shah 
told his nephew Baba Khan that "a daughter of Beylarbey Mirza Mahammed Khan 
-Dovalu Qajar should be given to Abbas Mirza, who is Dovalu by his mother and 
who will become the successor of the throne (after Baba Khan), so that his son, 
who will be named after me as Mahammed Mirza, would descend from the two 
great Qajar tribes. My uncle Suleyman Khan did a lot for this state. Marry your 
daughter to his son, and their daughter I designate for Mahammed Mirza. This 
way, the son of Mahammed Mirza, will be your grandson from both sides". This 
meant that Agha Mahammed wanted the crown to belong to the Qajar princes 
whose fathers belonged to the Govanlu family, and whose mothers belonged to the 
Dovalu family. Therefore, the successor of Baba Khan (Fatali Shah) became not 
his elder son, who was born of a Georgian mother, but Abbas Mirza. 
According to Manuchehr M. Iskandari-Qajar "Though Agha Mahammed 
Khan could not have children of his own, he neverthless married and had a harem. 
Personal reason aside, his dynastic instict dictated that necessity for him. As the 
first ruler of the dinasty, he knew that he must set the guidelines for succsession. 
By marrying the widow of his brother Husein Gulu Khan,and declaring her his 
Queen Mother (Mahdi Ulya) of his valiahd, he ensured the succession for his son, 
Baba Khan. " 
After the coronation, Agha Mahammed Shah conquered Khorasan, where 
the rider was the grandson of Nadir Shah Afshar, Shahruh. On his way to 
Khorasan, Agha Mahammed Shah suppressed Astrabad Turkmen, who went out of 
control. When in 1796 Agha Mahammed approached the walls of Meshhed, 
299 
 
Shahruh himself came out to greet him with honours. But Agha Mahammed was 
not satisfied. He demanded the famous treasures of Nadir Shah. Only under 
horrible torture, during which melted lead was poured down the old man's head, 
did he reveal the places where the treasures of Nadir Shah and the jewelry of the 
Meshhed's mosque of Imam Rezi were hidden. Exhausted by torture, the last 
political opponent of Agha Mahammed died. 
In response to the campaign of the Russian general V. Zubov on Georgia in 
1797, Agha Mahammed moved again to the Caucasus. On his way to Georgia he 
seized Shusha. Garabagh Khan, Ibrahim Khalil, fled to northern Azerbaijan. 
However, the campaign on Georgia did not take place after all. Agha Mahammed 
Shah was killed by his servants. 
According to one version, the conspiracy against Shah was organised by his 
commander, an outstanding Azerbaijani Khan, Sadiq Khan Shekkaki, who was 
connected with Azerbaijani Khans, as well as the Georgians living in Iran. 
According to another version, among the murderers was a Georgian, Sadiq Gorji 
(Andrey from Mtskheta), who acted on behalf of Georgian authorities. According 
to the information of some chronicles, Agha Mahammed was killed at night by his 
servants, Georgian Sadiq Gorji, Isfahanian Khodad and Mazandaranian Abbas, 
who were supposed to be executed by the Shah the next day for some delinquency. 
Shah's jewelry was transferred to Sadiq Khan Shekkaki, which hints at the 
existence of a conspiracy against the Shah. 
A palatial historian described these events: "As soon as this adventurous 
enterprise and important event was carried out so criminally and unholy by the 
villains, who had no shame, they stole the crown and diadem of the Shah's 
authority, on which each pearl was of incomparable beauty, and the price of each 
stone was equal to yearly taxes (from a territory as large as Seven Climates). Also, 
subjects of the imperial estate were taken, such as the diamond armband, the 
destroying enemies' swords decorated with precious stones, a casket with jewelry, 
as well as the diamonds 'Kokh-i-nur' ,'Darya-i-nur' and 'Taj-i-Makh,' and 
majestically illustrated manuscripts, each of which would honourably decorate the 
chest and shoulders of any monarch in the world". 
Noble Qajares, including the mother of Baba Khan and the Shah's aunt, 
stabbed the murderers. The body of the Shah was transported to Meshhed and 
buried.The head was sent to Belokan to Ibrahim Khalil Khan, who buried it with 
honours at the cemetery of various famous people. Shah's army returned to Iran 
and his nephew Baba Khan was proclaimed the Shah under the name of Fatali 
Shah. 
Such is the sad history of the founder of the dynasty of the Qajars in Iran, 
which reigned until 1925 when it was replaced by the Pehlevy dynasty. It has a 
continuation, representing interest for our readers. 
300 
 
Qajar Palace. Teheran. 1848. Oil on canvas.  
Painted by F. Colombary. 
 
In 1847-1848, as a result of palatial intrigues, Bahman Mirza Qajar 
grandson of Fatali Shah, son of Abbas Mirza, governor of Azerbaijan, Persian 
Crown prince was compelled to run to the Caucasus and seek refuge in Russia. The 
Russian government accepted him with great honours, gave him an imperial 
pension and promised to grant him residency anywhere in Russia. After some 
hesitation, Bahman Mirza asked for permission to settle in Shusha. He moved there 
with a large harem, children and confidants. His treasury and rich library were 
delivered from Iran to Shusha. Bahman Mirza gave his children and grandchildren 
a European education in the best-privileged educational establishments of Russia. 
He himself departed from politics and started writing the history of Iran and 
Azerbaijan. 
Most of his 33 sons became military. By the beginning of  WWI, eight of 
them were generals and a number of them were officers. The children of Bahman 
Mirza did not accept the Socialist revolution in Russia, and most of them had to 
pay for this with their lives. The Caucasian branch of Bahman Mirza's family 
literally ceased to exist. The memory about Bahman Mirza, a talented politician, 
commander and scientist, remains in his works, and also in the manuscripts and 
subjects of fine art from his rich collection scattered throughout museums and 
libraries in Azerbaijan, Russia, Ukraine and Georgia. 
 
A Life Sacrificed 
for Azerbaijan 
 
Abbas Mirza, son of Fatali Shah Qajar 
 
Fatali Khan (Baba Khan) Qajar 
(1797-1834), nephew of Agha 
Mahammed Shah Qajar, founder of 
the Qajar dynasty in Iran, and elder 
son of Huscin Gulu Khan, was born in 
1771/2 in Damghan to an Ezzet Dinlu 
mother, daughter of Mahammed Khan 
Ezzed Dinlu. He was tenderly 
nicknamed Baba Khan by Agha 
Mahammed Khan (Baba is 
grandfather in Azeri) because he was 
the namesake of his grandfather Fatali 
Khan. Fatali Shah was portrayed in 
scores of canvases of the so-called Qajar school of painting, which arose during his 
reign. This was a rather short man of imposing appearance with grey eyes and 
bushy eyebrows, typical of all Qajars. In addition, Fatali Shah was famous for his 
301 
 
Fatali Shah in Armor. 
Mir Ali. Teheran. 
1814-1815. Oil on 
canvas. 
 
huge beard, which accentuated his male dignity in contrast with the sleek, 
beardless face of his emasculated uncle, and his luxurious enormous harem. 
As has been noted above, in his verbal condition 
of will regarding succession to the throne, Agha 
Mahammed Shah, as witnessed by Qajar Prince Azad od-
Doule, ordered the following to Baba Khan (Fatali Khan): 
"a daughter of Beylarbey Mirza Mahammed Khan-
Dovalu Qajar should be given to Abbas Mirza, who is 
Dovalu on his mother's side and who will become the 
successor of the throne (after Baba Khan), so that his son, 
who will be named after me as Mahammed Mirza, would 
descend from the two great Qajar tribes. My uncle 
Suleyman Khan did a lot for this state. Marry your 
daughter to his son, and their daughter I designate for 
Mahammed Mirza. This way, the son of Mahammed 
Mirza, will be your grandson from both sides". 
In other words, the Shah's throne, according to the 
will, could take Qajar princes from the Qovanly family, 
born by Qajar women from the Dovalu family. Agha 
Mahammed Khan chose the first wives for his heir. Agha 
Mahammed Khan Qajar named Baba Khan as his heir. Baba Khan took part in the 
campaigns of Agha Mahammed Shah and was reputed to be one of his best com-
manders. Besides, Agha Mahammed Shah believed Baba Khan would be able to 
come to terms with the chiefs of the Qajar tribes and thus prevent disorder after his 
death. According to the same will, Fatali Shah's heir was to be not his elder son 
Dovlet Shah, born by a Georgian woman from the Tsiskarishvili family, but Abbas 
Mirza, and following his death (still in Fatali Shah's reign), his son Mahammed 
Mirza. 
Agha Mahammed Shah was killed in 1797.  At that time Baba Khan was 
ruler of Fars and quartered in Shiraz. He left with his army for Teheran, where 
disorder had already begun. Pretenders to the throne were Baba Khan's brother 
Husein Gulu Khan, Sadeq Khan Shekkaki, Agha Mahammed Shah's brother Ali 
Gulu Khan Qajar (soon after he was blinded), and Nadir Mirza, the son of Shahruh 
Shah Afshar, who demanded to grant him the throne of his ancestors. 
Baba Khan succeeded in his uncle Husein Gulu Khan's renunciation of any 
claims for the throne, and was crowned on Novruz in 1798 under the name of 
Fatali Shah. The last wish of Agha Mahammed Shah was fulfilled. The new Shah 
defeated Sadeq Khan Sheqqaqi - who had been successful in conquering all of 
Azerbaijan and seizing Qazvin - and directed his steps to Herat where the second 
pretender for the throne Nadir Mirza and his army were stationed. As a result of 
fierce battle Nadir Mirza was defeated and fell in action. It was this moment that 
302 
 
The Court of Fatali Shah. Teheran. 1815. 
 
Fatali Shah pronounced his famous dictum: "Nadir killed Fatali, and Fatali killed 
Nadir" (in the first case, he meant Nadir Shah who killed Fatali Khan Qajar, Baba 
Khan's great grandfather; in the second case, he meant himself, Fatali Shah who 
killed Nadir Mirza). 
After the way to throne 
was clear, Fatali Shah returned 
to the capital and started 
reigning against a background 
of struggle against internal and 
external enemies. While he 
succeeded in coping with 
intrastate problems, and his 
reign proved to be the longest 
in the history of Qajars, Fatali 
Shah came to grief in his 
conflict against Russia despite 
his effort to enlist the support first of Napoleon, and then of the English. 
Having come to the throne, Baba Khan as a brave and clever military leader 
handed over the command of the army and, to an extent, the country to his son, the 
talented political figure and commander Abbas Mirza, ruler of Azerbaijan since 
1798/99. According to his far-sighted plans of land campaigns in India, Napoleon 
tried to arrange matters with Fatali Shah about the unimpeded passage of his army 
via Iran. However, the English had forestalled him, and a treaty aimed both against 
France and Russia was concluded between England and lran in 1801. England's 
support gave confidence to Fatali Shah in his relations with Russia. 
After Eastern Georgia voluntarily joined Russia in 1801, and Russians 
seized Ganja in 1803, Fatali Shah demanded to withdraw Russian troops from the 
Southern Caucasus. This led to the fırst Russian-Persian war of 1804-1813. During 
this war, Abbas Mirza was in command of a strong army of 30,000 troops. 
However, Abbas Mirza's poorly equipped army was defeated, so he had to sign the 
Gulistan Treaty of 1813, following which Russians assumed possession of 
Armenia, Georgia and Northern Azerbaijan, except for Irevan and Nakhchivan 
Khanates. The military genius of Abbas Mirza proved insufficient to defeat an 
enemy furnished with strong artillery, fıre-arms and an army that applied the 
strategy and tactics of European armies, particularly those of Napoleon. Abbas 
Mirza realized this, so he decided to reform his army. 
With that in view, he sent students to Europe to improve their battle 
training. In 1812 Abbas Mirza ordered the installation of printing presses in Tabriz 
to print manuals for military training. Also, he built factories for the manufacture 
of powder and cannons. To improve military training, Abbas Mirza invited English 
military advisers to improve the fighting efficiency of the new army. As a result, 
303 
 
Cotton plain weave. Qajar 
period. Victoria and Albert 
Museum. London.  
Qajar royal tent. Wool with 
embroidered resht Woolen applique. 
Victoria and Albert Museum. London. 
 
the army demonstrated its might during the war against Ottoman Turkey in 1821-
1823 through seizing Van, Bayazid, Suleymaniya and other towns. These victories 
inspired Abbas Mirza: in the summer of 1826, instigated by the English, he 
launched an attack against the Russians in the environs 
of Irevan, Garabagh and Talish. So started the second 
Russian-Persian war (1826-1829). 
In the first year of the war, Abbas Mirza 
managed to return nearly all of the Russian-occupied 
lands. In particular, his troops liberated Ganja and 
reached Derbent. However, the war dragged out and 
Abbas Mirza had neither the funds nor resources to 
proceed with it. Even worse, Fatali Shah and his sons 
declined from compensating for losses incurred. 
It was the numerical superiority, equipment and 
discipline of the Russian army, as well as a change of 
command that enabled the new commandcr of the Russian army, General 
Paskevich, to make headway to the south and seize nearly all of Azerbaijan, 
including Ardebil and Tabriz. Abbas Mirza had nothing to do but sign a new 
humiliating Turkmanchay treaty (1828), which officially reaffirmed the transfer of 
all the northern part of Azerbaijan (now the Azerbaijan Republic), including 
Nakhchivan Khanate, to Russia. 
As Iranian historians noted, this was the 
most humiliating treaty in the history of Iran. 
Iran had to pay 20,000 Russian gold roubles as 
indemnity. Fatali Shah agreed to surrender 17 
towns to the Russians but declined from 
paying money. In order to indemnify, Abbas 
Mirza and his companion-in-arms had to sell 
the jewelry of their wives. 
The nobility and the people were 
dissatisfıed with the tough line of Russia 
regarding Armenians' resettlement to the South 
Caucasus with the purpose of establishing a 
buffer Christian state and thc payment of indemnity under the Turkmanchay treaty. 
This dissatisfaction, coupled with the arrogant behaviour of the Secretary of the 
Russian Mission A. Griboyedov, resulted in tragic consequences. On 19 February, 
an infuriated crowd attacked the Russian Embassy. As a result, nearly all the 
members of the mission were killed. One reason for the massacre was the 
concealment in the Embassy of the Shah harem's eunuch, treasurer and chicf 
custodian of precious stones Armenian Yakub Markaryan and two Armenian 
women from Allahyar Khan Qajar's harem. The eunuch was conversant with 
304 
 
Fatali Shah Attended by a 
Prince, Smoking a Water Pipe. 
Mehrali. Oil on canvas. 
Collection of Mrs. Eskandar 
Aryen. 
 
Seal of Fatali Shah. 
1822/23. Iran. Emerald 
in a setting of sheet 
gold, filigree and 
applique. Nasser D. 
Khalili Collection of 
Islamic Art. 
 
scores of state and intimate secrets of the court, and the Shah issued an ultimatum 
to Griboyedov to deliver them up. However, Griboyedov refused to comply with 
his demand. All things considered, Fatali Shah 
failed to deter gusts of indignation of his citizens. 
With the consent of both sides of conflict, the 
incident was settled in a diplomatic manner. With 
that in view, an expiatory mission was forwarded to 
St.Petersburg headed by Abbas Mirza's younger son 
Khosrov Mirza. In the northern capital, Khosrov 
Mirza was received with regal honours and, even 
better, Russian Emperor Nicholas I declared: "I 
consign to oblivion the ill-fated Teheran incident". 
In his turn, Khosrov Mirza presented the 
Emperor with gifts brought from Persia. The court 
was particularly impressed by a huge diamond, once 
brought by Nadir Shah from India. Now at Diamond 
Fund of Russia, St.Petersburg, the diamond was to 
serve as expiation for bloodshed, according to 
ancient Turkic traditions (Gan pulu). Among the 
gifts, there were also 18 valuable manuscripts, 
including an excellently illustrated lacquered 
binding of "Divani Khagan" (an anthology of verses by 
Fatali Shah). It was Shah's origin of Khosrov Mirza, his 
handsome, exotic appearance and courtly manners that 
allowed him to win court salons. It was not astonishing 
that two memorable medals with texts in Persian and 
Russian were issued to mark his visiting St.Petersburg and 
the Mint Place. 
It has to be kept in mind that wars and bitterness of 
defeat were the last straw that brought Abbas Mirza to his 
grave. The glorious successor to the throne died from 
tuberculosis in 1833 and was buried in Mashad, near Imam 
Reza's tomb. These were the highest ever honours to be 
rendered, according to Iranian traditions. As fate willed, 
Abbas Mirza's descendants proved scattered all over the 
world, from Azerbaijan to the USA. Note that the father 
outlived his son one year. He reigned for 36 years. In spite 
of the fact that Fatali Shah at the time of his death left 59 
sons and 46 daughters, he named Abbas Mirza's son 
Mahammed Mirza as his successor. Fatali Shah made this decision despite protests 
of his mighty uncles Ali Khans and Mahammed Ali Mirza. 
305 
 
Fatali Shah Qajar killing the Russian General. Shahinshahnama. 
Shaba. 1810. Opaque watercolour on paper. 
  
306 
 
Portrait of Fatali Shah 
Qajar Standing with a 
Sceptre. Mehrali. Oil on 
canvas.   
Portrait of Abbas Mirza.  
Fatali Shah's harem numbered approximately 150 
wives and upwards of 900 concubines, served by several 
thousand attendants, including eunuchs who were 
Christians, mostly Armenians. Women and girls were 
conveyed to the Shah's harem from many countries of 
Asia and Europe. Among them were daughters of the 
chiefs of Iranian militant tribes and heads of neighboring 
states that contributed to the settlement of intrastate and 
interstate disputes. Wives-minions were actively involved 
in court and country management, even interstate 
relations. For several years, Shah had favourably been 
disposed toward the elder daughter of Garabagh ruler 
Ibrahim Khan, the beautiful Agha Beyim (b. 1782), aunt 
of the famous poet Khurshid Banu Natavan. In March 
1798, escorted by 200 horsemen and scores of 
maidservants, she was brought to Fatali Shah's harem in 
Teheran on the occasion of his crowning. The following 
are verses ascribed to Agha Beyim: 
 
I'm enamoured of Garabagh  
Sheki, Shirvan and Garabagh,  
Should Teheran turn into paradise,  
I'll never forget Garabagh. 
 
Clever, energetic and incredibly beautiful, Agha 
Beyim took an active part in court and in the country's 
life. She learnt French to maintain ties with Europeans 
and to be in correspondence with prominent figures, in 
particular Napoleon and Catherine II. She wrote verses 
under the penname of Aghabaji. Agha Beyim died in 
1831 and was buried, like Fatali Shah, in Qum. The 
mausoleum of Fatali Shah in Qum was destroyed 
following the revolution in Iran. It was rebuilt into an 
office, and the tombstones disappeared without a trace. 
Fatali Shah applied efforts to arrange the harem's 
work on a scientific basis. The head physician of the 
harem was Scotsman Yohn McNeel who, jointly with a 
midwife from Switzerland, was responsible for the 
Shah's rendezvous schedule with wives and concubines, and for the registration of 
newly born princes and princesses. On Thursdays, on the night to Muslim festal 
Friday, the Shah received his minions in a bedroom of the Gulistan palace. A cut-
307 
 
Palace of Sardar, 18th Century. Irevan. Irevan 
Khanate.  
Goblet. Silver, gold 
plate and enamel. 
1796. Baku. History 
Museum. Moscow. 
glass bed an "eternal bed for the luminary of mankind to sleep" was in his 
bedroom. It was a gift from Nicholas I. 
Fatali Shah Qajar's reign was 
marked by an unprecedented upsurge in 
the arts of Iran and Azerbaijan. For 
unknown reasons, scores of researchers 
pay no heed to this circumstance; 
rather, they regard it as decadence, 
ignoring both the country and the 
structure it was accompanied by. Even 
worse, most researchers are prone to 
underestimate the role of Fatali Shah in 
the advancement of arts. Canvases 
depicting Fatali Shah, his numerous children and Qajar 
offspring, court musicians and dancers are currently 
decorating the world's best museums. 
It was no coincidence that a brilliant, life-asserting 
original Qajar school of painting was created at the court at 
the Shah's initiative. Termed "Qajar painting" in Europe, it 
could as well be called as "painting of the Qajar family". 
The same goes for the so-called varnish painting. 
Culminating under Fatali Shah were gunsmiths, or rather 
metallurgists who in collaboration with metal workers and 
painters succeeded in creating masterpieces of arms with 
blades made of damask steel. Flourishing as well were 
jeweller's art, filigree, enamel, inlaid work, carving, etc. A 
school of Qajar architecture sprang up, including such a brilliant specimen as 
Sardar's Palace in Irevan. Notable for their high quality and design are handmade 
carpets and pieces of fabric manufactured in the reviewed period. 
 
One Struggle More, 
and I am Free 
 
Javad Khan Ziyad-oghlu Qajar 
 
After the formation of the Sefevids' state, Azerbaijan was divided into semi-
dependent princedoms, ruled by Beylarbeys. From that time, the hereditary 
Beylarbeys of Garabagh and Ganja came from Qajars, a family of Ziyad-oghlu. 
The first Beylarbey of Garabagh and Ganja was the prominent political figure and 
commander Kamalladdin Shahverdi Sultan Ziyad-oghlu Qajar (died 1568). 
308 
 
Bonchuk of Javad 
Khan Ziyad-oghlu 
Qajar. 18th 
Century. Ganja. 
Ganja Khanate. 
 
Abbasi. 1189 (1775). 
Silver. Ganja. Ganja 
Khanate. 
 
After the death of Nadir-Shah Afshar, in place of Beylarbeys when 
independent Khanates sprang up, governors of Ganja Khanate again remained 
Qajars. The first Khan was Shahverdi Khan Ziyad-oghlu Qajar (1747-1760). 
The last Khan of Ganja Khanate was a famous polit-
ical figure of Azerbaijan at the end of the 18th and be-
ginning of 19th Centuries, Javad Khan ibn-Shahverdi Khan 
Ziyad-oghlu Qajar. He was born in 1748 in the city of 
Ganja. Javad's father Shahverdi ruled the Khanate of Ganja 
from 1756 until 1761. His mother, Sharaf Jahan Beyim, 
came from a noble family as well. Javad Khan had three 
sisters: Khurshid Beyim, Tuti Beyim and Kheyransa 
Khanum. In 1780, Javad Khan married an ordinary country 
girl named Shukufe Khanum, and in 1790 he married the 
Sheki Khan's sister, Maliknisa Beyim. The first died in 
1812, and the second died in 1830. 
After his death, Javad Khan's second wife came 
back to Sheki to her brother and died there as widow. Her 
grave is in Sheki. Javad Khan and Shukufe Khanum had 
three sons: Ughurlu Khan, Husein Gulu Khan and Ali Gulu 
Khan, and four daughters: Pusta Beyim, Tuti-bike, Khatun 
Beyim and Balaja Beyim. In 1801 Ughurlu Khan married Mammed Khan's 
daughter, Jahan Beyim. Their son was named Javad. Husein Gulu Khan (1784-
1804) married one of Kasib Sultan Shamshadil's relative, 
Zeynab Khanum. 
After Shahverdi Khan, Mahammed Hasan Khan 
Ziyad-oghlu Qajar came to power in Ganja. He displayed 
the abilities of an outstanding state figure, which 
contributed to the independence of Ganja Khanate and its 
prosperity. 
After his brother Mahammed Khan murdered him, 
instability came to Ganja. As soon as the flabby and savage 
Mahammed Khan ascended his brother's throne, he and his 
son Aghabey were seized by the allied Garabagh - Georgian 
army, blinded and put in a Shusha prison. 
During this period Russia, which was struggling with the Turks for Crimea, 
started actions in the Caucasus in order to distract Turkey's attention in this 
direction. Caucasian policy was entrusted to Potemkin, favourite of Catherine II, 
the ruler of Russia. Potemkin's chief adviser on the Caucasus was Armenian 
archbishop Jozef Argutinski. 
309 
 
Portrait of Javad Khan 
Ziyad-oghlu Qajar on a 
carpet. 19th Century. 
Ganja. 
 
As far back as 1783, a treaty between Georgia and Russia was concluded at 
Potemkin's headquarters in Georgievsk, under which Georgia fell under the protec-
torate of Russia and  Russian troops entered there. 
Georgian King Irakli laid claim to possess Ganja, 
Irevan, Akhaltsikh and Nakhchivan. He wrote: "I 
suppose that Russia has occupied Adribijan, and that a 
part of it is kindly granted to me". Georgia's plan became 
known to Ibrahim Khan, who then organized Ganja 
residents to set out for the Georgian garrison. Key 
Khosrov fled Ganja, and Irakli decided to put 
Mahammed Khan - who was one of Ibrahim Khan's 
captives - on the throne in Ganja. On learning this, 
Ibrahim Khan killed the captive. However, the protege of 
Ibrahim Khan, Hazrat Gulu Bey, did not remain long in 
Ganja. After the Ganja revolt, Rahim Bey came to power, 
and was followed some time later by his brother, Javad 
Khan. 
Javad Khan came to power, obviously, not 
without Erakli's help. It was no mere coincidence that he paid 10,000 roubles 
annually to the Georgian king. To put an end to the dependence and continuous 
forays of Georgia in Ganja, Javad Khan joined Agha Mahammed Khan Qajar's 
army in 1785, and moved on Tiflis. After the return of Agha Mahammed Khan's 
army to Iran, the relations between Javad Khan and Irakli II became increasingly 
hostile. The troops of Irakli II, Khan of Garabagh, Ibrahim Khan and Khan of 
Avars, Umma (his relative) besieged Ganja. Though the siege was unsuccessful, 
Javad Khan had to return prisoners of war captured in Tiflis and pay war costs to 
Ibrahim Khan in order to lift the siege. 
After the death of King Irakli, Javad Khan struggled to regain the territories 
of Borchali and Shamshadil, which had been given to Georgia by Nadir-Shah. 
However, he managed to liberate only Shamshadil, where he later sent his son, 
Ughurlu Khan. 
By the order of Catherine II in 1796, a campaign of the Russian army on the 
Caucasus began. The army was under the command of General Valerian Zubov, 
brother of Platon Zubov, a favourite of Catherine II. As an official purpose of the 
campaign, there was restoration of calmness in the region, which had been 
disturbed by Agha Mahammed Khan. More than 30,000 troops took part in the 
campaign. In a short time, Russia invaded eastern regions of Azerbaijan, almost 
without struggle. The majority of Khans were compelled to fall under the 
protection of Russia on the condition of the preservation of Khanates and Khan 
authorities, although there were representatives of pro-Turkish and Persian among 
them. 
310 
 
The Mosque of Shah Abbas. 
17th Century. Ganja. Ganja 
Khanate. 
 
The Caucasian corps approached Ganja under the command of General 
Roman Korsakov on December 13, 1796. Javad Khan left the city to meet the army 
and presented Ganja's keys to Roman Korsakov. 
Benevolent in the beginning of the 
campaign, Azerbaijan's attitude toward Russia 
sharply worsened after Argutinski was appointed as 
Zubov's adviser to Garabagh Meliks. He declared, 
without agreeing with Zubov, that Russians came to 
Azerbaijan with the plan "of relieving Armenians 
from the yoke of Muslims". Armenian Meliks laid 
claim to Garabagh and Zangezur. 
As soon as the Russians appeared in the 
Caucasus, Georgians and Armenians began dividing 
the territory of Azerbaijan. In exchange for 
Georgia's assistance, Russia promised   hereafter   to  
promote   the   institution   of Georgia's authority in 
this region. Irevan and Garabagh Khanates were 
planned to be populated by Armenians, who moved 
there from Iran and Turkey with the purpose of 
creating a buffer Christian state. These politics have proceeded to the present. 
More than 1.5 million Armenians were brought to that region, which had 
adopted the name  Armenia. Also, approximately as many Azerbaijanis were 
forcibly evicted from there. 
That same year  Catherine   II died,  and  the new Emperor Pavel   I  ordered 
Zubov to leave Transcaucasia. Immediately after the departure of the Russians, 
Agha Mahammed Khan organized a retaliatory campaign in the north of Azer-
baijan. He took Shusha, and Javad Khan then arrived there. They intended to 
explain to the Shah the reasons for the surrender of fortresses to Russians without 
resistance. 
The Assassination of the Shah on June 5, 1797 relieved Khans of possible 
punishment. In 1799, the Russian army returned to Georgia, and within a year 
Russia announced its annexation of Georgia. Georgian King George XII demanded 
the return of Shamshadil. 
Javad Khan sent an army there under the command of Ughurlu Khan. This 
time, the treasurer of the Georgian king, neighboured by Javad Khan, informed him 
about the expected campaign of the Russian - Georgian army against Ganja. 
311 
 
Battle of Prince Abbas Mirza with Russian Troops. Allahverdi Afshar. 
1815-1816. Tabriz. Oil on canvas. Hermitage. St. Petersburg. 
 
It is quite possible that by sending this letter they tried to intimidate Javad 
Khan and force him to flee. Russian historian Olga Markova wrote, "The most 
painful problem of the internal relations in Transcaucasia - the question of Ganja's 
submission - has now sprung up again". The Russian general, Georgian prince 
Tsitsianov, was nominated commander-in-chief of the Russian army to the 
Caucasus. He wrote 
Javad Khan a letter 
from Tiflis requesting 
a brief report on his 
activities and 
demanding him to 
send his son Ughurlu 
Khan as a hostage to 
show his loyalty and 
friendship. Javad 
Khan refused to 
execute these 
demands, declaring it 
in such a rough form. 
He clearly understood that this time the question was not about the transition under 
the protectorate of Russia, with the preservation of the Khanate, but complete 
liquidation. 
On November 22, 1803, Russians from Tiflis set off for Ganja. On appro-
aching Ganja, Tsitsianov again sent a letter to Javad Khan, which categorically 
demanded him to yield the fortress. 
Javad  Khan answered that he was ready to defend Ganja in action. Azerbai-
jani historian Mirza Adigezal   Bey wrote  that  Javad Khan mustered an army and 
attacked the enemy. The battle began near the tomb of the great Azerbaijani poet 
Sheikh Nizami, near the village of Qulu-kobu. 
The forces were evidently unequal. As a result, Ganja defenders suffered 
heavy losses and returned to the city to shelter in the internal citadel. The Russian 
army pursued them in Ganja and surrounded the citadel. During a month of threats 
and ultimatums by Tsitsianov, Javad Khan answered unequivocally: "As to the 
surrender of the city, leave behind this unrealizable dream. In Ganja you can enter 
only through my corpse. Do you understand? Only after my death and that's all". 
Winter colds came nearer and on January 3, 1804, Tsitsianov decided to 
assault the citadel. The first attack was a failure; then another attack on the citadel 
followed. 
312 
 
Despite the heroic resistance of the Ganja residents, Russians seized the main 
towers of the citadel. Early in the morning on January 4, 1804, Javad Khan fell in 
action from an enemy bullet. Javad Khan's son Husein Gulu Khan perished 
courageously. 
The Ganja Khanate was conquered by Russia and ceased to exist. However, 
on July 26, 1826, another son of Javad Khan, Ughurlu Khan, took Ganja and 
restored the Khanate for a short time. 
Ughurlu Khan, notable for his unusual courage and talent as a commander, 
twice made deep raids into Azerbaijan with a small army and even tried to take 
Ganja. 
Javad Khan was buried in Ganja at the "Juma" mosque, constructed by 
Shah-Abbas. 
A modest entombment was established over his grave. It was made of 
marble and an inscription in "nastalig" in Persian was very skilfully traced out: 
 
"In this tomb lies Beylarbey of Ganja 
 Javad Khan Ziyad-oghlu from the family of Qajar".  
Died in the year one thousand two hundred  
And eighteen (1218/1804). 
 
In 1962, apparently in connection with the reconstruction of the square 
around the mosque, his tomb was destroyed by the Soviet administration. Local 
patriots saved the remains of Javad Khan, and on March 27, 1990 they were 
returned to their former place. 
Russia gained a victory over Javad Khan and captured Ganja. To celebrate 
the event, Russians instituted rewards and memorable medals. Decorations (silver 
medals) were issued that said "For the capture of Ganja on January 30, 1804" and 
"For bravery during the capture of Ganja". The Recapture of Ganja following the 
battle with Ughurlu Khan in 1826 was marked in Russia by issuing a memorable 
medal by famous medallist Count Fedor Tolstoy. It read: "The Battle under 
Elizavetopol. 1826". The city was renamed Elizavetpol in honour of the wife of 
Russian Emperor Alexsander I Elizabetha Alexeevna. 
Ganja prospered during the reign of Javad Khan. Trade flourished, various 
crafts were cultivated, and schools, caravanserais and mosques were built. Under 
the court of Javad Khan, scientists, writers and poets assembled,  including 
Kerbalay  Sadiq, father of the prominent Azerbaijani poet Mirza Shafi. When 
Russians captured Ganja, Javad Khan's daughter Puste Khanum invited Mirza 
Shafi to serve as manager, but after the Shamkir battle, Ughurlu Khan took Pusta 
Khanum away to Iran. 
Javad Khan's granddaughter and Ughurlu Khan's daughter, Badir Jahan 
Beyim, was the wife of the last Khan of Garabagh, Mehti Qulu Khan Juvanshir. 
313 
 
She was an outstanding poet and public figure. Javad Khan's grandson Kelbali 
Khan Musahib wrote verses in Azeri and Persian. 
Javad Khan's brother Fathali Bey Ziyad-oghlu Khali Ganjali was a well-
known poet. The manuscript of his Divan, written mostly in Azeri, is kept at the 
Institute of Manuscripts of the National Academy of Sciences of Azerbaijan. 
Famous Azerbaijani writer Mohsun Nasiri wrote at the court of Javad Khan. By the 
order of Javad Khan, he wrote the Azerbaijani version of "Tuti-name", based on 
the ancient Indian fairy tale. After Russia's occupation of Ganja, some of Javad 
Khan's descendants adopted the surname Ziyatkhanovs. Now in Baku and  Ganja 
you can meet Javad Khan's direct offspring under this surname. 
  
A Life Spent 
in Pilgrimage 
 
Zeynal abd-Din Shirvani 
 
On March 8, 1852 at the session of the Caucasian Branch of Russian 
Geographical Society, a report was made on the book "Riyazus-Seyahat" by 
Zeynal abd-Din Shirvani. The chairman of the session, vice-regent of the Caucasus 
Prince Vorontsov was so interested in this report that he ordered a collection of 
information about Zeynal abd-Din Shirvani. He also ordered that the book be 
found or a copy be made. 
Through the Russian Embassy in Iran a contact 
was established with Prince Mahammed Reza Mirza 
Qajar. However, he refused to sell a single copy of the 
book, though he kindly agreed to send a copy. Who was 
Zeynal abd-Din Shirvani, what attracted the attention of 
Russian scientists and of high-ranking dignitaries, in 
honour of whom were named a library in Indonesia, 
Geographical Societies in Mecca and Jiz (Saudi Arabia), 
a street in the Iranian city of Shiraz, a steam-ship 
floating in the Caspian Sea, and a museum in India? 
Haji Zeynal abd-Din ibn Akhund Iskender Shir-
vani, a prominent geographer, traveller, historian, 
ethnographer, philosopher and poet, was born in 1780 in Shemakha. 
In 1785, when Zeynal abd-Din was five years old, the family of Akhund 
Iskender migrated to the city of Kerbela (near Baghdad), where the father of the 
future traveller attended university. There, Zeynal abd-Din received primary 
education. In 1796, he moved to Baghdad to complete his education. There Zeynal 
abd-Din continued to study philosophy, medicine, astronomy, mathematics and 
languages. Books of travellers were kept in the libraries of Baghdad, and scientists 
314 
 
Portrait of Zeynal abd-
Din Shirvani. Ali Minayi. 
 
Title page of Bustane-
seyahe by Zeynal abd-Din 
Shirvani.  
 
of Baghdad assembled there from all over the East. These, coupled with the 
numerous pilgrims visiting the sacred city, opened before the young man a 
mysterious, unknown world. Aspiration to see the world and bring the story about 
it to his countrymen became the only purpose in the life of young Shirvani, so 
without extensive preparations he started his way. 
Nureddin Keremov, a well-known Azerbaijani 
biographer of Zeynal abd-Din Shirvani, wrote: "The way 
was stretched for more than 60,000 kilometers and lasted 
for 40 years. It went through Asia Minor, Iran Highland, 
Central Asia, Arabian and North African deserts, 
through the forests and savannas of Sudan, the tropical 
forests of India, the islands of the Indian Ocean. This 
way crossed the mountain ridges of Hindukush, Zagros, 
Suleyman Mountains, Pamir, and many other areas of 
Asia and Africa". 
In his works, Zeynal abd-Din Shirvani did not 
focus on single trips. Nureddin Keremov pointed to his 
three main trips. "The first of them was the following: 
Baghdad, Iraq-e Ajam, Gilan, Shirvan, Mughan, Talish, 
Southern Azerbaijan, Khorasan, Herat, Zabul, Kabul, 
onward to India's regions, Penjab, Dean, Bengal, 
Gujarat, the islands of the Indian Ocean, Sind, Multan; 
then by mountain roads to Kashmir, Muzaffarabad and 
by Eabul roads to Takharistan; from there to Turan and 
through the Badakhshan Mountains to Khorasan; then 
via Iran to Phars. After a short rest, Zeynal abd-Din 
Shirvani began the second trip. It started with Shiraz 
(Phars), and from there went to Darab; then by sea to 
Bender-Abbas, further via Ormuz to Khadramaut and 
Yemen, then to Ethiopia and Sudan, then again to the 
Arabian peninsula to Jidda, Khijaz, Medina and Mecca. 
Later he went by sea to the country of Seyids, from 
Egypt in the Near East to Sham-Rum (Anatoly), Diyarbeqir, Garaman and Aydin. 
The third trip of Zeynal abd-Din Shirvani - to the Atlantic Ocean and back - 
crossed the following route: the islands of Bahre Akhzar (which means "green 
sea", as the Eastern geographer called the Atlantic Ocean), Rum-Eli (or Rumalya, a 
European part of the Osman Empire), Anatoly, Azerbaijan, Teheran, Baghdad, 
Hamadan, Isfahan, Kerman and Shiraz". 
Using more than 500 manuscripts and books, many of which are now lost, 
and personal observations, made during these trips, Shirvani wrote three books, 
315 
 
The Siniq Qala Mosque. 
1079. Baku, the State of 
the Shirvanshahs. 
 
Climactic Zones of 
the Earth, by Zeynal 
abd-Din Shirvani. 
bringing him world fame: "Riyazus- Sayahat" ("Fields of Trips") 1822, 
"Khadaikus-Sayahat" ("Gardens of the Trip") 1827 and "Bustanus-Sayahat" 
("Flower Bed of the Trip") 1833. In them, he gave valuable information on 
geography, history, ethnography, architecture, literature and well-known figures 
from many countries. 
He gave special attention to the description of the 
world's climatic zones. Like his predecessors from the 
East, Shirvani divided the Earth into seven climatic 
zones. 
During his travels, Shirvani became acquainted 
with quite a few scientific figures. Several of them tried 
to meet with him, and they took his opinion into 
consideration. News of the scholarship of Shirvani 
overstepped the borders of the routes of his trips. When 
asked about the reasons for his unusual hospitality, the 
governor of one of the regions of India answered, "I have 
rendered you only one hundredth of the respect which 
you deserved. I highly appreciate you for eight reasons: 
one of them is your charity; people should respect each 
other. Another reason is that you have arrived as a guest 
of our country, and a guest should be respected; and because you are a scientist, 
and scientists need to be to respected; and at last, one more reason is that you are a 
wise and informed person. You help the poor people, and he who helps paupers 
and unfortunates is estimable... I appreciate you due to the above told and I have a 
whole-hearted kindness toward you". 
He was invited to the courts of the governor of 
Egypt Ibrahim Bey, Shah of Iran, Fathali Shah Qajar, 
Sultan of Turkey Mahmud, and many others. There, he 
participated in disputes and conversations, but on offers to 
stay at the Court, there followed polite refusal. Shirvani 
preferred an adventurous life full of hardship to replete the 
existence of a courtier. At the same time, Zeynal abd-Din 
was a poet and composed lyrical poetry under the 
pseudonym of Tamkin. These verses are scattered 
throughout his geographical writings and collected in his 
"Divan", the manuscript of which is kept at the Central Library of Teheran. 
Manuscripts of other works are kept at the British Museum, the Paris National 
Library, in St. Petersburg and in Iran. 
Shirvani's works were explored by many Azerbaijani, Iranian, Russian and 
European scientists, including Abbas Qulu Bakikhanov, Mahammed Tarbiyat, 
Asker Rabbani, B. Dorn, N. Khanikov, E. Braun, C. Storn and E. Bloshe. Of 
316 
 
A postcard. Baku. Beginning of the 20 
th Century. 
 
 
particular interest are works of N. Keremov, who devoted a greater part of his life 
to the propaganda of the scientific heritage of Zeynal abd-Din Shirvani.  
Zeynal abd-Din married in 1820/21 in 
the city Shiraz. Soon, his son Jalal ad-Din 
Mahammed was born, followed two years 
later by his second son Khusam ad-Din Ali. 
His elder son did not live long. The younger 
son followed in his father's steps and took 
trips to Iraq, Iran and India. Zeynal abd-Din 
Shirvani spent the last years of his life with 
his family in Shiraz. From there he went on 
his final trip. It was the hajj to Mecca he made 
together with his wife. On the way to Mecca he fell ill and died near the city of 
Jidda in 1838, where he was buried. 
 
The Master of Love Poetry. 
 
Molla Panah Vagif 
 
Molla Panah Vagif - Grand Vizier of Garabagh 
Khanate and well-known political and public figure of 18th 
Century Azerbaijan - is one Azerbaijan's outstanding poets 
of the medieval tradition and the first poet to create new 
realistic poetry, close to folksy. His creativity had a great 
influence on the further development of Azerbaijani poetry. 
Vagif was born in 1717 in the settlement of Salahli, 
near Gazakh. Apparently, his distant ancestors migrated there from the native land 
of the great Fizuli-Bayat. However, there is not much reliable information about 
his parents. It is only known that Vagif's grandfather's name was Suleyman, his 
father's name was Mehdi, and his mother's name was Aggiz. 
Panah was highly educated. He was skilled in Persian and Arabic and knew 
the particulars of astronomy, mathematics architecture, music and poetry. In 
Gazakh, he attended the school of well-known scientist and teacher Shafi-efendi. 
Some biographers consider that he was subsequently educated in Ganja or Tabriz. 
In Gazakh, and later in Garabagh, Vagif taught in the madrasa under a 
mosque named after Molla Panah. The glory of the profound erudition of Vagif 
went far beyond his native land; a proverb even said: "Not every scribe can 
become Molla Panah". 
In the middle of the 18th Century, hostile conditions arose on the border 
with Georgia and many families from the Gazakh area migrated to the regions of 
317 
 
Shusha. 19th Century. Garabagh. Drawing by Vereschagin. 
Garabagh and Ganja. Vagif s family was among these emigrants. They found 
refuge in the village of Terterbasar, Javanshir's region of Garabagh. There, Vagif 
continued teaching. This brought him modest income in the small poor village, so 
Vagif s family lived in poverty. It is not surprising that he wrote the poem "Bayram 
oldu" ("Holiday Has Come") during this time: 
 
Although Bayram, the holiday, is on its way, I sigh.  
At home, there's not a sack that holds a thing to eat. 
 
The jars that held the oil are empty and quite dry 
 There's not a whiff of cheese and not a shred of meat. 
 
We put no faith in God, whose mercy is never shown – 
If bumpkins knew they'd drive us off with blows! 
 
In every village house the honey overflows. 
It's only in our own there's nothing sour or sweet. 
 
In this immense world of ours we've not a groat to show, 
 And ne'er a pretty lass to set the heart aglow. 
 
Vagif, don't ever boast about the things you know.  
God knows our store of wisdom's poor and incomplete! 
 
This undistinguished verse would not be worth mentioning if not for its bad 
name. During the Soviet time this verse would have been regarded as a merit of the 
poet. It was recited 
everywhere, from creche 
to university audiences. 
Communists always used 
this verse to emphasize the 
advantages of the then-
existing socialist system of 
management. Masses of 
the country's population 
started studying the cre-
ativity of Vagif from this 
verse. 
Soon after, Vagif 
moved from Terterbasar to Shusha, where he opened a school and shortly after 
gained the reputation of excellent teacher and talented poet. The poet's glory 
reached Garabagh's Khan Ibrahim Khalil Khan, and he was invited to the palace. 
There are different legends as to how Vagif got to the palace. According to one, 
Vagif predicted a lunar eclipse and earthquake with great accuracy. Having learned 
318 
 
about this, Ibrahim Khan wanted to get acquainted with the gifted astrologer, and 
Vagif was invited to the palace. Impressed by Vagif's sharp wit, acuteness and 
personal charm, Ibrahim Khan offered him to move to the palace. 
According to another legend, while Vagif was in Ganja, he wrote a letter on 
behalf of an applicant to the ruler of Ganja Khanate Javad Khan Qajar. Javad Khan 
was surprised by the style of the letter and took Vagif to the palace. However, 
giving in to the persistent appeals of Ibrahim Khali 1 Khan, he released him to 
Garabagh. Vagif remained in the palace until his dying day, first as Eshikaghasi 
(Vizier or Home Secretary),  and  then  as  Grand  Vizier.  Thanks  to his 
accomplishment and scholarship, he soon won common respect. It is evident that 
Vagif seriously studied astronomy and successfully used his knowledge in practice 
to predict eclipses, as well as make calendar calculations and astrological forecasts. 
The palace needed these to make serious decisions. Vagif felt at home in applied 
mathematics and used this knowledge during the construction of Khan's palace, 
residential houses and the wall of the impregnable fortress of Shusha. 
Vagif  had a rich library and was perpetually engaged in self-education. 
Through his accomplishments, he stood out among die intellectuals of Shusha and 
fully justified his poetic pseudonym "Vagif" ("Expert"). Aziz Sharif, a researcher 
of Vagif, said that as Vizier of Garabagh Khanate, Vagif proved himself to be a 
great politician and public figure, and a wise and far seeing individual. There are 
no grounds for doubting the exceptional abilities of Vagif, but a question arises: 
perhaps it was him and Ibrahim Khalil Khan's "far-seeing policy" that later led 
Azerbaijan to the bloody events in Garabagh. 
Vagif had two wives. One was called Medina, and the other was 
Gizkhanum. Gizkhanum was a Durband Bey's daughter and got married in her 
young age to the already elderly Vagif. There are legends about her unusual 
beauty. Vagif  had one son and two daughters. All of them were children of 
Medina Khanum. The son's name was Aliagha. He wrote under the pennamc 
"Alim" ("Scientist"), and was murdered when he was middle-aged. 
Vagif was on good terms with the poets Vidadi, Husein Khan Mushtag and 
Aggiz-oghlu Piri. Of these, his closest friend was the poet Vidadi from Gazakh. 
According to some information, Vidadi was Vagif's distant relative. The daughters 
of Vagif were married to the sons of Vidadi. The poetic correspondence between 
the two poets was of particular significance for their creative work. Another friend 
of his, Mahammed Husein Mushtag, was Khan of Sheki for 22 years. Their poetic 
correspondence is also known. 
Although Vagif arrived in the palace as a Sunnit, he adopted Shiism, which 
was professed by the Khan. As Grand Vizier, he supervised the foreign affairs in 
the Khanate. Azerbaijan was in a difficult situation. Nadir Shah was murdered in 
1747. A little earlier, independent Khanates had been formed in Azerbaijan. In a 
short time, such Khanates as Garabagh, Ganja, Guba, Sheki and Talish sprang up 
319 
 
Shusha Fortress. 18th Century. Garabagh. 
 
 
320 
 
and were recognised in the international arena. However, despite the political, 
military and economic success achieved by these Khanates, they faced the threat of 
the loss of their independence. 
The independence of the Khanates was threatened by neighbouring 
Khanates and Georgia. Ceaseless internal wars and the threat of intrusion of the 
powerful neighbour compelled the Khanates to enter into alliance with other 
Khanates and seek support of powerful states. Ibrahim Khan concluded a treaty 
with Georgia and sought the support of Russia. In 1783, Georgian King Irakli II 
adopted Russian citizenship. Vagif visited Tiflis a year later to attend a reception 
arranged in honour of the conclusion of the treaty between the two states. During 
the reception, some of Vagifs verses were read. These were written in Tiflis and 
devoted to Irakli's son Prince Eulon. They also praised Georgia's beauties and 
included a eulogy of Tiflis. 
In 1783, Ibrahim Khalil Khan 
addressed a letter to Empress 
Catherine II with a request to admit 
Garabagh Khanate into Russian 
citizenship. Ibrahim Khan had to 
choose between Russia and Iran, 
where Agha Mahammed Shah Qajar 
had come to power. 
Ibrahim Khalil Khan oriented 
himself toward Russia. From old 
times Garabagh was populated with 
Qajars and had been ruled for nearly 200 years by Qajars from the Ziyad-Oghlu 
family. Agha Mahammed Shah tried to conquer Garabagh Khanate in any degree, 
and he was motivated by the restoration of the rights of Qajars. 
Before Agha Mahammed's arrival in Garabagh, Ibrahim Khalil Khan had 
maintained close contact with Irakli II. Vagif participated in the negotiations held 
by Ibrahim Khalil Khan, Irakli II, hakim of Irevan Mahammed Khan and hakim of 
Talish Mir Mustafa Khan. The negotiations focused on the joint struggle against 
Agha Mahammed. Prepared to campaign against Garabagh, Agha Mahammed 
demanded unconditional obedience from Ibrahim Khalil Khan, and as a guarantee 
he expressed his desire that the Khan's son be sent to him. Ibrahim Khalil Khan did 
not agree and in 1795, Agha Mahammed Shah's army crossed the river Araz and 
made their attack on Shusha. Shusha's people were guided by Vagif and had time 
to prepare for their prolonged defense. The siege of Shusha was thoroughly 
developed. Agha Mahammed Shah asked his court poet to write an intimidating 
letter to Ibrahim Khalil Khan. Noteworthy are the following verses:  
 
 
321 
 
Madman! A hail of stones crashes down from heaven.  
And you in glass walls wait for wonder to come. 
 
Here we have a play on words. Shusha in Azeri means glass. A sheet with 
this couplet was attached to an arrow, which the Shah's warriors shot into the 
fortress. In the same way, they received an answer written by Vagif, Grand Vizier 
of Garabagh Khanate: 
 
The Creator surrounded me by glass, 
But by hard stone the glass is encompassed. 
 
This verse evoked terrible anger from Agha Mahammed, and he renewed 
the shelling of Shusha. After 33 days of unsuccessful attacks of the fortress, the 
army of the Shah lifted the siege and made their way to Georgia. 
Wielding arms skilfully, Vagif was among the defenders of the fortress. 
Legends were spread about his art of straight shooting. People said that one day at 
an Armenian wedding party, the numerous visitors arranged a shooting 
competition, which Vagif won. Vagif even had muhammas devoted to the gun. 
In 1796, Russian armies under the command of count Zubov passed through 
Shemakha up to the borders of Garabagh. Ibrahim Khalil Khan sent an embassy led 
by Abulfat Khan's son to Zubov. Among them were Vagif and the sons of some 
Garabagh emirs too. On behalf of Catherine II, Ibrahim Khalil Khan and Vagif 
were presented with costly gifts. Vagif was presented with a staff decorated with 
precious stones.  
Ibrahim Khalil Khan continually maintained correspondence with Catherine 
II. Vagif wrote Ibrahim Khalil Khan's letters to Catherine, and the Empress at once 
noticed the uncommon abilities of the author. In a letter to Potemkin written in 
1784, Catherine II pointed out that all the letters of Ibrahim Khalil Khan stood out 
by the refined style compared with (he ones from Persia and Turkey. She asked her 
favourite to find out the details of the personality and state of health of the author 
of the letters. 
In 1796, Empress Catherine II died and the new Emperor Pavel I withdrew 
the Russian army from the Caucasus. Agha Mahammed Shah took the opportunity 
to punish the recalcitrant Khans of Azerbaijan. Within a year he launched a new 
campaign and again started it from Shusha. This time Ibrahim Khalil Khan opened 
the gates of the fortress Shusha without resistance and fled to the north of 
Azerbaijan, backed by a small group of relatives and an entourage. However, Vagif 
was not among his entourage. Only a week after the arrival of the Shah's army in 
Shusha, he was arrested and brought to the palace of Ibrahim Khalil Khan's brother 
Mahammed Hasan Bey, where Agha Mahammed Shah sat solemnly. 
Historians  account  for the punishment  inflicted by Ibrahim Khalil Khan 
on ihe famous delender of Shusha by the disastrous situation in Garabagh, where 
322 
 
drought was followed by terrible famine. The absence of Vagif in the Khan's 
entourage is explained differently. 
All the explanations lead to numerous questions. Shusha was regarded as an 
impregnable fortress and Ibrahim Khalil Khan had enough time to stock up 
provisions and prepare for prolonged defense. 
If from the very outset he wanted to hand over the fortress, Vagif, his 
closest courtier, would have known about it and would have tried to be  in the 
fortress at  that moment. However, for unknown reasons he left the fortress and 
turned Vagif adrift. 
There are some versions that explain the poet's absence in the Khan's 
entourage. According to one of them, Vagif went with a certain Jamil Agha to 
Tiflis and on his return was seized by Agha Mahammed Shah's people. Vagif, 
according to another version, escaped from the Shah, was seized by Javad Khan, 
and sent off to the Shah. There was also an assumption that antagonists of Ibrahim 
Khalil Khan seized the city some days before the intrusion of Agha Mahammed, 
and that Vagif was arrested before the arrival of the Shah. This explained why the 
impregnable fortress surrendered without struggle. Then there arose yet more 
mysterious events. According to the message of historian Mirza Jamal, who 
occupied Vagif s position at the court of Ibrahim Khalil Khan after his return to 
Shusha, Vagif was brought to the palace close to sunset and Agha Mahammed 
announced that he would be executed in the morning. It is rather surprising that the 
same evening, he promised to execute three servants the same morning. However, 
Agha Mahammed Shah did not hold out until morning. The servants facing 
execution penetrated into the Shah's bedroom and killed him. Plots of these stories 
are rather primitive as if written under one scenario. 
Many historians consider that Agha Mahammed was assassinated as a result 
of a conspiracy led by opponents from Iran or Georgia by King Irakli II. The 
involvement of tragedy in the murder of Agha Mahammed may be explained by 
the presence of a Georgian among the servants charged with the murder of the 
Shah. If so, most questions can be explained. Ibrahim Khalil Khan was an ally of 
the Georgian king. Therefore, the probability remains that if it were a plot, Ibrahim 
Khalil Khan could have participated as well. Then it is possible to assume that 
Vagif stayed in Garabagh for the continuation of the struggle against the Persian 
Shah and, perhaps, guided the plotters, among whom there may have been repre-
sentatives of Iranian dignitaries accompanying Agha Mahammed to Shusha.  
 One such plotter, as historians consider, could have been his commander, 
the noble Azerbaijani Khan Sadiq Khan Shekkaki, connected with some 
Azerbaijani Khans and Georgians living in Iran. At any rate, this version is 
confirmed by the delivery of the Shah's treasures to him after the murder. After the 
Shah's murder, the army came back to Iran by different ways, and the possible 
campaign on Georgia did not take place. 
323 
 
Vagifs conduct the night before the murder of the Shah confirms this 
version. Vagif, as eyewitnesses testified, repeatedly sent for a custodian that night 
and towards the morning and asked him whether something unusual had happened 
in the town. Right after the murder of the Shah, Ibrahim Khalil Khan's nephew 
succeeded to Garabagh Khanate. Rescue seemed to have come, but Mammed Bey 
Javanshir trumped up a charge against Vagif and decided to execute him and his 
son Ali Bey. 
Historians have no consistent opinion regarding this incident. Apparently, 
on the day of the execution, when the guard was leading the father and his son, 
allegedly, to the Khan's reception, the son wondered why the guard was taking 
them downstairs when the Khan was upstairs. Vagif answered that they were being 
led to where many people had sent for them. 
Vagif was buried with funeral honours in Shusha. On his grave, a modest 
mausoleum was erected. It became a place of pilgrimage. After Vagifs execution, 
his house was plundered and his manuscripts were incinerated. The "Divan" of his 
verses did not reach us. 
The famous poet's works were scripted together by several generations of 
scholars. The poet's verses were used by ashigs and have enjoyed popularity by 
people at large. A number of his verses survived in manuscripts. In 1856 Mirza 
Yusif Nersesov published the corpus of Vagifs poetry in Teymurkhanshur. Then 
Mirza Fatali Akhundzade collected rich material and gave it to the outstanding 
orientalist Adolf  Berje, who issued it in 1867 in Leipzig. Husein Efendi Gaibov, 
who was a distant descendant of the poet Vidadi, edited a large anthology of 
Azerbaijani poetry. Though his manuscript was not published, many litterateurs 
used it. 
The last time that Vagif was published before the Russian revolution was by 
Hashim Bey Vezirov, editor of the newspaper "New Life". After the revolution, 
Salman Mumtaz was actively involved in Vagifs poetry. The popularity of Vagif 
was very great not only among Azerbaijanis, but among Georgians and Armenians 
as well. In those years, Azeri was the language of international communication in 
the Caucasus, so manuscripts of his verses survived not only in the Arabic script, 
but also in the Georgian and Armenian scripts. 
Vagif used all classical forms of Oriental poetry. He wrote qazels, tejnis, 
muhammas, mustezad, muashar, mushaire, mesnevi and elegies. However, a 
special place in his creativity belongs to the poetic form goshma, adopted from 
ashugh poetry. The language of these verses is close to folksy. There are minimal 
Arabic and Persian words. Vagif grew up among ashugs and perfectly knew the 
preferences of the audience. This explains the predominance in his poetry of the 
poetic form goshma. 
On the other hand, "Divan" by Vagif was lost, and in the memories of the 
people there remained goshmas congenial to them. However, the overindulgence of 
324 
 
this poetic form had a positive effect on the content and language of the verses of 
classical forms. 
The love in Vagifs verses stems from the Sufi-mystical symbolism, which is 
inherent, to a degree, in most Azerbaijani medieval poets. Vagifs verses sing the 
joys of life, the beauty of beloved, the bitterness of separation and the pleasures of 
meetings and ardent love. A great number of Vagif s verses are devoted to the 
elegy of Azerbaijani beauties. In nearly all of his poems, the poet describes the 
beloved's eyes, eyebrows, cheeks, hands, legs, stature and languishing looks. These 
verses seem a little bit monotonous to us, but Vagifs contemporaries perceived 
them differently. In the Muslim community, men were deprived of the opportunity 
to sec open-faced women and to have free access to communicate with them. 
Vagifs verses simply recited the amenities of the beauties, thus permitting them to 
be animate, inaccessible live images. 
The emotions of that time's audience are exaggerated today. From our point 
of view, love verses had an unusually strong emotional effect on listeners, down to 
the loss of consciousness. The realisation of a woman's beauty by a male audience 
of that time enabled them, under the effect of Vagif s verses, to reconstruct in their 
imagination the living image of clever, sharp-witted, playful, flirty, graceful and 
slender, pure and virginal white beauties with large eyes and long eyelashes, and 
with a birthmark on their cheeks. The poetry of Vagif is very imaginative and 
permits the design of volumetric and multicoloured spiritual images. If we could 
translate that into a computer, it could create an "ideal" image of the Azerbaijani 
beauty. However, he often answers this question himself: 
 
Like a mirror, her body should always be fair, 
Her locks should be ebon and set off her height. 
 
Her checks should recall springtide tulips a blowing. 
 Her lips should be red and like cut amber glowing.  
Her body, a jewel no fault ever showing.  
From her head to her toes should be pure pearly white. 
 
Her dress should be neat and impeccably clean.  
Her manner must never be mincing or mean.  
Her breath should be sweet and her glances serene. 
 Her hair with cool violets' scent should delight. 
 
Both her arms and her legs should be graceful and slim,  
Her buttocks well rounded, not fat, or too thin,  
On her ankles two dimples and one on her chin,  
Her face should be round and her bones should be slight. 
 
At the door of maturity-fifteen, not more.  
With no band on her brow that might cover some flaw.  
She must not be precocious, or push to the fore,  
325 
 
Yet charming to guests that her lord may invite. 
 
Let her beauty each morning attention excite- 
A fine preening pheasant, delighting the sight. 
She should not talk too much, but be gay and forthright. 
Attentive she must be, and always polite. 
 
Translated by Tom Botting. 
 
Vagif was not only the master of love poetry, but also a connoisseur of love 
enjoyment. Aziz Sharif said, "Instead of an unearthly, ideal love that was at the 
centre of attention of the classical medieval poets, Vagif conveyed hot and live 
feelings, the simple pleasures of love". Vagif wrote deeply philosophical verses 
about the mission of man and the frailty of the world, as well as verses of 
accusatory nature. However, he remains the poet of love, beauty and the pleasures 
of being. 
 
A Key to Wisdom 
 
Mirza Shafi 
 
Mirza Shafi, what do they want of you?  
They either glorify you, or speak ill of you. 
 
"The Key to Wisdom", Mirza Shafı 
 
The system of education at schools and 
universities in medieval Azerbaijan was built in such a 
way that attention was paid fırst to theology and then to 
the study of languages, theory and the practice of 
versification and calligraphy. (This system was preserved 
at schools affiliated with mosques until the end of the 
19th Century). That is why almost all educated people of 
that time had to try themselves in versification and 
calligraphy. However, paper, ink and the labor of a 
copyist cost a lot, and only poets who had very rich 
patrons could afford a luxury such as duplicating their works. As a rule, many 
manuscripts that were written as just one copy had a tendency to disappear in the 
course of time. The same could have occurred with Mirza Shafi, an ordinary 
manuscript copyist from Ganja, if it hadn't been for an almost detective story with 
a denouement that made him famous all over the world. 
Hardly could the modest calligrapher, and later teacher of Azeri, hope that 
his verses would be interpreted by the best translators and poets of European 
326 
 
Fridrich Bodenshtedt 
 
countries into practically all the languages of the world, that a collection of his 
poetry would run in 100 editions in various countries of the world, and that 
beautiful music for his verses would be written by composers of different music 
schools. However, everything happened that way thanks (or contrary) to the 
attempts of Fridrich Bodenshtedt, a German literary man travelling around Russia 
and the Caucasus. But we will proceed in succession. 
At the beginning of the 19th Century, there 
lived an architect named Kerbalay Sadiq, a born 
Ganja citizen (his father Mahammed was also from 
Ganja), in the palace of the last Ganja Khan, Javad 
Khan Ziyad-oghlu Qajar. Kerbalay Sadiq had two 
sons. One of them, Abdul Ali, was an apprentice of 
a stonemason. The other one, Shafi, attended the 
Shah Abbas medrese in Ganja. After Ganja Khan 
was killed during the seizure of Ganja by Russian 
troops in 1804, Kerbalay Sadiq, a pious man who 
found himself without means of subsistence, 
pinned his hopes on his son Shafi. He hoped that 
Shafi would become a theologian. However, he 
didn't see his dream come true. Afer Javad-Khan 
Qajar died, Sadiq went bankrupt and, unable to 
stand the vicissitudes of life, soon died leaving his children orphans. 
Shaft could continue his education thanks to assistance from the famous 
merchant Haji Abdulla, "a man of remarkable intellect and high morals", who had 
recently come back from Tabriz. 
Haji Abdulla was born in Ganja. When he became 
rich he moved to Tabriz and later to Baghdad. In Baghdad 
he got acquainted with a dervish-Sufi, Seyid Sattar by 
name. Under the influence of the dervish's passionate 
sermons, Haji Abdulla became an ardent supporter of his 
philosophical ideas. Before leaving for Ganja, Haji Abdulla 
offered his homeless and poor friend a big gift as a token of 
his gratitude for the latter's teaching. Seyid Sattar refused 
the gift and asked the merchant to adopt his ideology and 
accordingly change his way of life. Haji Abdulla kept his 
word. Upon arrival in Ganja he changed his way of life; moreover, he actively 
popularized the Sufist ideology- 
Haji Abdulla's sermons made a significant impression on Shafi, who 
became Haji Abdulla's ardent supporter. Shafi, as far back as in medrese, was keen 
on Sufism and the pantheistic philosophy of the Orient, which gave him the key to 
327 
 
the poetry of his favourite poets Khafiz, Fizuli, Khayyam, Saadi and other Sufist 
poets. Therefore, he found Haji Abdulla's preaching congenial to him. Haji 
Abdulla in his turn took Shafi under his patronage and, as some researchers 
believe, adopted him. 
Shafi's heretical views and support for Haji 
Abdulla in his disputes with representatives of the 
clergy did not go unnoticed, and the future poet was 
expelled from medrese. Scholars who deal with the 
literary works of Shafi should bear in mind that the 
poet remained loyal to his teacher and did not deviate 
from the positions of Sufism for the rest of his life. 
In Sufist poetry, pubs (Meykhana, Kharabat) 
meant the meeting of Sufis, and glorified love referred 
to God. In addition, the verses that had a disguised 
Sufist meaning, which could not be known to 
Bodenshtedt, can be attributed to genuine verses of 
Vazeh. 
Haji Abdulla helped Shafi find a job as a manager at the house of the late 
Javad Khan's daughter, Pusta Khanum. Afterwards, an honorable title, Mirza, was 
added to his name. 
In 1826 Javad Khan's elder son, Ughurlu Khan Ziad-oghlu Qajar, managed 
to restore Ganja Khanate with the help of the troops commanded by Abbas Mirza 
Qajar. However, the Russians again recaptured Ganja, 
and Ughurlu Khan emigrated to Iran with his sister 
Pusta Khanum. 
Having lost his job, Mirza Shafi earned his 
living by copying Muslim religious literature. In 1831 
Shafi's associate and patron Haji Abdulla died. He left 
by will several hundred roubles to Shafi. That sum 
enabled Mirza Shafi to pay off his debts and ease his 
financial difficulties, but not for long. With printing-
houses coming to light, the labor of a copyist was not 
in such demand anymore, and Mirza Shafi again found 
himself in a difficult situation. 
M. Rafili, one of the best connoisseurs of the poet's literary works, is of the 
viewpoint that the climax of Mirza Shafi's creative activity fell during that very 
period. He writes, "Haunted by life, adversities and attacks on the part of the 
clergy, Mirza Shafi felt lonesome and rejected, and he found a way out by writing 
verses, in which he praised the merits of wine and his sweetheart and which very 
often sounded mystic. This was partially a result of the influence exerted by the 
works of Khafiz, Khayyam and Fizuli the greatest Azeri poet of the 16th Century". 
328 
 
Bodenshtedt's native home. Peine. Germany. 
 
Mirza Fatali Akhundzade, an outstanding Azeri philosopher and playwright, 
helped Mirza Shaft get the position of teacher in a Tiflis district school. Shaft 
worked there for the rest of his life. It was in 1848 that he moved to Ganja, where 
he lived for two years while teaching at the Ganja district school, which was newly 
opened. 
In Tiflis, Mirza Shafi, jointly with 
I.Grigoryev, wrote one of the first textbooks in the 
Azeri-Turkic language, "Kitab-i Turki". The book 
was published in one of the printing-houses of 
Tabriz. In official papers it was called as follows: 
"A reading-book of the Azeri dialect compiled by 
teachers Grigoryev and Mirza Shafi Sadiq oghlu." 
"Wise sayings and admonitions", which were 
quoted by Mirza Shafi in this book, would later be 
repeated word for word by Bodenshtedt, who did 
not refer to them as Mirza Shafi's authorship. 
In Tiflis Mirza Shafi entered an 
environment completely new for him. 
However, he did not lose his connec-
tions with the literary circle that he had 
set up in Ganja. The literary society "Diwan-Khikmet", which was organized by 
Mirza Shafi in Ganja, was still operational. Outstanding Azeri scientists and poets 
included Abbas-Gulu Aga Bakikhanov and Mirza Fatali Akhundzade, and the 
poets included Najmi, Naseh, Shole, Mirza Gasan, Molla Abdulla, Haji Abdulla, 
Mirza Yusif Vidadi, Haji Yusif Kane and others. Russian and Georgian literary 
men and orientalists, who knew Azeri and Persian, also participated in the activity 
of the society. European scientists and poets living in Tiflis were members of the 
society as well. The above-mentioned Fridrich Bodenshtedt became a member in 
1843. He played such a large role in the fate of Mirza Shafi's heritage that he 
deserves special attention. 
Bodenshtedt was born on 22 April 1819 in the former Hanover Kingdom. 
He studied languages and literature in the best universities of Germany and 
Gettingen, Munich and Berlin. Then in 1841 he moved to Moscow, where he was 
the tutor of Prince Mikhail Golitsin's children. Three years later Bodenshtedt went 
to Tiflis as an observer and foreign language teacher. In Tiflis, Bodenshtedt 
decided to start learning oriental languages. In his "Memoirs", Bodenshtedt wrote: 
"I was the only German in Tiflis who studied an oriental language, and I started 
with Tatar (Azeri-Turkic), because it was the most important language in relation 
to numerous Caucasian nations. One could understand you anywhere where the 
Russian language did not suffice". 
329 
 
Above: Mirza Shafi`s script.  
Below: Mirza Shafi`s ex`libris. 
Bodenshtedt's acquaintances recommended to him, among others, Mirza 
Shafi, who had a lot of experience in private teaching in Ganja and Tiflis. "Among 
those teachers recommended to me 1 liked Mirza Shafi best of all. He had a slender 
figure, and he looked kind and serious", wrote 
Bodenshtedt. The classes were held three times a 
week and Mirza Shaft's other students were also 
present. Soon the teacher and student became good 
friends and Bodenshtedt became a full and equal 
member of Mirza Shafi's "Divan". 
Lively philosophical discussions were held 
at the lessons and meetings of the literary majlis 
"Diwan-Khikmet". Mirza Shafi read by heart and 
sang poetry by Firdowsi, Khayyam, Saadi and 
Fizuli. In class, Mirza Shafi devoted a lot of time 
to his old verses and to the new ones composed 
during the lesson in the presence of the students 
and members of "Diwan". "There wasn't a single 
time when I saw Mirza Shafi bringing and using a book in class", Bodenshtedt 
recalled. "He sang, dictated to us, and cited by heart, proving to us that his memory 
was brilliant and it never failed him". 
The highly educated Bodenshtedt used his time spent with his teacher 
effectively. He wrote down the contents of conversations and poetry that he 
frequently heard there. Mirza Shaft especially dictated his verses to his German 
pupil for taking notes. The effectiveness of such a method of teaching foreign 
languages, which was tested for centuries, was extremely high. Bodenshtedt soon 
started to perceive the charm of Azeri and Persian poetry, which was presented to 
him by Mirza Shafi in the original. 
Bodenshtedt's sincere desire to get a better understanding of the Orient 
appealed to Mirza Shafi, and the latter gave Bodenshtedt a book of his poetry titled 
"The Key-to Wisdom" as a gift. Bodenshtedt wrote, "This book contained the 
complete outlook of our teacher". In the introduction of the book, the poet presents 
the reader with the foreword that Bodenshtedt subsequently published in German, 
and which left no doubt of its authenticity. The introduction reads as follows: 
"In the name of Allah, the most merciful and gracious one! After we render 
homage and praise to the Creator of the Earth and the Sky we reveal the true 
essence and nature of this book. At the urgent request of my friend and student 
Bustan-effendy (may Allah send him a long life!), Mirza Shafi (may Allah make 
his life prosperous!) wrote down in this book a set of gasida, gazal, mugattaat, 
masnaviyyat and rubaiyyat, as the source of wisdom and knowledge. May silly 
men derive from it and wise men enjoy that source. This collection contains songs 
about love, the joy of beauty and kindness, as well as songs condemning 
330 
 
everything that is bad and vulgar. It contains seeds of wisdom, grown for planting 
not on the field of thirst of knowledge and in the furrow of perception; songs which 
are not written for people wishing to keep the golden mean as an example of poetry 
and eloquence and refusing to let the horse go along the path of loquacity". 
In 1845 Bodenshtedt came back to Germany and, summing up the results of 
his stay in Tiflis, published a book in 1850 called "1001 Nights in the Orient". 
There he presented to the reader the translations of Mirza Shafi Vazeh's songs into 
German. Addressing the poet, Bodenshtedt said (and at that time he was sincere): 
"You rise in my recollections, Mirza Shafi, a man of wisdom from Ganja! Your 
words and everything that you predicted have come true. Your songs have taken 
refuge in the hearts of our women and girls and your name is pronounced with 
pride in the West. I have made a wreath of flowers that you have given me as a gift 
and I have strung pearls that you have scattered in front of me, and I have done that 
to glorify you and to bring people joy". 
In that book, Bodenshtedt used translations of other Azeri and Persian 
poets. He mentioned the authorship of every poet including Mirza Shafi. In 
addition, he went into detail specifying where and under what conditions the verses 
or songs were written, and what impact it had produced on him. Thus, thanks to the 
efforts of this diligent student, all of Europe got acquainted with the works of one 
of the most outstanding Azeri poets of the 19th Century. 
Bodenshtedt used to deal with literary activity and translations before, but 
he had never been popular. He was known in a small circle of literary men. All of a 
sudden, and against the author's expectations, the book was a success. Inspired by 
the suggestion of his publisher, Bodenshtedt decided to republish the book and, to 
be more exact, to publish as a separate book "Mirza Shafi's Songs", which had 
previously been a triumph. This time the success was staggering. Within just a few 
years, both the author and the translator of the "Songs" won names for themselves 
and acclaim all over the world. "The Songs" were published in French, English, 
Swedish, Dutch, Danish, Spanish, Portuguese, Russian, Czech, Hungarian, Hebrew 
and other languages. 
Several poems from the "Songs" were translated into old Jewish. In 
Germany alone, the book ran in 169 German editions until 1922. The success was 
so overwhelming that "Mirza Shafi's Songs" had to be published several times 
within one year. In 1866, the book went through six editions, and in 1876 it went 
through 12. 
Even the musical comedy "Die Lieder des Mirza Shafi" was written, and its 
first night was held in 1887 in Berlin. Emil Pol wrote the libretto of the operetta, 
and Austrian composer, Carl Mileker, who wrote more than 20 operettas, 
composed the music. Franz Liszt, Glacomo Meyerbeer, Edvard Grieg, Johannes 
Brahms, K. Shimanovskiy, Anton Rubinstein and many others wrote" music for 
Mirza Shafi's verses. 
331 
 
Now it is difficult to name any translation other than Rubaiyat's version, of 
Omar Khayyam into English by Edward Fitzgerald, which scored massive and 
completely unexpected success. In fact, Fitzgerald, as well as Bodenshtedt, was 
accused of manipulation of the verses of Khayyam and borrowing verses from Sufi 
poets such as Attar, Hafiz, Saadi and Jami. Idris Shah wrote: "Probably knowingly, 
but it is not excluded that it was purely accidental, Fitzgerald was penetrated by 
Sufi ideas contained in well-known Persian poetry. These ideas ripened in his con-
sciousness, and then after joining them with the Khayyam verses, accepted the 
form of Rubaiyat in English". It is possible to say exactly the same about the 
translations of Mirza Shafi's poetry into German by Bodenshtedt. 
We should mention two Russian translations, among numerous ones, which 
differed in level. One was the magnificent translation by Nadson of Mirza Shafı's 
songs about Zuleykha. By some misunderstanding, people usually assumed that 
"Mirza Shafı's Songs" were translations from "Persian", although Bodenshtedt, in 
his description of his trip to thc Caucasus, characterized them as a translation from 
"Turkic". For the same reason, Rubenstein's vocal cyclc, consisting of 12 romances 
to Mirza Shafi's words, was mentioned as "Persian Songs". 
Rafıli wrote that readers were so convinced of Mirza Shafi's authorship that 
some of them requested that Bodenshtedt show them the original of those 
wonderful songs. The success of "The Songs", however, turned Bodenshtedt's 
head. 
In his next book, with the typically long German title, "From Mirza Shafı's 
Heritage with a Prologue and Fridrich Bodenshtedt's Additional Explanation", 
which was published in 1874 when Mirza Shafı and his numerous contemporaries 
were not alive, Bodenshtedt spoke out with "self-exposure" in public. He stated 
that he himself was the only author of his earlier published two books, which were 
presented as translations of Mirza Shafı's works. He got used to that image and 
later started signing under the name of "Mirza Shafi". He was ironically called "a 
Turk from Hanover or a German from Ganja". 
German and West European literary critics accepted Bodenshtedt's 
statement without reserve. Many people started doubting whether Mirza Shafı 
himself existed as a personality; moreover, Mirza Shafı's "Divan" was not dis-
covered in Bodenshtedt's archives after the latters death. Mirza Shafi's notebook of 
verses could be the best proof of Bodenshtedt's authorship. The fact that the 
notebook suddenly disappeared spoke for itself, taking into consideration the fact 
that Germans as a nation were very accurate. 
In 1889 a book was published in Leipzig in honour of Bodenshtedt's jubilee. 
A Lithuanian literary man and polyglot, Yurgis Yulius Zauerveynas, wrote the 
book, which was called "Mirza Shafi's Western-Oriental 'Divan.'" The author 
presented to the reader congratulations composed by him in Azeri, Russian, 
Persian, Sanskrit, Chinese, French, English, Italian, Latin, Polish, Greek, 
332 
 
Rumanian, Hungarian, Lithuanian, Old German, Danish, Swedish, Arabic and 
other languages. It begins with a poem written in Azeri in which the author calls 
Mirza Shafı Bodenshtedt's spiritual tutor (murshid). 
Azeri scientists S.Mumtaz, M.Rafıli, A.Seyidzade and others managed to 
restore the poet's biography little by lit-tle, and they found the originals of his 
poems, written in Azeri and Persian. Analysis of "Mirza Shafı's Songs", undertaken 
by them, revealed Mirza Shafi as the indisputable author of those verses. However, 
they found poems of the Oriental poets Hafız, Saadi and Fizuli, and the verses 
written by Bodenshtedt himself as an "imitation of Mirza Shafı" (one could 
observe such a phenomenon before as well: there are seven such improvisations in 
his translations of Lermontov's poetry). They also found "scrappy translations" (A. 
Seyidzade) when the lines of Mirza Shafi's poem were scattered along several 
verses of "The Songs". 
The fact that Mirza Shafi was a famous poet in Tiflis can be proved by the 
publication in the magazine "Otechestvenniye Zapiski" in 1850 of his well-known 
poem "Khafiz is my teacher, the pub is my temple..." in the Russian translation. 
The Tiflis correspondent of the magazine wrote down the verse from the words of 
one of the habitues in Zalzman's tavern who called Mirza Shafi "the current Khafiz 
of the Orient". Bodenshtedt himself mentioned Mirza Shafi's popularity in his 
book: "Mirza Shafi's many songs, which he sang during poetic contests or during 
other ceremonial occasions, continue to live on the lips of Georgians and Tatars 
(Azeris), while he himself never thought of putting them in writing. If it hadn't 
been for the habit in the Orient to add the poet's name to each verse, it would be 
pretty difficult to guess to whom they belonged". 
Mirza Shafi died on 16 November 1852 in Tiflis. Deprived and forgotten in 
life, he turned out to be deprived after his death as well. The Azeri cemetery locat-
ed behind the Botanic Garden in Tiflis was pulled down after the war, and nobody 
in Mirza Shafi's home country raised a voice in defense of the memory of their 
great countryman. 
Research of Mirza Shafi's creative activity has not yet been completed; 
however, the compiled material suffices to restore his name in the world of poetry, 
without belittling the services of his talented translator. 
 
One of the Last Medieval 
Encyclopaedists of Azerbaijan 
 
Mir Mohsun Navvab Garabaghi 
 
Shusha, the capital of Garabagh, had always been one of the centres of 
Azerbaijani culture. According to well-known musicologist Fridun Shushinskiy, 
333 
 
Cafe in Shusha. 19th Century. Garabagh.  
Drawing by Vereschagin. 
 
there were 95 poets, 22 musicologists, 38 singers, 16 painters, 5 astronomers, 18 
architects and 16 physicians in Shusha in the 19th Century. 
In the city there operated about 10 literary, musical 
and other associations, and over 10 madrasas (universities) 
and schools. In the mountainous Shusha, as nowhere in 
Azerbaijan, medieval traditions in science, art and culture 
were long preserved. In rich libraries, calligraphers and 
scribes wrote and copied books; painters decorated the 
walls of buildings with paintings; and book miniatures were 
created. Excellent carpets were woven, of which the best 
museums in the world are proud. 
Musicians highly raised the banner of the Garabagh 
school of mugham. It is not surprising that in the middle of the 19th Century, when 
capitalism had just formed in Azerbaijan to engender a new mentality, the last 
encyclopedist of the medieval type was born - Mir Mohsun Navvab Garabaghi. 
Mir Mohsun was a prominent musicologist, poet, painter, calligrapher, astrologer, 
chemist and mathematician. Because of his knowledge and breadth of vision, he 
may be safely attributed to a medieval encyclopedist, although in the public life of 
Shusha he always adhered to advanced positions of his time. 
Mir Mohsun is presently 
known as a musicologist and the 
author of two musical treatises 
written in Azeri, "Vizukhul-
Argam" ("Explanations of 
Figures") and a second untitled 
one. These essays were written in 
the best classical traditions and 
were the last treatises of the sort 
in the East. In Azerbaijan, 
Navvab was reputed to be one of 
the last alchemists, astrologers 
and painters of the old school. 
Mir Mohsun Navvab was 
born in 1833 to the family of Haji Seyid Ahmed and lived all his life in Shusha. He 
was educated at a spiritual school, where he mastered Arabic, Persian and Turkish, 
and then in the madrasa of Abbas Sarajali, where he studied astronomy, chemistry, 
mathematics and other sciences. 
Throughout his long life, Navvab actively participated in the cultural and 
public life of Shusha. He wrote verses, published books, taught at school and wrote 
over 20 books on science and culture. He also created the literary association 
334 
 
Above: Rahil decorated by Navvab. Late 19th Century. Shusha, Garabagh. Azerbaijan. 
Below: Galamdan (penbox) depicting holiday in Shusha. Late 19th Century. Mir Mohsun Navvab. 
Shusha, Garabagh. Azerbaijan. Opaque watercolour under lacquer. 
 
"Majlisi-faramushan" ("Assembly of the Forgotten"), as well as the musical society 
"Majlisi Khanende" ("Assembly of Musicians"), and he opened a library and 
reading-room. 
The said associations (Majlis) were composed of the 
poets Abdulla Bey Asi, Fatma Khanum Kamine, Mes-hadi 
Eyyub Baki, Khan Garabaghi and Abdulla Hasan Shahid, as 
well as the musicians and singers Haji Gusi, Meshadi Jamil 
Amirov, Islam Abdullayev and Seyid Shushinski. These 
associations maintained close relations with other associations 
of Azerbaijan - "Majlisi-uns" in Shusha, "Beytus-Safa" in 
Shemakha and "Majmua-Shuara" in Baku. 
Among the works of Navvab is the anthology 
"Tezkireyn-Navvab", which informs about the life and creative 
activities of more than 100 Azerbaijani poets of Garabagh from 
the 19th Century. This book was published in Baku in 1913. 
Mir Mohsun Navvab took a great interest in mathe-
matics, chemistry and astronomy. He created a small 
observatory with two telescopes and a chemical laboratory. 
In his "Kifayatul-atfal", written as a textbook on astronomy 
in 1899, he drew up tables of heavenly bodies, the times of 
solar eclipses, etc. 
At his chemical laboratory, he carried out experi-
ments and simultaneously examined the recipes of medieval 
alchemists. In his book "Nasihatnama", Navvab referred to 
500 instructions for youth. Of the same nature were his 
books "Kifayatul-Atfale", "Nurul-Envere" and "Lend-
nama", containing ethical ideas. Mir Mohsun's artistic 
creativity was a great contribution to the art of Garabagh 
and Azerbaijan. He also produced watercolour drawings, book miniatures and 
paintings of residential buildings and mosques. 
Mir Mohsun Navvab's famous musical treatise "Vizukhul-Argam" 
("Explanations of Figures") was published for the first time in 1913 in Baku. (His 
other work "Keshful-khagigeyi mesnevi", which is devoted to music, is also well 
known.) In the treatise, Navvab dealt with the origin and titles of separate 
mughams, the structure of some dastgah, the links between mughams and poetical 
texts, the contacts between a performer and an audience, and their mutual 
arrangement from the point of view of acoustics. Navvab  was  the first to apply 
335 
 
The scenes from theatrical performance Shabeh 
(Passion pleys). 1873. Mir Mohsun Navvab. 
Shusha, Garabagh. Azerbaijan. Opaque 
watercolour on paper. 
 
the term "dastgah", which put into practice one of the variants of six Garabagh 
dastgahs: Rast, Mahur, Shahnaz, Rahavi or Rahab, Chahargah and Nava. As 
specified by Navvab, the structure of performed dastgahs in many respects 
depended on the taste and abilities of performers. 
There were 82 mughams and 
songs performed at that time in 
Garabagh. Navvab linked the names of 
the mughams - Azerbaijan, Nishapur, 
Zabuli, Baghdadi, Shirvani, Qajari and 
Shah Khatai - to the names of the 
creators and regions. He linked the 
mugham "Rast" to the gust of spring 
wind, "Rahavi" to drops of rain, 
"Chahargah" to the reverberating peal 
of thunder, "Dugah" to water rushing 
from a fountain, "Humayun" to a flight 
of birds, "Nava" to the groan of 
unfortunate lovers, "Mahur" to a stream 
of water, "Shahnaz" to the singing of 
nightingales, "Ushshag" to the flight of 
a bird, and "Uzzal" to the flight of a 
meteorite. 
Speaking about the emotional 
influence of mughams on an audience, Navvab wrote that "Ushshag", "Busalik" 
and "Nava" inspired courage and daring, while "Bozarg", "Rahavi", "Zangule", 
"Zirefkand" and "Huseyni" inspired melancholy. Navvab stated a number of 
interesting ideas about the curative properties of music. The treatise ended with the 
words: "This work is written with the purpose of increasing the potency of 
domestic science". 
Well-known musicologist Zemfira Safarova wrote, "'Vizukhul-Arganr is a 
valuable work on music to describe the important aspects of musical art and per-
formance of mughams of the last century, not only in Azerbaijan, but in oriental 
countries as well". 
Musicologist Gultakin Shamili discovered Mir Mohsun's second musical 
treatise in 1991 at the Institute of Manuscripts of the National Academy of 
Sciences of Azerbaijan. In his treatise, Navvab offered a system of musical 
notation identical, to some extent, to the European one. Navvab died in 1918 in the 
city of Shusha. 
 
 
 
336 
 
A Virtuoso Tar Player and the 
Inventor of the Azerbaijani Tar 
 
Sadiqjan Garabaghli 
 
During the second half of the 19th Century the capital 
of Garabagh, Shusha, saw an exceptional blossoming: 
universities, schools and tens of literary and musical associa-
tions were active in the city. Science and culture prospered 
even more, and Shusha turned into the musical academy of 
the Caucasus. New tunes spread all over the Orient. It has to 
be kept in mind that many famous singers and musicians 
from this period lived in Shusha. Among them was Sadiqjan, 
a famous tar-performer (tar is a national Azerbaijani musical 
instrument), composer and inventor of the new tar. With 
exceptional vocal and musical abilities, he lost his voice in 
his youth and concentrated on performing activities. 
Succeeding in playing the tar but not confining himself to 
this, Sadiqjan was successful in creating a new musical 
instrument on the basis of the tar. In addition, he modified 
the manner of playing the instrument and thus expanded the opportunities of 
performing classical mugham. 
Sadiqjan gained popularity as an excellent improviser and composer. It was 
the well-known musicologist Afrasiyab Badalbeyli who thoroughly explored the 
creative work and mastery of Sadiqjan. Materials on the biography of Sadiqjan, 
shown below, were collected by Firudinbey Shushinski, an indefatigable explorer 
of the creative activities of professional singers and musicians of classical 
Azerbaijani music. 
Mirza Sadiq Asad oghlu Sadiqjan was born in 1846 in the town of Shusha. 
Like most Shusha residents, he tried his forces in performing songs and mughams. 
In fact, the participation in theatrical performances and religious singing during the 
"Maharram" month were believed to please God, so a lot of poor families who 
could not afford to invite professional singers to mark the holidays had to teach 
their children to sing. 
With that in mind, there were active special musical  majlises (meetings,  
associations) and schools in Shusha. Famous singers and musicians trained pupils. 
Subsequently, scores of graduates of these majlises and schools became famous for 
their singing and musical activities throughout the entire East. 
Among the best teachers to work in the Shusha musical schools was Kharat 
Gulu Mahammed oghlu, who was noted for his perfect erudition in Oriental music, 
poetry and vocal art. Mirza Sadiq began attending Gulu's school on his father's 
337 
 
instructions. Despite the fact that by the age of 18, Mirza Sadiq had lost his voice 
and could not attend the school any longer, Gulu played an exceptional role in his 
becoming a professional musician. 
The loss of his voice urged Mirza Sadiq to master various musical 
instruments. In particular, he tried to learn to play the trumpet, the ney, the 
kemancha and the tar. He eventually fixed himself on the tar, having been trained 
by a well-known tar performer of Shusha, Mirza Ali Asker. 
Firidunbey Shushinski pointed out, "With his 
massive hands, long and strong fingers, innate talent and 
zeal, the boy successfully mastered the technique of 
playing the tar and soon after excelled his teacher in 
mastery". Once while Sadiq was playing the tar, Asker 
sighed, "I'd like to present all my riches to Sadiq in 
exchange for his fingers". People said that Mirza Sadiq 
originally performed in an ensemble with Mirza Ali 
Asker, playing the kemancha. One day, when his 
teacher was ill, Mirza Sadiq had to play the tar and thus 
demonstrated his phenomenal ability. After this 
occurrence, Mirza Sadiq decided to devote himself to 
this wonderful instrument and perfect his mastery. 
The musician took part in the popular  Shusha musical and literary majlises, 
particularly assemblies arranged by the famous musicologist Mir Mohsun Navvab, 
"Majlisi-Faramushan" ("Gathering of Forgottens") and "Majlisi-Khanande" 
("Gathering of Singers"), as well as the majlises of Khurshid Khanum Natavan. 
The majlises discussed problems of theoretical music and poetic works, and they 
heard debuts of young singers and musicians. 
Sadiq's name became famous in numerous countries. This time, he was 
nicknamed Sadiqjan. Note that a title,  
in addition to Mirza Sadiq, was conferred to well-known singer Abdul Bagi 
Zulalov - Bulbuljan. 
Mirza Sadiq performed in a well-known trio of Shusha with singer Haji 
Husi and kemancha player Ata Baghdagul oghlu; later he joined another trio with 
Meshadi Isi as khananda (singer). In 1880, the trio was invited to give a concert in 
Iran, during the wedding ceremony of Muzafar ad-Din Mirza, son of Nasir ad-Din 
Shah Qajar. 
Following the wedding, Hajji Husi was recognized as the best singer and 
Sadiqjan was recognised as an unsurpassed tarist; even better, he was awarded with 
the order "Shiri Khurshid". Meanwhile, a well-known tarist challenged Sadiqjan to 
a contest. Sadiqjan agreed by running his fingers over the fingerboard of the instru-
ment. On seeing this, the contender declined from taking part in the contest, and 
even kissed the fingers of his rival. 
338 
 
Sadiq Jan's Ensemble. 1878. Tiflis. 
 
Well-known tar player Meshadi Suleyman Mansurov, son of the head of the 
Baku musical majlis Meshadi Melik Mansurov, wrote in his memoirs: "Mirza 
Sadiq was the most outstanding tarist of his epoch. His amazing performance and 
tar playing had an unfathomable ascendancy over people". 
The unrivaled virtuoso Mirza Sadiq frequently played without a mediator; 
he just put the tar to his chin. From time to time, he performed with the tar on his 
neck. Apparently, even the nightingales in the garden danced to his tar. A music 
lover from Baku named Abdulgamid 
Babayev noted: "I first heard Sadiqjan in 
1897 at our Baku fortress. No such tar 
player has ever been born in the 
Caucasus. Sadiqjan was very handsome: 
tall, broad-shouldered and sturdily built. 
He behaved with dignity and restraint at 
the majlises. People respected him 
interminably. His left arm was so strong 
that he frequently performed without a 
mediator". 
It would be appropriate to note 
that Sadiqjan partook in weddings, 
receptions and concerts, and from time to time acted in theatrical performances 
staged in Shusha and Tiflis, jointly with remarkable singers from Azerbaijan and 
Iran. He toured about the Caucasus, Central Asia and Iran, and he was a member of 
various musical associations. In particular, he performed in Shemakha in the trio of 
Hajji Husi, and he attended the musical majlis of Mahmud Agha. 
However, famous 19th Century Azerbaijani poet Seyid Azim Shirvani 
wrote that for certain reasons Mirza Sadiqjan soon came back to Shusha. From his 
verses, it became clear that Seyid Azim was familiar with Mirza Sadiqjan and 
highly esteemed his talent. 
Shortly after, Sadiqjan was recognized as the first tar player in the entire 
Caucasus. The "Caucasian Review" newspaper pointed out that "his playing was 
exceptional, artistic, strict and charmingly impressive. It would be desirable for our 
Tiflis composers to benefit from Sadiqjan's stay at Tiflis and adopt some tunes 
from him to use as material for their future compositions". 
As soon as Mirza Sadiqjan realized that he had pressed out everything from 
the tar, he tried to improve it further, modifying his manner of playing. It was no 
mere coincidence that he was nicknamed Mirza Sadiq, i.e. erudite Sadiq. His 
analytical cast of mind helped him solve this problem. In particular, he began 
playing the tar by putting it to his chest instead of holding it on his knees, as had 
been before. Mirza Sadiq increased the number of strings from 5 to 11 and made 
changes in the design of the fingerboard, belly, fastening, etc. 
339 
 
Hall in Shusha. 19th Century. Garabagh.   
Drawing by Vereschagin. 
 
Musicians termed the new instrument "the magic tar", and Sadiq "the tar's 
father". Novelties introduced by Sadiq made it possible to enhance its performing 
culture and to sound the instrument brilliantly and lively. 
Turkish musicologist Raul Ektabey wrote, "The musical glory of Sadiq was 
widely spread all over the Caucasus. Grand master of tar Sadiq added six new 
strings to the tar and thus enriched it". Raul Ektabey regarded Sadiqjan as the 
greatest ever musician in the Caucasus. The reconstruction of the tar carried out by 
the ingenious musician was so striking that shortly after, Sadiq's tar excelled the 
previous so-called "Iranian tar" in its design and phonation. 
Furthermore, Mirza Sadiqjan was a talented composer. He was successful in 
melodizing some rangs to the mughams "Orta Segah" and "Bayati Shiraz", and he 
composed musical works and thus enriched popular melodies. 
Mirza Sadiq took an active 
part in staging the musical  play 
"Leyli and Majnun" in Shusha in 
1897. Uzeir Hajibeyli pointed out 
that this staging played a role of 
paramount importance in the 
development of mugham in 
Azerbaijan. European travelers of 
the 17th and 18th Centuries 
witnessed these miracle plays and 
other performances, usually staged 
at Khan palaces, and focused on 
the likeness of the composition 
and form of mughams to European opera works. 
Sadiqjan took part in the first Oriental concert arranged in Shusha in 1901. 
For the first time in his life, he performed the mugham "Mahur" on his tar. 
Mirza Sadiqjan died in Shusha in 1902. His role in the development of 
Azerbaijani traditional music is enormous. Afrasiyab Badalbeyli said, "In 
considering that the tar is a principal instrument to perform mugham, it would be 
appropriate to add that discoveries made by Mirza Sadiqjan marked the new era in 
Azerbaijani music. It should be noted that Mirza Sadiqjan's contribution made it 
possible to raise the core of Azerbaijani mughams, their means of expression, the 
power of impact and the methods of performance to a qualitatively new level. 
Mirza Sadiqjan opened up a new page in the history of Azerbaijani music". 
 
 
  
  
340 
 
Miniature Portrait of 
Abbas Mirza. 1820. 
Allahverdi Afshar. 
Opaque watercolour on 
paper. Hermitage. St. 
Petersburg. 
 
A Great Master 
of Qajar Painting 
 
Allahverdi Afshar 
 
In 1973 a large exhibition of canvases of Qajar painting of the 18th-19th 
Centuries was held at the museum of Oriental Art. Among canvases exhibited at 
the show, experts focused on the works of Azerbaijani painter Allahverdi Afshar. 
Touching upon ceremonial portraits exhibited, art expert Karpova noted: 
"To catch a likeness, an artist is not necessarily seeking to identify a psychological 
image, specifically in the portraits. In this regard, a portrait of Abbas Mirza, 
painted by Allahverdi Afshar, is worthy of note. The portrait is of ceremonial 
nature, notable for its psychological features and 
natural position of the character". 
Today, the portrait is kept at the Museum of 
Oriental Art in Moscow. As for other works of 
Allahverdi Afshar, there is no additional information. 
We know very little about the life of Afshar. It 
is known that he was a distant relative of the great 
miniaturist of the 16th Century Sadiq Bey Afshar. He 
came from the town of Urmiya, in the south of 
Azerbaijan. In his famous book "Prominent 
Azerbaijanis", Iranian researcher Mahammed Ali 
Tarbiyat called Allahverdi Afshar an outstanding 
painter who was very popular in Iran. The author 
provided interesting facts about Abu-hassan 
Naqqashbashi Afshar Urmavi, Allahverdi Afshar `s 
son. Apparently, he was brought up by his uncle 
Aliashraf Afshar, who was successful in creating paint-
ed pencil cases. Tabriyat pointed out that his works 
were hardly different from his uncle's ones and even 
sold at 50 tumans. Abulhassan died in 1888. 
Allahverdi Afshar represented the so-called Qajar painting in Iran. 
According to critics, this style started developing in the mid-18th Century and 
culminated during the reign of Fatali Shah Qajar (1798-1834). It was named after 
the title of the ruling dynasty. 
According to European art critics, oil on canvas, wall painting, lacquer 
works and painted enamel are all attributes of Qajar painting. Some methods and 
principles of painting, such as light and shade treatment on the face and garments, 
used in Qajar painting were borrowed from the European school of painting. Even 
so, canvases were painted to comply with the traditional Persian and Azerbaijani 
341 
 
Portrait of Abbas Mirza. 
1816/17. Tabriz. Allahverdi 
Afshar. Oil on canvas. The 
Museum of Oriental Art. 
Moscow. 
 
Crown Prince Abbas Mirza and Court Officials. Allahverdi 
Afshar. Tabriz. 1815/1816. Oil on canvas. Hermitage. St. 
Petersburg. 
 
manner. Also, the decorative style of book miniature frequently contained a two-
dimensional image in bright, clean colours. 
Contributing to the creation of such 
paintings were famous painters, including Mehr Ali 
(naqqash-bashi, or chief court painter of Fathali 
Shah), Abdul Qasim Tabrizi, Mirza Qadim Irevani 
and Mir Mohsun Navvab Qarabaghi. 
Prominent painter Mahammed Hasan 
Afshar, whose single work is exhibited at the Art 
Museum in Baku, represented the family of Afshar, 
famous from olden times, except for Allahverdi 
Afshar, his brother and son. Also, some of 
Mahammed Hasan Afshar's canvases are known 
from J. Emiri's collection. These are portraits of 
three princes, depicted perhaps during their 
lifetime. The canvases are typical examples of 
Qajar painting from the reviewed period. Well 
known is a portrait of Sheikh Sanan. Also, two 
canvases are exhibited at the State Fine Arts 
Museum in Tbilisi, Georgia. Noteworthy is the fact 
that there is also a portrait of Jamshid-ad-Dovle by 
another representative of the 
family, Beylar Afshar, now kept 
at the same museum. 
It has to be kept in mind 
that Mahammed Hassan 
succeeded in creating his own 
style of painting and was 
followed by scores of imitators. It 
is no mere coincidence that many 
works, performed in Mahammed 
Hasan's style, are presently kept 
at the said Georgian museum, J. 
Emiri's collection and other 
places. 
Formal ceremonial 
portraits composed the core of Qajar painting. There are a huge number of portraits 
of  Fath Ali Shah, his son Abbas Mirza and other princes. Also, there are numerous 
pictures depicting court beauties, singers, dancers and musicians in colourful gar-
ments. Looking at these beauties, we recollect those extolled by Vagif: medium 
342 
 
height, large eyes, a wide, oval face, pink cheeks, etc. There are also pictures of the 
numerous palaces, hunting lodges and pavilions built by Fath Ali Shah. 
K. Porter depicted one of the rooms in the palace of Fath Ali Shah's son, 
crown prince Abbas Mirza, in Tabriz: "Various components of the walls were 
filled with portraits of former Shahs, hunting sketches and Abbas Mirza"s 
exploits". 
During the 1739 Indian campaign, Nadir Shah captured a huge quantity of 
jewels and treasures of the Mughal Empire, including the famous Peacock Throne 
(Takhte-Tavus), strewn with innumerable precious stones set in a massive golden 
frame. All the jewelry found its parallel in the portraits of Fath Ali Shah, especially 
emeralds and diamonds in the crown and belt. 
Qajar paintings are highly estimated by experts today. Not long ago, some 
Qajar paintings were successfully sold during a London auction. Today, a great 
quantity of the said paintings are kept at several museums and private collections 
in Georgia at the Museum of Fine Arts in Tbilisi, in Russia at the Museum of 
Oriental Art in Moscow, and in Great Britain at the Museum of Victoria and Albert 
in London. 
Qajar painting played a major role in the development of North Azerbaijani 
painting. Examples include works by Mirza Qadim Irevani, Navvab Garabaghi, 
Qayur Yunus, a wall painting in the palace of Sheki Khans and Sardar's palace in 
Irevan, destroyed in the early 20th Century. 
  
343 
 
Bibliography 
 
Azəroğlu. Saib Təbrizi. ("Saib Təbrizi". Seçilmiş əsərlər. Yazıçı. Bakı-1980.) 
Bədəlbəyli Əfrasiyab. Musiqi lüğəti. Bakı-1979. 
Bodenştedt Fridrix. Mirzə Şəfi haqqında xatirələr. Yazıçı. Bakı-1987. 
Bayramov A. Mirzə Şəfi Vazehin əbədi irsi. Yazıçı. 1993. 
Bunyadova Şirin. Nizami və etnoqrafiya. Elm. Bakı-1992. 
Qiyasi Cəfər. Yaxın-uzaq ellərdə. İşıq. Bakı-1985. 
Fazili Abdulla. Atropatena er. əv. IV-VII əsrlər. Elm. Bakı-1992. 
Araslı Həmid. Məhsəti xanım və Rübailər. Bakı-1957. 
Qarabaği Cavanşir. Mirzə Camal - Qarabağ Tarixi. Bakı-1959. 
Kərimov Kərim. Sadıq bəy Əfşar. İşıq. Bakı-1987. 
Kərəmov Nurəddin. Odlar yurdunun səyyah və coğrafiyaşünasları. Bakı-1986. 
Kərəmov Nurəddin. Coğrafiyaşünas və səyyah Zeynalabdin Şirvani. Bakı-1958. 
Məmmədov Zakir. Orta əsr Azərbaycan filosofları və mütəfəkkirləri. Bakı-1986. 
Məmmədov R. Naxçıvan şəhərinin tarixi oçerki. Bakı-1977. 
Məmmədov Əzizağa. Şah İsmayıl Xətai. Bakı-1961. 
Məmmədbəyli H. Məhəmməd Nəsrəddin Tusi. Gənclik. Bakı-1980. 
Mahmudov Malik. Ərəbcə yazmış Azərbaycanlı şair va ədiblər. VII-XII əsrlər. Elm. Bakı-
1983. 
Mahmudov Malik. Piyada Təbrizdən Şama qədər. Yazıçı, Bakı-1982. 
Mir Cəlal. Füzuli sənətkarlığı. Bakı-1968. 
Sührəverdi Şihabəddin Yəhya. İşıq heykəlləri. Elm. Bakı-1989. 
Sadıxova Cəmilə, Təyyibə Ələskərova. Fars dilini tədqiq edən Azərbaycan alimləri. Elm. 
Bakı-1990. 
Səfərli Əylər. Məsihi. "Gənclik". Bakı-1992. 
Səfərli Əylər. Ön söz. Bax: Qazi Bürhanəddin. Divan. Bakı-1998. 
Tərbiyet Məhəmmədəli. Danishməndani Azərbaycan. Bakı-1987. 
Şusinski Firidun. Azərbaycan xalq musiqiçiləri. Bakı-1985. 
Şah İsmayıl Xətai. (Məqalələr toplusu). Elm. Bakı-1988. 
Şükürov Sadiq. Gəncəli Cavad xanın hekayəti. Gəncə-1992. 
Dadaşzade Araz. Vaqif (həyat və yaradıcılığı). Bakı-1966. 
Həmidova Ş. XVIII əsrin ikinci yarısında Azərbaycan-Gürcüstan münasibətləri tarixindən. 
Elm. Bakı-1985. 
Hüseynov Rafael. Məhsəti necə varsa. Yazıçı. Bakı-1989. 
Şəki xanlığının tarixindən. Bakı-1993. 
Abolala Soudavar. Art of the Persian Courts. Rizzoli. New-York. 
Basil Gray. Persian Painting. London-1977. 
Brend Barbara. Islamic Art. Harvard University Press. Cambridge. Massachusetts. USA. 
1991. 
Bretanizki L., Weimarn В., Brentjes B. Die KunstAzerbaidshans. Koehler & Amelang. 
Leipzig-1988. 
Farid Mamedov. Jaffar Giyasi. AZERBAIJAN. Fortress&Castles. 
Grube Ernst J. Lslamske Umeni. Artia. Praha-1973. 
Hegyi Klara. Zimanyi Vera. The Ottoman Empire in Europe. Corvina. Budapest-1989. 
344 
 
Ilhan Akshit. The Topkapi Palace. Aksit. 1994. 
Ipshiroglu M. Sh. Das Bild im Islam. Wien und Munchen-1971. 
Grands Livres. Iran. Paris. 1976. 
Vagif Aslanov. Foreword in Nesimi. Poems. Yazichi. Baku-1984. 
The museum of Oriental Art. Auropa. Leningrad-1968. 
Vagif Abdulgasimov. Azerbaijanian tar. Baku-1990. 
Varma P. Delhi and its monuments. New Delhi-1987. 
Walther Wiebke. Woman in Islam. Leizig-1981. 
Zonic Ella. Classical Persian Music. Harvard University Press. Cambridge. Massachusetts. 
USA. 1973. 
Bernard Lewis. The World of Islam. 1997. 
The Museum of Oriental Art. Moscow. Aurora Art Publishers. 1988. Leningrad. 
La Peinture Qajar. Teheran. 1973. 
Sattareh Farmanfarmanian with Dona Munker. Daughter of Persia. Anchor Books. 
Sir Harford Jones Brydges. The Dynasty of the Kajars. Arno Press. New York-1973. 
Royal Persian Painting. The Qajar Epoch, 1785-1925. Edited by Layla S. Diba, with 
Maryam Ekbitar. Brooklyn Museum of Art. I. B. Tauris Publishers. London-New York. 
Bournoutian G.A. The Khanate of Erevan Under Qajar Rule. 1795-1828. Mazda Publishers. 
The Diari of H.M. the Shah of Persia. 1995. Mazda Publishers. 
Абдулкасумова Н.А. Низами о вселенной. Баку-1991. 
Агаева Н.А. Азербайджанские языковеды средневековья. Баку-1990. 
Агаева Сурая. Абдулгадир Мараги. Язычы. Баку-1983. 
Алиев Играр. Очерк истории Атропатены. Баку-1989. 
Алиев Рустам. Низами Гянджеви. Язычы. Баку-1991. 
Алиев Рустам. Низами Гянджеви. Элм. Баку-1979. 
Араслы Гамид. Великий азербайджанский поэт Физули. Баку-1958. 
Ахмедов Э.А. Арабо-мусульманская философия средневековья. Маариф. Баку-1980. 
Ахундов Д.А. Архитектура древнего и раннесредневекового Азербайджана. Баку - 
1986. 
Ашурбейли Сара. Экономические и культурные связи Азербайджана с Индией в 
средние века. Элм. Баку-1990. 
Ашурбейли Сара. Государство Ширваншахов. Элм. Баку-1983. 
Ашурбейли Сара. История города Баку и период средневековья. Баку- 1992. 
Бадалбейли Афрасияб. Музыкальный словарь. Элм. Баку-1969. 
Байрамов Акиф. Классическая азербайджанская литература на немецком языке. 
Язычы. Баку-1992. 
Бертельс. Е.Э. Низами. Москва-1956. 
Бойль М.. Зороастрийцы. Москва-1980. 
Боханин А.Г. Парфия и Рим. Часть II. Москва-1966. 
Бретаницкий А.С, Веймарн Б.В., Искусство Азербайджана. Искусство. Москва-1976. 
Бретаницкий А.С. Зодчество Азербайджана XII-XV в в. Наука. Москва-1966. 
Буниятов З.М. Государство Атабеков Азербайджана. Элм. Баку-1978. 
Буниятов Зия. Азербайджан в VII-IX вв. Баку-1965. 
Гаджиев А. А. Ренессанс и поэзия Низами Гянджеви. Элм. Баку-1980. 
345 
 
Галей Аллахвердийев. Труд Хитаба Тебризи Китаб ал-Кафи фи-л аруз ва-л-Кавафи, 
как источник по восточной поэтике. Элм. Баку-1992. 
Гейдаров М. X. Города и городское ремесло Азербайджана XIII-XVII вв. Элм. Баку-
1982. 
Геюшев Р.Б.. Христианство в Кавказской Албании. Элм. Баку-1984. 
Гордлевский Вл. Государство Ссльджукидов Малой Азии. Москва-Ленинград-1941. 
Гусейнова С. Б. "Клейма на глазурованной керамике эпохи Низами, как элемент 
азербайджанского ренессанса". В альманахе "Низами Гянджеви". Элм. Баку-1991. 
Гусейнов Гейдар. Из истории общественной и философской мысли в Азербайджане 
XIX века. Баку-1958. 
Гусейнов Р. Сирийские источники XII-XIII вв. об Азербайджане. Баку-1960. 
Джавелидзе Э.Д. У истоков турецкой литераторы. Тбилиси - 1979. 
Джеваншир Мирза Джамал Карабахский. История Карабаха. Баку-1959. 
Дьяконов И. М.. История Мидии. Москва-Ленинград-1956. 
Дьяконов М. М. Очерк истории древнего Ирана. Москва-1961. 
Занд М. И. Шесть веков славы. Наука. Москва-1969. 
Зарубежная тюркология. Древние тюркские языки и литературы. Наука Москва-1986. 
Ибрагимбейли Хаджи Мурат. Россия и Азербайджан в первой трети XIX века. Наука 
Москва-1986. 
Ибрагимбейли Хаджи Мурат. Россия и Азербайджан в первой трети XIX века. Наука. 
Москва-1989. 
Исмаилов Шаиг. Философия Махмуда Шабустари. Элм. Баку-1976. 
История Иранского государства и культуры. Москва-1971. 
Казиев А. Ю. Художественное оформление азербайджанской книги XII-XVII веков. 
Книга. Москва-1977. 
 
  
346 
 
GLOSSARY 
 
Abbasid dynasty of caliphs 
Abd servant, slave (used in combination with one of the names of God, as in Abd al-Malik, 
"Servant of the King") 
Abu father (of) 
Agha mister, master 
Akhund Islamic religious office 
Ahuro Mazda the supreme deity and creator of the world; the spirit of good in 
Zoroastrianism 
Allah God 
Amir a ruler, prince or commander: see also Emir 
Anghra Mainyu (Ahriman) the spirit of evil in Zoroastrianism 
Ashug folk singer, bard 
Ashura the 10th of Maharram, the anniversary of the battle of Kerbala and martyrdom of 
Husein, the son of Ali and grandson of Mahammed 
Asker soldier 
Atabey guardian of a prince; governor. 
Bin son (of) 
Bayram Azerbaijani feast 
Bey nobleman, official 
Beylarbey bey of beys 
Caliph the name given to leaders of a Muslim community 
Chalchibashi bandmaster 
Caravanserai lodging place for travellers, merchants and their goods; often fortified and 
situated on a trade route 
Dakhma Zoroastrian "Silence Tower" 
Dervish another word for Sufi 
Dinar gold coin 
Dirham silver coin (later copper) 
Divan collected works of poetry or other writings by a single author 
Diwan government office or ministry; royal reception 
Emir a ruler, prince or commander 
Eshikaghasibashi Chief Master of Ceremonies 
Eyvan vaulted or flat-roofed hall, open at one end 
Fatimid Shiite dynasty of caliphs 
Firman a decree or sanction given by an ruler 
Futuvva a brotherhood linked with guilds or with Sufi orders  
Gizilbash litteraly red heads in Azeri, the Azerbaijani military nobility 
Gazal verse form of five to twelve lines, often used for liric poems 
Hadiths collective body of traditions relating to the life, deeds and sayings of the Prophet 
Mahammed 
Haj the piligrimage to Mecca 
Haji a Muslim who has made a piligrimage to Mecca; a title of honor 
Hakim a ruler, judge or governor 
347 
 
Hammam public or communal baths 
Hijra (Hegira) Muhammad's emigration from Mecca to Medina in 622, the date which 
marks the beginning of the Muslim calendar 
Ibn see bin 
llkhan(II-khan) Dynasty of Turkic-Mongol khans that ruled great Azerbaijan from 1258 to 
1335 
Imam spiritual leader: prayer leader: descendant of Ali, Mahammed"s son-in-law; leader of 
the Shiite community 
Islam the Moslem religion 
Jihad holy war 
Kaaba the cubic black stone in the center of the Haram Mosque in Mecca; the sacred 
Muslim shrine 
Kamancha Azerbaijani classical bow instrument 
Kerbala place of pilgrimage of Shiites 
Khamsa quintet of books (Five Tales) by Nizami Ganjevi 
Khan lord, prince 
Khanagah residential Sufi convent, often with an additional funerary function 
Khananda singer of mughams 
Khanum lady, madam 
Khatatt calligrapher 
Khatib a prayer-leader qualified to preach 
Khutba a bidding prayer or sermon delivered in the mosque at midday prayers on Fridays 
Kitab book 
Kitabkhana literally "book home" 
Koran the sacred book of the Moslems, written in Arabic 
Kufic squared letters of Arabic script 
Kurchi guards 
Malik local ruler, king 
Madrasa Muslim religious university 
Maghrib the Muslim world in North Africa, west of and including Tunisia 
Majlis national assembly; musical and literary miteengs, assembly  
Malik Ashshura King of Poets 
Mamluk sequence of sultans, originally Turkish or Circassian slaves 
Mavali, Mavla literally "join to"; a person living among Arabs who voluntarily adopts 
Islam 
Majlis, Mejlis an official or formal conference or council; musical and poetic associations 
also 
Mecca Muslims' main place of pilgrimage 
Mehmandarbashi chief of a ceremonial state reception of ambassadors and other 
honourable guests 
Meydan open public square or plaza; central ceremonial space 
Mesjid mosque 
Mihrab arched niche, indicating the direction of Mecca (the qibla) 
Minaret a tall tower of a mosque from which the faithful are called to prayer 
Minbar stepped pulpit in a mosque, used for the pronouncement of the khutba 
348 
 
Mirza a prince or son of a prince when after the name (Abbas Mirza), and a scholar or 
secretary when before the name (Mirza Fatali Akhunzade) 
Mosque a place where Muslims worship 
Muezzin a crier, as in a minaret, who calls the people to prayer at the proper hours 
Mufti a head of Islamic clergy 
Mughal dynasty of emperors that ruled the Indian subcontinent from 1526 to 1857 
Mugham classic Azerbaijani music 
Munajimbashi a chief astrologer of the court 
Munshi a secretary, chronicler 
Muraqqa album of calligraphy and pictures 
Murid spiritual disciple, murshid's disciple 
Murshid a spiritual tutor 
Musavvir a painter 
Muslim a person who follows the religion of Islam 
Nagara-Khana a tower where the court ceremonial orchestra was placed 
Nakkash ornamentalist 
Nama a book of writing 
Naskhi cursive style of Arabic script 
Nastaliq arabic script characterized by wide sweeps and loops, invented in the 14th Century 
by Mir Ali Tabrizi 
Nisba the part of a Muslim name that refers to geographical origin, family or profession  
Oghlu son (of) 
Ottoman Turkish dynasty of sultans 
Ovchibashi  chief of court hunting 
Padishah emperor 
Qadi (Cadi) a Muslim judge 
Qajar Azeri-Turkic dynasty of shahs that ruled Iran from 1794 to 1925 
Qasr castle or palace 
Qibla direction of prayer, i.e. to the Black Stone in Mecca  
Qurchi royal bodyguard 
Ribat fortified Muslim monastery or frontier post 
Rubaiyat the quatrains 
Gassida arabic poetic form 
Mesnevi arabic poetic form 
Safavid dynasty of shahs that ruled Azerbaijan and Iran from 1501 to 1732 and made 
Shiism the state religion 
Sardar governor-general 
Saljuq dynasty of Turks from Central Asia 
Saz Azerbaijani stringed instrument 
Shahnama literally "Book of Kings"; the Persian national epic composed by Firdowsi 
Sharabchibashi chief of court cup-bearers 
Sheikh leader, whether tribal or religious (e.g. Sufi); a highly venerated man 
Seyid religious official 
Shia (hence Shiite) a series of sects not regarded as part of orthodox Islam, which all 
recognise Ali (cousin of the Prophet Mahammed) as the first legitimate caliph 
349 
 
Simurgh mythical bird like a phoenix 
Sufi Muslim mystic or ascetic 
Sufrachi table-steward 
Sufrachibashi chief of court table-stewards 
Sultan ruler, king 
Sunni orthodox Muslim (see Shia) 
Sura chapter of the Koran 
Tar classical Azerbaijani stringed instrument 
Tazkira history, story, memoirs 
Tazkirist author of tazkira 
Tasnif Azerbaijani classical music 
Thulth a formalised and elongated version of Arabic naskhi script 
Timurid Turkic-Mongol dynasty descended from the great conqueror Timur (or Tamerlane, 
r. 1370-1405) 
Turkoman Azerbaijani tribe 
Umayyad the first Islamic dynasty (r. 661-750) 
Ustad a master, expert 
Vekil 
Vizier minister 
Yasavul Shah's adjutant 
Zoroastrianism the religious system of Persians and Azerbaijanis before their conversion to 
Islam; founded by-Zoroaster 
 
