T O E F L®
EXAM ESSENTIALS

T O E F L®
EXAM ESSENTIALS
LearningExpress
New York
®
Copyright © 2004 LearningExpress, LLC.
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions. Published in the United States by Learning Express, LLC,
New York.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
TOEFL exam essentials / LearningExpress—1st ed.
p. cm.
ISBN 1-57685-504-X (pbk.)
1. English language—Textbooks for foreign speakers. 2. Test of
English as a foreign language—Study guides. 3. English language—
Examinations—Study guides. I. Title.
PE1128.M747 2004
428'.00706—dc22
2003018793
Printed in the United States of America
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
First Edition
ISBN 1-57685-504-X
For more information or to place an order, contact LearningExpress at:
55 Broadway
8th Floor
New York, NY 10006
Or visit us at:
www.learnatest.com
Contents
Introduction vii
Chapter 1 How to Use This Book to Get a Top Score 1
Chapter 2 Listening 23
Chapter 3 Structure 49
Chapter 4 Reading 85
Chapter 5 Writing 113
Appendix A Test Details 139
Appendix B Resources 149

Introduction
T his essential guide to the Test of English as a Foreign Lan-guage (TOEFL) exam is perfect for studying on the goand tackling the exact kinds of questions tested on your
upcoming official exam. Information is presented in an easy-to-
follow, straightforward manner so you can find what you need,
learn the information, and move on—it’s that simple.
Each chapter covers the essential facts and practice you need
to get prepared for your exam, as well as tips on where to go to for
more detailed practice and further information. Whether you need
to review all parts of the TOEFL exam or just skip ahead to the
sections where you need extra practice and review, TOEFL Exam
Essentials has just what you need for focused, targeted practice.
■ Chapter 1: About the TOEFL exam—signing up for the
test, study schedules, how to prepare with this book
■ Chapter 2: Listening skills—lesson and practice
■ Chapter 3: Structure skills—lesson and practice
■ Chapter 4: Reading comprehension skills—lesson and
practice
■ Chapter 5: Writing skills—lesson and practice
Good luck!
vii

Chapter 1
How to Use This Book
to Get a Top Score
I f you are planning to take the TOEFL exam, you are not alone.Worldwide more than 700,000 people will likely take the Testof English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL) this year. Native
speakers of 145 different languages—representing more than 220
countries and regions—take the TOEFL exam annually. And, over
4,500 colleges, universities, programs, and agencies in the United
States and Canada will use the TOEFL exam to evaluate applicants
who are not native speakers of English. This important test mea-
sures your ability to read, write, and understand English so you can
succeed in a college classroom or professional program.
To prepare for the TOEFL exam, unlike other standardized
tests, you can’t just memorize a list of vocabulary words or math
formulas and expect to do well on the exam. You need to under-
stand conversations and other spoken English, know grammar
rules, understand and process what you read, and be able to
1
2 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
express yourself effectively in writing. As you sharpen your
English-language skills to prepare for the exam, this book will
highlight what you need to know to get your best score.
If you have looked on the shelves of your local bookstore, you
know the volume of test-preparation tools and guidebooks can
be overwhelming. That’s why this guide is designed to focus on
the most important parts of studying for the TOEFL exam, with-
out weighing you down. TOEFL Exam Essentials pulls together
all the pieces of test preparation for you:
■ what to expect on the test
■ successful test-taking strategies
■ how to make your own study plan
■ a review of the content and skills you need to know
You can take this book with you wherever you go. Take it out
while you wait for the bus, during a work break, or while you exer-
cise at the gym. It fits in your pocket or purse so you can fit your
study time into a busy schedule. By using this book, you are tak-
ing your first steps to earning a top score on the TOEFL exam.
Good luck as you prepare for the exam and pursue the education
you need for a successful future.
WHAT THE TOEFL EXAM IS ABOUT
The TOEFL exam has two formats: a computer-based test and
a paper-and-pencil version. You can take the computer-based
test (CBT) at test centers around the world throughout the year.
In some areas, the CBT is not available and the paper-based
TOEFL exam is offered instead. The paper test is offered six times
a year at specific locations. Although the test designs for the
HOW TO USE THIS BOOK TO GET A TOP SCORE 3
CBT and the paper-based test are different, both versions mea-
sure the same skills and use similar content for reading passages
and recorded conversations.
The computer-based TOEFL exam has four components: lis-
tening, structure, reading, and writing.
■ The listening section tests your ability to understand
North American English. You will use headphones to
listen to conversations and lectures and then answer
multiple-choice questions about them. You will be asked
to locate main ideas, supporting ideas, and understand
inferences made in the conversations that you hear.
■ The structure section measures your knowledge of
grammar and usage in standard written English. You will
read sentences and locate grammatical errors or
complete sentences with an appropriate word or phrase.
■ The reading portion of the exam will measure your
ability to read and understand short, written passages.
The passages will have a style and subject matter similar
to that of college-level academic texts.
■ The writing section will ask you to compose a short
essay on a general topic selected by the computer from a
large set of possible topics. It measures your ability to
write in English and develop and organize ideas about
an assigned subject.
You will have about four hours to complete the CBT. Before
you begin the test, you will go through a tutorial about basic com-
puter skills, including how to use a mouse, how to scroll, and how
to use testing tools. Each test section also begins with a tutorial that
4 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
will demonstrate how to answer test questions in that part of the
exam. These tutorials are not scored, and you can spend as much
time on them as you need. You can also take these tutorials prior
to the test for no charge at www.toefl.org or purchase a download-
able file. It is a good idea to practice your computer skills ahead of
time and become familiar with how to answer test questions using
a computer—this will be an advantage to you on exam day.
The paper-based TOEFL exam has three sections: listening
comprehension, structure and written expression, and reading
Computer-Based TOEFL Exam
Number of Time Computer 
Section Questions Limit Adaptive?
Tutorials 7 tutorials No time limit No
Listening 30–49 15–25 minutes Yes
to answer questions
40–60 minutes total 
(You will not be 
timed while you 
listen to recordings;
only while you 
answer questions.)
Structure 20–25 15–20 minutes Yes
Reading 44–55 70–90 minutes No
(This includes the 
time it takes you to 
read passages and
answer questions.)
Writing One topic 30 minutes No
HOW TO USE THIS BOOK TO GET A TOP SCORE 5
comprehension. Each section consists of multiple-choice ques-
tions with four possible answer choices for each question. Although
the test format varies from the CBT, the skills measured are 
the same.
■ Listening comprehension tests your ability to under-
stand North American English, including use of idiom
and vocabulary.
■ Structure and written expression tests your ability to
recognize grammatical errors in standard written
English and complete sentences with an appropriate
word or phrase.
■ Reading comprehension asks you to read and answer
questions about short passages like those used in
college-level texts.
The Test of Written English (TWE), a 30-minute writing
test, is a required part of the paper-and-pencil TOEFL exam on
What Is Computer-Adaptive Testing?
Some sections of the computer-based TOEFL exam are
computer adaptive, which means the computer selects
your questions based on your level of proficiency. Your first
question will have an average level of difficulty. Your next
question will either be easier or harder, depending on how
you answered the first. The listening and structure parts of
the exam are computer adaptive, but the reading and
writing sections are not.
6 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
most test dates. There is no separate fee for the TWE. You will
write a short essay about an assigned general topic.
What about your test score? The TOEFL exam has no 
single passing score. The college, university, or agency to which
you are applying decides the minimum test score that it accepts.
To learn more about how the TOEFL exam is scored, see 
Appendix A.
MANAGE YOUR TIME
If your life is busy, you may wonder how you will find the time
to prepare for the TOEFL exam. You can’t make each day longer,
but effective time management—how you organize and use your
time—can help make the most of the time you have to get ready
for the exam. Managing your time during the exam is also an
important skill.
To manage your time before the exam, evaluate how you
currently use your time. Follow these steps to better organize your
time:
Paper-and-Pencil TOEFL
Number of 
Section Questions Time Limit
Listening comprehension 50 30–40 minutes
Structure and 
written expression 40 25 minutes
Reading comprehension 50 55 minutes
Test of Written English (TWE) One topic 30 minutes
Note: Number of questions and time limits may vary.
HOW TO USE THIS BOOK TO GET A TOP SCORE 7
■ Review your current activities and obligations,
including recurring ones like classes, your work
schedule, your exercise or sports schedule, or religious
services.
■ Prioritize your activities. Which are the most
important to you? Are there any activities you can
eliminate to make more time to prepare for the TOEFL
exam?
■ Work out a weekly schedule. Make a list of your major
weekly events, including your TOEFL exam study goals
for the week. (See more about creating a successful study
plan later in this chapter.) List any major social, work, or
school-related events (for example, a vocabulary test in
Register Right Away
Test centers fill up quickly, so begin the TOEFL exam
registration process right away. Registration information is
available online at www.toefl.org or in the TOEFL exam
Bulletin, available at English language centers or at the
international student center at the university to which you
are applying. You can also request a Bulletin by writing to:
TOEFL/TSE Services
P.O. Box 6151
Princeton, NJ 08541-6151
609-771-7100
8 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
English class). Ideally, create this schedule for each week
of your test preparation period.
■ Create a daily “to do” list. Write down your activities,
including your TOEFL exam study goals for the day.
Make this list daily, before bed, or first thing in the
morning. Carry it with you and cross out the items that
you have accomplished.
Managing your time effectively while you are actually taking
the TOEFL exam is a crucial skill. As outlined earlier in this chap-
ter, each section of the TOEFL exam has a specific time limit.
You are expected to complete each section within that given
amount of time. Because you know how much time you have, you
can pace yourself and budget the amount of time you would like
to spend on each question.
If you are taking the computer-based TOEFL exam, an
onscreen clock display will keep track of the current question num-
ber, the total number of questions, and the time you have left to
answer them. For example, if you are halfway through a section
with 30 questions, you may see a display that shows question 15
of 30 and 00:09 minutes remaining. The display continuously
changes as you go through the section.
To help you manage your time during the exam, review these
guidelines:
■ Sharpen your computer skills if you are taking the
computer-based exam. Even if you use a computer every
day, taking a test on a computer may be unfamiliar to
you. Go to the TOEFL exam website (www.toefl.org)
for free online tutorials before exam time.
HOW TO USE THIS BOOK TO GET A TOP SCORE 9
■ Take a practice test and time yourself. For a 20-
question practice test with a time limit of 40 minutes,
give yourself about two minutes for each practice
question. This will help you learn to pace yourself.
■ Read the directions before you begin each section.
The total number of questions and the time allotment
are listed at the start of each section—carefully review it,
even if you think you already know the information. The
number of questions may vary because the test
developers sometimes add questions for research
purposes. They do this to determine whether a new
question for a future test is sufficiently clear. These
questions are not scored and you will not know which
ones they are.
■ Eliminate incorrect answer choices. Most of the
questions used in the TOEFL exam are multiple-choice.
For each question, you will have a set of four possible
answers. Read the questions carefully and eliminate the
answer choices you know are incorrect. This will make it
easier for you to find the correct answer.
■ Do not spend too much time on any one question. If
you do not know the answer, eliminate as many answer
choices as possible and then choose your best answer.
Do not make a random guess unless absolutely necessary
for you to move on to the next question. On the
computer-based exam, the listening and structure
portions of the test (the computer-adaptive parts of the
test), do not allow you to skip questions or return to
them later. Once you click the “Confirm Answer”
10 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
button on your computer screen, you cannot change
your answer. Random guessing, however, can reduce
your score. Fortunately, in the reading section, you can
make note of a difficult question and go back to it after
you have completed the rest of the questions. Likewise,
on the paper-and-pencil version of the test, you can
answer questions in the order that you wish. 
■ Try to finish each section if you are running out of
time. This does not mean you should make random
guesses—again, doing so can significantly lower your
score on the CBT. However, evidence shows that most
test takers will score higher if they answer all the
questions than if they do not try to complete the test.
Here are some other tips for answering multiple-choice
questions:
■ Watch for tricky wording. Some questions use
wording such as “All of the following are true except” or
“Which of the following is not a likely outcome?” You
will find answer choices that are accurate, but do not fit
the question. 
■ Look out for absolutes. Be careful answering questions
that use words such as always, never, none, or all. You may
find answer choices that sound correct but are not true
in every circumstance.
■ Beware of silly answer choices. Test makers often
include silly or easily confused answer choices. When
you are under pressure, these choices can become
HOW TO USE THIS BOOK TO GET A TOP SCORE 11
appealing if you are not reading closely. Eliminate these
options first.
CREATE A STUDY PLAN
Have you ever crammed for a big test, trying to learn everything
at the last minute? If you have, you know that you can’t learn all
the material for a major exam in one study session. And if you stayed
up all night cramming, you probably found out that you were too
tired to study effectively. A study plan creates a framework for you
to follow as you prepare for the TOEFL exam. By planning ahead,
you can break down your studying into smaller blocks of time that
are easier to manage, less intimidating, and more effective.
To implement a study plan, first consider your study envi-
ronment. You will need a place to study that has a minimum of
distractions, a location where you can concentrate and spread out
your materials. Your study environment should also be well lit and
Should You Guess?
In most cases, the answer is yes—if you can eliminate at
least one answer. On the computer-based TOEFL exam,
random guessing will lower your score. Only guess if you
can cross out at least one answer. On the paper-based
TOEFL exam, however, your score is based on the number
of questions you answer correctly. Because there is no
penalty for wrong answers, you should guess even if you
can’t eliminate one or more answer choices.
12 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
comfortable for you. A corner of your bedroom, a study in your
home, the local library, or your school are all possibilities. Once
you have a place to work, collect the study tools you will need. 
With study tools in hand and a place to study, it’s time to col-
lect the information you need to make decisions about what to
study and how much time to allocate to each area of study.
Follow these five steps to create an effective study plan:
1. Get the information you need. Find out the details
about the TOEFL exam, including:
When will it be held?
Where is the test center nearest you?
How do you register?
What do you need to register?
How much does it cost?
What You Need Before You Start
To make your TOEFL exam study time more effective, get
the right study tools. Here are some suggestions:
■ a good English-language dictionary, such as Merriam-
Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary, 11th Edition
■ paper or legal pads
■ pencils or pens
■ highlighter pens in different colors
■ index or note cards
■ notebooks and folders
■ calendar or Personal Digital Assistant, such as a Palm
Pilot™
HOW TO USE THIS BOOK TO GET A TOP SCORE 13
What do you need to bring with you on exam day?
What exactly will be tested on the exam?
Some of this information is covered in this chapter
and in Appendix A at the back of the book. For more
information, you may need to contact your nearby test
center or university or go to www.toefl.org.
2. Find out what you already know and what you
need to learn. For your study plan to be useful, you
need to decide which subject areas require the most of
your attention. Take a practice TOEFL exam. Your
score will show both your strengths and the areas in
which you need improvement.
3. Set a time frame. Now that you know where to focus
your study, you can decide how much time you can
give to each subject area. First write down a list of
specific study goals. Be realistic—try to make goals that
you can accomplish. Now use a calendar to set
deadlines for these goals. Break up your studying into
small time blocks so you can reach your goal one step
at a time. Avoid making goals that are too big and too
general—for example, “Learn everything by May 1.”
Instead, set dates to learn material throughout March
and April and your study plan will enable you to learn
everything by May 1. For example, if you have three
months for test preparation and need to focus on
building your reading comprehension skills, you might
create a schedule like the one on the next page.
In this study plan, the first five weeks focus solely on
reading comprehension. However, the plan also allows
for time to study other test materials and complete an
14 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
overall review before the exam day. It sets specific weekly
goals as well as smaller, daily goals.
4. Stick to your plan. Write it down and post it where
you can see it. Unexpected events—such as coming
down with the flu or a problem at work—may interrupt
your plans. Don’t waste time worrying—just pick up
Week 1 Review basic reading comprehension
strategies. Start vocabulary list.
Week 2 Practice vocabulary in context questions and
specific detail questions.
Week 3 Practice inference questions.
Week 4 Practice finding references.
Week 5 Take reading comprehension practice test.
Week 6 Review grammar and usage rules. Start
reading novel.
Week 7 Continue reviewing grammar and usage
rules.
Week 8 Take structure practice test. Finish novel.
Week 9 Review writing strategies. Write a practice
essay.
Week 10 Write two more practice essays.
Week 11 Start overall review.
Week 12 Continue overall review until test day.
Every day: Read several articles in an English-language
newspaper.
Every week: Watch or listen to a TV show, news program,
or movie in English to build listening skills.
HOW TO USE THIS BOOK TO GET A TOP SCORE 15
where you left off. Try to put in extra time during the
next few weeks to catch up. You may need to adjust
your schedule to make deadlines more realistic, but be
sure to give yourself enough time to finish everything
before the exam.
5. Modify your plan. Most likely, you will need to adjust
your study plan as you proceed. Review your progress
every week. Did you reach your goals? If not, where
did you fall short and why? The more you assess what
is working in your plan and what is not working, the
more it will address your actual study needs.
It may go without saying, but the key element to doing well
on the TOEFL exam is mastering the material covered on the
test. Proficiency in English-language skills is crucial for success.
How can you best improve your listening, grammar, reading, and
writing skills? Knowing how to study can be as important as how
much time you spend studying. Effective study strategies are
active rather than passive, meaning that you do something, such
as the following:
■ Ask questions as you study, read, or listen to a
conversation in English.
• What is the main idea being expressed?
• What is the author or speaker trying to prove?
• What is fact and what is opinion?
■ Locate what is important. As you read, use a high-
lighter or pencil to underline key information, such as:
• terms that are defined in the text
• main ideas
16 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
• words or grammar rules you want to remember
• new ideas
• vocabulary words or expressions you need to look up
■ Make connections. If you can make connections
between ideas, you will better remember the material.
For example, if Spanish is your native language, you
might connect the word dormir (“to sleep” in Spanish)
with dormitory (the English word for a room or building
where students sleep).
■ Make notes. Note taking can help you remember
material, even if you never read your notes again. That’s
because it’s a muscle activity, and using your muscles
helps you remember. While reading or listening, make
note of main ideas, supporting details, authorities,
opinions and facts, and key terms.
BEAT TEST STRESS
Your palms sweat, your breathing quickens, and your heart races.
Most test takers recognize these common symptoms—the signs
of stress. However, by following a study plan and taking concrete
actions to reduce the stress in your life, you can boost your con-
fidence on exam day and lower your test stress.
Keep your general stress levels low. Take note of the factors
in your life that cause you stress, such as family, work, or school
problems. Try to deal with those stresses that interfere with
studying and preparing for the exam. For example, if you can’t
study at home because it is loud or chaotic, make plans to find a
quieter, calmer location like a friend’s house or the library. Taking
HOW TO USE THIS BOOK TO GET A TOP SCORE 17
specific actions can help you limit stress. The result will be that
you will feel more relaxed when you sit down to take the exam.
Here are seven ways to better handle stress.
1. Get plenty of sleep. Most adults need seven to nine
hours of sleep a night. Being deprived of sleep will
make you less able to cope with stress, less able to
concentrate, and less likely to perform well. If you have
a hard time falling asleep, try these tips:
■ Keep a regular schedule. Go to sleep and get up at
the same time every day.
■ Take a relaxing bath or read a book.
■ Stay away from caffeine after lunchtime (coffee, tea,
cola, and chocolate may contain caffeine).
■ Exercise earlier in the day (at least two to four hours
before bedtime). A tired body will need more sleep
(but a workout just before bed will keep you awake).
2. Eat well and exercise. Good nutrition and regular
exercise are important for your complete health. Stay
away from high-sugar, high-calorie, low-nutrition
snacks and meals. Instead of donuts, potato chips, or
cookies, for example, try low-fat yogurt, fresh-squeezed
fruit juice, or carrot sticks. Also, try to fit some exercise
into your busy schedule—even a brisk walk can
improve your mood, reduce stress, and boost your
energy level.
3. Study. Review and improve your skills ahead of time
and you will feel calm and confident when you walk
into the testing room. If you fall behind in your study
plan, do not worry—just try to get back on schedule.
18 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
4. Be prepared. New situations can make people
nervous. Find out where the TOEFL exam test center
is and plan how you will get there. Organize the
materials you will need for the test the night before.
Use this book to learn about the format of the exam
and what types of questions to expect. If you prepare
well, the TOEFL exam will not be new to you.
5. Create realistic goals. Break up big goals into smaller,
easier-to-manage tasks. Instead of telling yourself what
you “should” do, do the best you can. Keep things in
perspective—the TOEFL exam is an important test,
but don’t lose sight of the other important parts of your
life.
6. Think positively. Imagine yourself doing well—
picture yourself at the exam, calmly answering each
question. If you believe you can do it, you will be more
likely to achieve your goals.
7. Reward yourself. Give yourself rewards throughout
your preparation for the TOEFL exam. This can make
studying less burdensome. Set up realistic rewards for
following your study plan and, eventually, for your
well-earned test score.
COUNTDOWN TO EXAM DAY
After months of preparation, your hard work will soon pay off.
The test is just a week away. How can you make the most of your
final days? Here’s a countdown plan that will help you reach your
goal and reduce unnecessary stress.
HOW TO USE THIS BOOK TO GET A TOP SCORE 19
The week before
■ Get detailed directions to the test center. Take a practice
drive or practice commute so you know how long it
takes to get there.
■ Do an overall review of your material.
■ Get plenty of sleep every night.
■ Picture yourself doing well on the test.
The day before
■ Go to bed early.
■ Get light exercise. Avoid heavy workouts—you do not
want to be physically exhausted on exam day.
■ Pack everything you need: pencils/pens, admission
materials, identification, mints, or snacks for break time.
■ Set your alarm and ask a family member or friend to
make sure you are up on time.
Exam day
■ Get up early.
■ Eat a light, healthy breakfast. (Don’t drastically change
your diet on exam day. For example, if you drink coffee
regularly, don’t skip it because you may get a headache.
But don’t overdo it, either.)
■ Dress comfortably in layers so you can adjust to a room
that is too hot or too cool.
■ Arrive at the test center early.
■ Think positively. Remember, you are prepared.
20 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
USE THIS BOOK WITH OTHER 
TEST-PREPARATION MATERIAL
TOEFL Exam Essentials gives you key information about the
TOEFL exam in a quick, easy style and format. Unlike other test-
prep books that use a question-and-answer format, TOEFL Exam
Essentials offers strategies for studying and test taking that can make
the difference for you in getting a top score on this important
exam. When used in combination with other test-preparation
materials, TOEFL Exam Essentials is a powerful tool that will
help you succeed.
If you are committed to doing well on the TOEFL exam, you
should also invest the time and money into purchasing or using
other test-preparation materials that contain practice tests. As you
prepare for the exam, consider taking several practice tests. Use
the study plan described earlier in this chapter to schedule your
practice test.
You will find many test-preparation books at your bookstore,
library, or for purchase online. See Learning Express’s TOEFL
Exam Success (LearningExpress, 2002) for detailed study and
learning strategies, lessons, and practice questions targeted to the
kinds of questions asked in each section of the official exam.
The Internet also contains resources for the TOEFL exam.
Some websites offer online practice tests and scoring, with an
analysis of your results. If you register for the computer-based
TOEFL exam, taking a practice test on a computer will be an
advantage to you. You will become more familiar with the expe-
rience of taking a standardized test on a computer so that when
you take the official exam, it won’t be new to you. See Appendix
B in the back of the book for more print and online resources.
HOW TO USE THIS BOOK TO GET A TOP SCORE 21
A primary resource for TOEFL exam preparation is the offi-
cial TOEFL exam website at www.toefl.org. Since July 2003, the
Educational Testing Service (ETS)—the service that administers
the TOEFL exam—has made test-preparation material avail-
able at no charge when you register for the test. You can access
the material on the TOEFL exam website or request that it be
mailed to you. The TOEFL exam website also offers online reg-
istration, the most current information about the test, and the loca-
tions of test centers around the world. Here are some other
helpful resources found at www.toefl.org:
■ Frequently asked questions about the computer-based
test: www.toefl.org/toeflcbt/cbtfaq.html
■ Free online computer tutorial (how to scroll, how to use
mouse): www.toefl.org/testprep/cbtutprq.html
■ Practice questions (computer-based):
www.toefl.org/testprep/cbtutprq.html
■ Complete list of TOEFL exam writing topics:
www.toefl.org/testprep/preindx.html#wrtgtopics
■ Frequently asked questions about the paper-based test:
www.toefl.org/toeflsup/suppfaq.html
■ Practice questions (paper-based):
www.toefl.org/onsitetst/itpprac.html
Now that you have started getting ready for the exam, let
TOEFL Exam Essentials streamline the test-preparation process
for you. The next chapters describe each section of the TOEFL
exam, emphasizing the specific language skills and test-taking
strategies that will help you do your best.
22 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
CHAPTER HIGHLIGHTS
■ Register for the test soon.
■ Organize your current calendar so you can make time to
prepare for the TOEFL exam.
■ Design a study plan and modify it as you go to make it
more useful.
■ Stick to your study plan as much as possible.
■ Time yourself answering practice questions so you can
pace yourself during the exam.
■ Take a standardized practice test on a computer if you
are taking the computer TOEFL exam.
■ Sharpen your computer skills if you are taking the
computer TOEFL exam.
■ Study in an active manner: ask questions, highlight or
underline, make notes.
■ Take steps to reduce your general stress level.
■ Follow strategies to cut down on your test stress.
Adequate test preparation, regular sleep, and good
health habits will increase your confidence and energy.
■ Be prepared: know how to get to the test center and
what materials and documents you will need on test day.
■ Think positively—you are ready for your exam!
Chapter 2
Listening
You may think of listening as a passive activity, but becom-ing a good listener means learning to listen actively—to askquestions, analyze, and draw conclusions about what you
hear. Because lectures and class discussions are the primary teach-
ing methods at universities, good listening skills are crucial for
your success at college.
The listening section of the TOEFL exam measures your abil-
ity to understand North American English. It uses conversa-
tional language including idiomatic expressions, rather than
formal, written English. The section has 30–50 questions and is
40–60 minutes in length. On the exam, you will hear three types
of recordings:
Dialogues: a brief conversation between two people. In some,
each person speaks only once. In others, one or both 
23
24 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
people speak more than once. Each dialogue is followed
by one question.
Short conversations and class discussions: a seven- or
eight-line conversation between two or more people about
a specific topic, followed by several questions.
Mini-lectures: a one- or two-minute talk by a single speaker,
followed by several questions.
Below is a breakdown of each recording type for the computer-
and paper-based TOEFL exams:
Types of Computer Paper-and-
recordings Test Pencil
Dialogues 11–17 dialogues, with 30 dialogues, with
one question each one question each
Short 2–3 conversations, 2 conversations,
Conversations with 2–3 questions with 7–8 questions 
each total
Mini-lectures/ 4–6 mini-lectures, with 3 mini-lectures with
Academic 3–6 questions each 12–13 questions total
Discussions
COMPUTER TEST VS. PAPER TEST
The listening section on the computer-based test (CBT) differs
from that on the old, paper-based test. Although you will listen
to the same kinds of conversations and talks, you will answer fewer
questions about each on the CBT. The listening section of the
CBT is also computer adaptive, meaning that the computer
selects questions based on your ability level. Your first question
LISTENING 25
will be of average difficulty. If you answer it correctly, your next
question will be harder. If you answer incorrectly, your next ques-
tion will be easier. Here are some other key differences between
the two tests:
Computer Test: Paper-and-Pencil:
Listening Listening Comprehension
30–50 questions 50 questions
Computer adaptive: Test takers answer the same 
questions are based on questions.
your ability.
You wear a headset with Test administrator plays 
adjustable volume. recordings.
Includes visuals (pictures Does not include visuals.
and other graphics).
You hear and see the You hear the questions only.
questions on the computer 
screen.
You control the pace by You follow the same pace as 
choosing when to begin other test takers.
the next recording.
Questions may have two Questions have only one 
answers. answer.
Most questions are All questions are multiple 
multiple choice, but some choice.
follow special directions.
Once you submit an You can return to previous 
answer, you cannot questions and change your 
change it. answers.
26 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
LEARNING HOW TO LISTEN
How can you become a more active listener? Practicing the fol-
lowing listening techniques will improve your ability to under-
stand spoken English:
■ Focus on the speaker. Do not be distracted by your
surroundings or by daydreaming.
■ Use non-verbal responses, like nodding your head or
leaning toward the speaker as you listen. Even if you are
listening to a pre-recorded audiotape for the TOEFL
exam, your physical responses will engage you in the act
of listening and help you concentrate on the
information.
■ Concentrate on the message. If you plan to take the
computer TOEFL exam, you will see pictures of people
on your computer screen before each recording. These
visuals will orient you to the setting and participants of
the conversation, but they may also distract you. Focus
on the conversation, not the picture. If you are taking
the paper-based TOEFL, find a place in the room—a
blank chalkboard or wall—to direct your attention. Do
not be distracted by the reader’s appearance as you listen
to him or her. You may also try closing your eyes as you
listen to the reading of each passage.
SPECIAL TIPS FOR THE COMPUTER TEST
Developers of the computer test use the computer’s multimedia
ability to present different types of questions and to include 
LISTENING 27
images along with audio recordings. Other special features of the
computer test include listening to the recordings on your own
headset and controlling your pace throughout the section. To pre-
pare for the computer-based test, try these test-taking strategies:
1. Adjust the volume on your headset before you begin
the listening section. Make sure that you can hear the
recordings clearly. You will not be allowed to adjust the
volume once the testing begins.
2. Don’t be distracted by the computer images of
people. Before most dialogues, your computer screen
will show a picture of the people in the conversation
you are listening to. These images are meant to set the
scene. However, if you find them distracting, look at
them briefly, then close your eyes when you listen to
the recording.
3. Pay close attention to other visuals. Images of maps,
tables or charts, graphs, drawings, or objects may
accompany longer talks and conversations. These
visuals contain information from the talk—information
that you need to answer the questions.
4. Read the questions on your computer screen as you
listen to them. This can help you better understand
them.
5. Pace yourself. Because you control how fast or slow
you go through the test, make sure to keep track of
time. Give yourself enough time to hear each recording
and answer every question.
28 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
Skill Builders
Listening well takes practice. As you prepare for the
listening section of the TOEFL exam, incorporate some of
these skill-building exercises into your study plan:
■ Go to places where English is spoken. The more you lis-
ten to spoken English, the more you will understand. Visit
a park or museum where you will hear English around
you, go to the movies in English, or converse with family
and friends in English.
■ Build your concentration. Tune in to a radio program or
listen to a book on tape every day. Start with a five-minute
session and add five minutes each day. Your ability to
focus will grow.
■ Summarize information. Listen to a radio or TV show
about a serious topic. Summarize the show’s message in
your mind or on paper. What is the main idea presented
in the show? What are the supporting details?
■ Ask questions. When you talk with others, think about
whether you really understand what they are saying. If
you don’t, speak up and ask for clarification.
■ Take note of verbal clues. As you listen to different peo-
ple, pick out the clues that let you know when they are
changing subjects or making a point that is important to
them.
■ Listen to different speaking styles. Consider the speak-
ing styles of three different people (for example, your
teachers, people you overhear at a café, or political speak-
ers on cable news programs). What helps you understand
what each has to say? What makes it difficult?
LISTENING 29
LISTENING TO LECTURES
Lectures, the primary teaching method in colleges today, can be
challenging to listeners. They demand your sustained attention
and often, you can’t interrupt a lecturer to ask a question or clar-
ify a point. Lectures, however, are often much more organized
than everyday conversation or a class discussion. Once you know
what organizational and verbal clues to listen for, you will better
understand what you hear.
Main ideas—Most speakers organize their lectures around
a main idea or point, and often they will announce their
main idea at the beginning of the lecture. These phrases
and statements signal the introduction of a topic:
“Now I’d like to talk about . . .”
“Let’s turn our attention to . . .”
“Moving on to the next subject . . .”
Supporting details—A lecturer will present supporting
details in the form of examples or details that develop their
main idea. Keep attuned to these common words and
phrases that often introduce supporting facts or details:
for example for instance in particular
in addition furthermore some
others specifically such as
Lists—Lecturers often use lists to organize their subject mat-
ter and introduce important points. Numbers can be a
verbal clue that a speaker is using a list:
The three different kinds of burns are . . .
There are four reasons why this happened.
Recent environmental laws have affected our area in
several ways.
30 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
Key words and concepts—Speakers may introduce key
terms or ideas as a way of organizing their thoughts. Lis-
ten for unfamiliar terms followed by a definition of what
they mean. These phrases signal that a speaker is using a
key word or concept:
“This important theme/idea/concept . . .”
“Let me define that for you.”
“This idea is central to X’s argument . . .”
QUESTION TYPES IN THE LISTENING SECTION
The questions in the listening segment of the TOEFL exam will
test your ability to locate main ideas, supporting facts and details,
and inferences in the conversations and talks you hear.
In Class: Listening to Group Discussions
When you listen to a class discussion, you are receiving
information from not one, but several people. Unlike lectures,
class conversations are not highly structured. Participants
may interrupt each other or make a point that seems off
track. Some participants offer comments that are more
valuable than others. How do you make sense of it all? Try
this: As you listen to a group discussion, track each person’s
arguments and positions. Summarize on paper or in your
mind what each speaker is saying. Then work out what the
main idea is. The main idea may be a combination of
everyone’s viewpoint, so it could be a two-step process.
LISTENING 31
1. Locate the main idea. The main idea of a
conversation, class discussion, or lecture is different
from its main topic. The topic is the subject—what a
conversation or lecture is about. The main idea is what
the speaker wants to say or express about the subject.
The main idea is a general statement that brings
together all of the ideas in a conversation or talk.
Here’s an example. Listen to an instructor begin a lecture:
Today we’re going to talk about the body’s immune system. As
you may know, the immune system is what defends the body from
infections. It’s really a remarkable system—in the body, millions
and millions of cells, organized into sets, or smaller units called
subsets, make a complex communications network that pass infor-
mation back and forth, almost like bees swarming around a
hive. The result is a sensitive system of checks and balances the
produce a prompt, appropriate, and effective immune response.
Question: What is the instructor’s main point?
a. The immune system has its own system of checks and
balances.
b. The immune system protects the body.
c. The immune system is a remarkable and complex
communications network.
Main topic: what the conversation or lecture is about
Main idea: what the speaker wants to express about his or
her topic
32 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
d. When the immune system breaks down, it can be dev-
astating.
Choice c is correct—it gives the main idea or point that the
instructor is trying to express. It’s a general statement that
holds together all of the information in the passage. Choice
a is too specific to be the main idea. Choice b is too general
to be the main idea. Choice d may be true, but the passage
does not give this information.
2. Find the supporting details. Supporting details are
facts or specific examples that give proof of a speaker’s
main idea. The next question asks you to find a
supporting detail from the mini-lecture about the
immune system.
Question: The body’s immune system consists of
a. swarming bees
b. billions of cells
c. a complex organization
d. a communication network
The correct answer is b. You can easily eliminate choice a—
it’s a silly answer choice used to distract you. Choices c and
d are too general to be supporting details.
Supporting detail: a specific fact or example that supports
the main idea
LISTENING 33
3. Make inferences. Often people do not say what they
mean in explicit terms. In these cases, you need draw a
logical conclusion based on details or from what is
suggested in a conversation. In the listening test, some
questions ask you to make inferences based on a
speaker’s tone, or attitude about his or her subject.
Man 1: How about you help me fix my car today?
Man 2: Sure, Sam. Right after I go to work, go to the game,
and study!
Question: What does Man 2’s reply suggest?
a. He plans on helping Sam fix his car.
b. He doesn’t have time to help Sam today.
c. He will help Sam, if Sam does his homework for him.
d. He is promising to help.
Choice b is correct. In speech, people often use tone rather
than words to convey meaning. A word like “sure” can have
dozens of meanings depending on the speaker’s tone. Dur-
ing the exam, listen to how someone speaks. Consider the
speaker’s attitude or mood: is he or she expressing joy, anger,
disbelief, or another emotion?
Inference questions may also ask you to draw a conclu-
sion based on what a speaker implies or assumes. Here is an
example:
Tone: a speaker’s mood or attitude expressed in speech
34 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
Woman: Frank, how do I get to Times Square?
Frank: Ask Sarah. She’s a native New Yorker.
Question: What is Frank assuming about Sarah?
a. She always carries a map of New York City.
b. She doesn’t know how to get to Times Square.
c. She will know how to get to Times Square because she
grew up in New York.
d. Frank doesn’t know how to get to Times Square.
Choice c is correct. Choice a may be true, but it is not what
Frank is implying. Choice d may be true, but it doesn’t answer
the question.
The last type of inference question asks you to make a log-
ical conclusion about what the speaker will do in the future
based on the conversation:
Woman: I forgot my textbook. Professor Jacob said we
could look at our books during the test.
Man: I have a copy that I’m not using.
Question: What will the woman probably do?
a. Borrow the man’s textbook for the test.
b. Go home so she can get her book.
c. Ask the professor if she can take the test another day.
d. Call home and see if her roommate will bring it to her.
Choice a is correct. The man is offering his book to the
woman even though he is not saying it explicitly. You can make
this conclusion based on what he is suggesting.
LISTENING 35
OTHER QUESTION TYPES ON THE COMPUTER TEST
Most of the questions on the computer-based test are traditional
multiple choice, but some are types that can only be used on a
computer. If you are taking the computer-based TOEFL exam,
become familiar with these question types: 
■ Questions with more than one answer. You will select
two of four possible answer choices. Here is an example:
Acid rain looks, feels, even tastes like clean rainwater, but it
actually contains high levels of pollutants. Although natural
sources like gases from forest fires can be part of the problem,
the burning of fossil fuels, such as car exhaust and smoke from
factories, is the main cause of acid rain. This how it works: pol-
lutants mix in the atmosphere to form fine particles that can
be carried long distances by wind. Eventually, they return to
the ground in the form of rain or other precipitation. Acid rain
has caused widespread damage in eastern North America,
Europe, Japan, China, and Southeast Asia.
Question: Based on the lecture, which of the following can
cause acid rain?
[Click on two answers.]
a. contaminated drinking water
b. natural sources
c. man-made pollutants
d. rain
Answer: b and c.
■ Questions that use visual information. You will select
an image or part of an image for your answer.
36 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
Question: Choose the map that best represents the areas
negatively affected by acid rain. [Click on a map.]
Answer: You would choose a map that highlights eastern
North America, Europe, Japan, China, and Southeast Asia.
■ Sequence questions. You will put information or
events into order so that they form a process.
Question: Summarize what happens to acid-rain pollutants
by placing the stages in the proper order. [Click on a word.
Then click on the space below where it belongs. Use each
word only once.]
form fine particles carried by wind mix in atmosphere
return to ground in rain
1. _____________________________________________
2. _____________________________________________
3. _____________________________________________
4. _____________________________________________
Answer: 1. mix in atmosphere; 2. form fine particles; 3.
carried by wind; 4. return to ground in rain.
■ Matching questions. You will match up or pair images,
words, or phrases.
LISTENING 37
Question: An instructor describes the formation and effects
of acid rain. Match each term with its definition. 
[Click on a sentence. Then click on the space where it
belongs. Use each sentence only once.]
precipitation fossil fuel pollutant
something that contaminates the environment
condensed vapor that falls to earth as a deposit like rain or snow
a fuel formed in the earth from plant or animal remains
Answer:
precipitation fossil fuel pollutant
condensed vapor a fuel formed in something that
that falls to earth the earth from contaminates the
as a deposit like plant or animal environment
rain or snow remains
WHAT’S UP WITH IDIOMATIC EXPRESSIONS
You probably won’t see the greeting “What’s up?” in the reading
portion of the TOEFL exam, but you might hear it—or another
idiom—on the listening test. Idioms are words or phrases used
in a particular region. Idiomatic expressions often have unusual
grammatical structures or have a meaning that does not make sense
when you add up the meanings of each word. Here’s an example
of a test question that will ask you to identify the meaning of an
idiomatic expression:
Woman: The astronomy midterm is tomorrow!
Man: I know. I’m not ready. It’s going to be an all-nighter!
38 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
Question: What does the man mean?
a. He’s going out past midnight.
b. He thinks the midterm is at night.
c. He’s going to stay up late studying.
d. He’s not going to study—it’s too late.
The correct answer is c. If you don’t know an idiomatic
expression, think about what makes sense in the situation. You
can eliminate choices a, b, and d because they are not what is sug-
gested in the context of the conversation. 
Keep Your Ears Open for Idioms
“Keep your ears open” means to stay attuned—so keep your
ears open for idiomatic expressions while you are listening to
everyday conversations. Here is a sample of some idioms
used in North America:
all of a sudden: suddenly
All of a sudden, the dog ran into the road.
boil down: summarize; amount
He boiled down the report to a page and a half.
The report boiled down to a plea for more funding.
catch up: to complete something belatedly
I need to catch up on my sleep.
drop off: deposit or deliver
She dropped off the package at his house.
find out: discover, learn
I don’t know the answer, but I’ll find out for you.
LISTENING 39
get down: give one’s attention to; depress
Let’s get down to business.
The rain was getting her down.
have on: wear
The man has on a new sweater.
keep + –ing verb: continue without interruption
She kept talking throughout class despite the teacher’s
warnings.
jump in: begin or enter eagerly
The woman didn’t wait for instructions, she just jumped
right in.
make up your mind: settle, decide
I made up my mind to take the earlier train.
put off: to hold back to a later time
You will have to put off buying that dress until you have
more money.
show up: arrive, appear
He always late—he would show up late to his own funeral!
sleep on it: delay making a decision until the next day
After considering the plan, the council decided to sleep on
it and cast a vote the next day.
take place: happen, occur
U.S. presidential elections take place every four years.
used to + verb: something accomplished in the past, but
not in the present
She used to work as an investment banker, but now she’s a
teacher.
40 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
QUICK QUIZ
Ask someone who speaks fluent English to read the following pas-
sages, questions, and answer choices into a tape recorder. Your
reader should speak at a normal, conversational pace. If you can’t
find someone to help you, read aloud to yourself and answer the
questions that follow. The answers can be found on page 48.
Woman 1: Are going to the party tonight?
Woman 2: I don’t think so. It’s been a long day. I’m beat!
1. Why isn’t Woman 2 going to the party?
a. She doesn’t like parties.
b. She’s too busy to go.
c. She’s too tired to go.
d. She’d rather stay home and beat eggs.
Man: I promised Dante that I’d lend him my car, but I for-
got that I need it today to get to work.
Woman: I have his cell phone number.
2. What will the man probably do?
a. call his mother
b. call Dante on his cell phone
c. use the cell phone to call his boss at work
d. skip work today
Woman: I didn’t like that novel.
Man: Neither did I.
3. What does the man mean?
a. He didn’t like the book either.
b. He doesn’t like reading novels.
LISTENING 41
c. He did like the book.
d. He doesn’t know what to do.
Man: Would you mind if I turned off the radio?
Woman: Well, I’m in the middle of listening to the game.
It’s almost over.
4. What is the woman implying?
a. The man should listen to the game too.
b. The man doesn’t like sports.
c. She’ll turn off the radio right away.
d. She’ll turn off the radio when the game is finished.
Man: So, how’d you do in your acting class?
Woman: Let’s just say that I won’t be winning any Acad-
emy Awards.
5. What does the woman mean?
a. She’s a terrific actress.
b. She thinks she didn’t do very well in acting class.
c. She didn’t go to class.
d. She doesn’t have time to watch the Academy Awards
ceremony on TV.
Woman: Hey, why aren’t you at the physics lab?
Man: I don’t have lab on Tuesdays.
Woman: Today’s not Tuesday—it’s Wednesday! Really, I
think you would forget your head if it weren’t
attached to your shoulders.
Man: Oh no!
Woman: You can just make it if you take my car.
Man: Thanks, I’ll be careful with it!
42 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
6. What does the woman mean by “you would forget your
head if it weren’t attached to your shoulders”?
a. The man is very forgetful.
b. The man forgot where the physics lab was.
c. The man has had neck surgery.
d. The man usually doesn’t forget things.
7. What will the man probably do?
a. skip lab and go to lunch with the woman
b. run as fast as he can to the lab
c. call his professor and explain the problem
d. borrow the woman’s car and drive to the lab
Questions 8 through 11 are based on the following class
discussion:
Professor: By now you have read the chapter about the challenges
faced by Native Americans after the first Europeans set-
tled in North America. What were your reactions?
Yes, Malinda?
Malinda: I was really surprised that the biggest threat to the
Native Americans was disease. I couldn’t believe how
much damage smallpox and measles caused.
Jose: Yeah, it was really devastating. The native population
just didn’t have the immunity to those diseases. I read
in the chapter that smallpox and measles killed entire
Native American communities before even one Euro-
pean got sick!
Barbara: Disease wasn’t the only problem. There was genocide.
And European settlement also destroyed their tradi-
tional way of life.
LISTENING 43
Malinda: I think it’s a tragedy how many people were killed and
how much of Native American culture was lost after
Europeans arrived.
Jose: I agree that it was a terrible tragedy, but I think it’s
important to remember that not everything was lost.
I mean, Native Americans have had a major popula-
tion recovery in the last century. And a lot of Native
American tribes are really strong today. They’re car-
rying on their traditions and taking back control of their
governments.
8. What event are the students discussing?
a. the development of Native American cultures
b. U.S. policymaking regarding Native Americans
c. the effect of European settlement on Native Americans
d. the arrival of the first people in North America
9. Why is Malinda surprised?
a. She’s surprised that Native Americans were removed
from their homelands.
b. She’s surprised by the diversity of Native American cul-
tures.
c. She doesn’t believe that some Native American pop-
ulations have recently increased.
d. She can’t believe that common European diseases were
so deadly to the native population.
10. The students name some of the challenges that Native
Americans faced after European settlement. What were the
two that they discussed?
a. malnutrition
b. new diseases
44 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
c. killing of Native Americans by Europeans
d. introduction of horses by Spanish
11. From the students’ comments, we can infer that
a. European settlement drastically changed Native Amer-
icans’ way of life.
b. European settlers found few inhabitants when they
arrived.
c. Europeans did not benefit from contact with Native
Americans.
d. Native Americans had one culture and language.
Questions 12 through 16 are based on the following mini-
lecture:
The Cuban Missile Crisis lasted only thirteen days. But those thir-
teen, terrifying days make up the world’s closest brush with the
threat of nuclear war. There were several events that unfolded
during the Cuban Missile Crisis.
First, on October 14, 1962, U.S. spy planes flying over Cuba
spotted Soviet missile installations under construction. The mis-
siles were intermediate- and medium-range; they could carry
nuclear weapons within the range of U.S. cities—putting the
people of New York, Chicago, and Los Angeles at risk. After con-
sidering a surprise air strike, President Kennedy decided to
announce a naval blockade of Cuba.
But before he began the naval blockade, Kennedy made a
worldwide radio and TV address on October 22. In the address,
he told the public about the discovery of the missiles and
demanded that the Soviet Union remove them. He said that the
LISTENING 45
United States would regard a missile attack from Cuba the same
as an attack from the Soviet Union, and that it would respond
accordingly. The days after the speech were tense. Kennedy
didn’t know how the Soviet Union would respond. Finally, after
thirteen days, Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev agreed to remove
the missiles if the United States promised not to invade Cuba.
One interesting fact is that, unknown to the U.S. government
at the time, 40,000 Soviet soldiers were stationed in Cuba and
armed with nuclear weapons. This information has only come to
light recently when U.S. and Soviet files about the incident have
become declassified.
An ironic result of the crisis was that even though Khrushchev’s
actions helped protect the world from nuclear war, they made him
look weak to younger Soviet leaders. He was removed from power.
12. What is the speaker’s main point?
a. Thirteen days is not a long time.
b. The Soviet threat during the Cuban Missile Crisis was
not real.
c. The Cuban Missile Crisis put the world at risk of
nuclear war.
d. The Cuban Missile Crisis was a significant historical
event.
13. According to the speaker, President Kennedy
a. knew that Khrushchev would back down.
b. didn’t think the situation was very serious.
c. viewed the crisis as a conflict between Cuba and the
United States only.
d. believed the crisis was principally between the United
States and the Soviet Union.
46 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
14. According to the speaker, at the time of the Cuban Mis-
sile Crisis, the U.S. government
a. was not surprised to find missile installations in Cuba.
b. did not know the full extent of the Soviet threat in Cuba.
c. overestimated the Soviet threat in Cuba.
d. knew everything that was going on in Cuba.
15. The speaker describes four events that occurred during the
Cuban Missile Crisis. Place these events in proper chrono-
logical order.
Kennedy’s public address
U.S. discovery of missile bases in Cuba
U.S. blockade of Cuba
Soviet removal of missiles
1.
2.
3.
4.
16. The speaker suggests that by agreeing to remove the
weapons and end the crisis, Khrushchev
a. made a strong choice, not a weak one.
b. brought shame to his country.
c. deserved to be removed from power.
d. made the wrong choice.
LISTENING 47
CHAPTER HIGHLIGHTS
■ Practice active listening techniques, like using non-
verbal responses.
■ Schedule listening skill builders into your study plan.
■ Go to places where English is spoken regularly.
■ Listen to radio or TV programs or go to the movies
regularly.
■ Review how lectures are structured; listen to a lecture or
long program.
■ Listen for idiomatic expressions in everyday
conversation; look up those that you don’t know.
■ Main ideas are general statements that a speaker wants
to say something about a topic.
■ Supporting details are specific examples and facts that
back up a main idea.
■ Inferences are what a speaker suggests or implies but
does not necessarily say.
■ Tone is a speaker’s attitude or mood expressed in speech.
■ If you are taking the computer-based exam, know its
special features and the question types specific to that
test.
■ Review the differences between the computer- and
paper-based tests.
48 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
QUIZ ANSWERS
1. c.
2. b.
3. a.
4. d.
5. b.
6. a.
7. d.
8. c.
9. d.
10. b and c.
11. a.
12. c.
13. d.
14. b.
15. 1. U.S. discovery of missile bases in Cuba
2. Kennedy’s public address
3. U.S. blockade of Cuba
4. Soviet removal of missiles
16. a.
Chapter 3
Structure
W hen you communicate in writing, you make a per-manent impression. When you talk, you may abbre-viate words, leave sentences unfinished, or use
informal words and phrases, but when you write, you must fol-
low the grammatical constructions of formal English. Admis-
sions officers will want to know if you have the ability to express
yourself clearly and correctly in written English—an essential skill
in college. The structure section of the TOEFL exam measures
your knowledge of English grammar and style. It presents you
with sentences that you need to correct by filling in a blank or
by identifying a grammatical error. The sentences will cover top-
ics similar to those in college courses like history, biology, soci-
ology, and art. However, you do not need to have specific
knowledge of these topics to answer the questions in the struc-
ture test.
49
50 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
QUESTION TYPES IN THE STRUCTURE SECTION
There are two basic kinds of questions on the structure section
of both the computer-based and paper-based exams:
■ Sentence completion. This question type presents a
sentence with a blank. From four possible answer
choices, you will select the one word or phrase that
correctly completes the sentence. Here are some
examples:
1. The company had dumped waste into the river for years
and it ________ to continue doing so.
a. plans
b. planning
c. planned
d. had planned
2. After the female emperor penguin lays a single egg, she
gives them to her mate, ________ holds it in a fold of skin
near his feet for a two-month incubation period.
a. he
b. who
c. which
d. while
Answers: 1. c
2. b
■ Recognizing grammatical mistakes. In this question
type, sentences will have four underlined words or
phrases. You will choose the underlined word or phrase
that is incorrect. Here are some examples:
STRUCTURE 51
3. Frank Lloyd Wright, by designing the low-cost “Usonian” 
A B 
house in the 1930s, wanting to make American architec-
C D
ture more “democratic” and affordable to everyone.
a. A
b. B
c. C
d. D
4. A lack in vitamin D, which comes from fortified milk or 
A B
sunshine, can decrease the body’s ability to absorb calcium.
C D
a. A
b. B
c. C
d. D
Answers: 3. c
4. a
COMPUTER TEST VS. PAPER TEST
You will find some key differences between the computer-based
test (CBT) and the paper-and-pencil exam. Although the ques-
tions will cover the same type of material, you will answer fewer
questions about each on the CBT. The structure section of the
CBT is also computer adaptive, meaning that the computer
selects questions based on your ability level. Your first question
will be of average difficulty. If you answer it correctly, your next
52 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
question will be harder. If you answer incorrectly, your next
question will be easier. Here is an overview of the differences
between the two tests:
Computer Test: Paper-and-Pencil:
Structure Structure and Written
Expression
15–20 minutes 25 minutes
20–25 questions 40 questions
Computer adaptive: the Test takers answer the same
level of difficulty of ques- questions.
tions is based on each 
test-taker’s ability.
Question types are mixed Question types fall into two
together and presented sections:
at random. Part A—15 sentence-
completion questions
Part B—25 questions in
which you identify grammar
mistakes
Once you submit an answer, You can return to previous 
you cannot change it. questions and change your
answers.
Your score on the structure Your score on this section is 
section is combined with not combined with another 
your score in the writing part of the test.
portion of the test.
STRUCTURE 53
MAKING SENSE OF SENTENCES
The grass grows. This is an example of the basic unit of thought
in the English language: the sentence. Sentences must have two
key parts—a subject and a predicate—and express a complete
thought. The subject (grass) names what the sentence is talking
about. The predicate is a verb or verb phrase (grows) that tells us
something about the subject. The subject of a sentence may be
singular, meaning that there is only one subject. Subjects may
also be compound, meaning they have more than one subject:
The grass and the flowers grow.
The predicate may also be singular or compound. For exam-
ple, here the predicate is singular: I ate a bowl of spaghetti. In the
following example, the predicate is a compound: I ate a bowl of
spaghetti and drank two glasses of milk.
WHAT IS A CLAUSE?
Like sentences, clauses are groups of words that have a subject
and a predicate. Clauses may be independent or dependent. An
independent clause stands alone and expresses a complete idea
as in this example: Ximena walked on the grass. When a sentence
has more than one independent clause, it is called a compound
sentence. In compound sentences, independent clauses are joined
by a connecting word or conjunction (and, but, or, for, nor, so, or
yet). In the following example, the independent clauses are under-
lined: Ximena walked on the grass, but she didn’t get her new shoes
wet.
A dependent clause does not express a complete thought:
though it was wet. When a dependent clause stands alone, it is called
a sentence fragment. To make a complete thought, a dependent
54 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
clause needs an independent clause: Though it was wet, Ximena
walked on the grass. Sentences that contain an independent clause
and a dependent clause are called complex sentences.
Quick tip: To identify a sentence fragment or dependent
clause on the TOEFL exam, look for the following joining words,
called subordinating conjunctions. When a clause has a sub-
ordinating conjunction, it needs an independent clause to com-
plete an idea. 
after because once though when
although before since unless where
as, as if if that until while
Practice
Underline the independent clauses in the following sentences.
Find the answers on page 82.
1. I went for a walk downtown and mailed your letter.
2. If it is hot tomorrow, let’s go to the beach.
3. The 20-foot-tall, long-necked giraffe is the tallest living
animal on Earth.
4. The log-cabin quilt was probably designed as a way to give
a second life to unwieldy but warm fabrics salvaged from
suits and coats.
PARTS OF SPEECH
A word can be classified as a different part of speech depending
on how it works in a sentence. For example, the word quiet can
be a noun, verb, or adjective; add –ly and it can function as an
adverb. This table lists the parts of speech:
STRUCTURE 55
Part of 
Speech Function Examples
noun names a person, Emma, cat, girl, Elm 
place, thing, or Street, vase, pen, New 
concept York, weather
pronoun takes the place of a I, you, he, she, us, they, this,
noun so that the that, themselves, some-
noun does not have body, who, which
to be repeated
verb describes an action, swim, becomes, is,
occurrence, or state seemed, hoping
of being
helping combines with other forms of be, do and have;
verb verbs (main verbs) to can, could, may, might,
create verb phrases must, shall, should, will,
that help indicate would
tenses
adjective describes nouns and green, content, awake,
pronouns; can also small, heavy, happy; that
identify or quantify (e.g., that car); several
(e.g., several dogs)
adverb describes verbs, adjec- quickly, slowly, suddenly,
tives, other adverbs, always, very, yesterday
or entire clauses
prep- expresses the relation- in, on, around, above,
osition ship in time or space between, underneath,
between words in a beside, with, upon
sentence
56 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
SUBJECT-VERB AGREEMENT
She don’t or she doesn’t? You might easily pick out the second
version as the correct match between subject and verb. However,
some instances of subject-verb agreement are trickier—even for
native speakers of English.
Subject-verb agreement is when the subject of the sentence
correctly matches the verb in number. If the subject is singular,
the verb is singular. If the subject is plural, the verb is plural.
Singular: Betto feeds the birds every day.
Plural: Betto and Josephine feed the birds every day.
Subject-verb agreement can be confusing, however. Look
out for problem verb forms and the other common pitfalls listed
below.
■ The subject I—Even though I is a single person, it
usually takes the plural form of the verb: I look. I do.
■ The verb to be—The irregular verb to be (be, am, is, are,
was, were) is a problem verb because of the unusual way
it is formed. Remember never to use the be form after a
subject.
I be going is incorrect.
I am going is correct.
■ Doesn’t/don’t, Wasn’t/weren’t—These verb
constructions can confuse writers. Doesn’t (does not) and
STRUCTURE 57
wasn’t (was not) are singular. Don’t (do not) and weren’t
(were not) are plural. (I takes the plural form, don’t)
I don’t want to leave. I wasn’t in class yesterday.
She doesn’t want to leave. We weren’t in class yesterday.
■ Words or phrases that follow a subject—A common
error in making subject-verb agreement is confusing a
phrase (words or phrase that follow a subject) with the
subject of the sentence. When you read, be careful to
locate the true subject of the sentence. Subject and verbs
are underlined in the following examples.
One of the boys is missing.
The paintings by Pedro Reiss are bold and commanding.
The president, along with three members of his Cabinet,
returned to Washington today.
■ Singular nouns that end in s—Some words like
measles, mumps, news, checkers or marbles (games), physics,
economics, sports, and politics are singular despite their
plural form, because we think of them as a single thing.
Some are singular or plural depending on how they are
used in a sentence.
The news begins at 6 p.m.
Aerobics is a great way to get in shape and reduce stress.
■ Pronoun subjects—Pronouns are misused often in
speech and writing. Some pronouns are always singular,
whereas others are always plural. A few can be either
singular or plural. Each, either, neither, anybody, anyone,
58 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
everybody, everyone, no one, nobody, one, somebody, someone
are singular pronouns that agree with singular verbs.
Everyone wants to win the lottery.
Each of the managers wants her own phone line.
■ Both, few, many, and several are plural pronouns and
agree with plural verbs.
Both of her ex-boyfriends are attending the wedding.
■ All, any most, none, and some can be singular or plural
pronouns, depending on their use.
All of the ice cream is gone.
All of the ice cream sundaes are gone.
WHEN THINGS GET COMPLEX . . .
When you look at complex sentences, pay close attention to
determine whether the subject and verb agree. These guidelines
will help you:
■ If two nouns or pronouns are joined by and, they need a
plural verb.
Oscar and Lorraine drive to work on most days.
■ If two singular nouns or pronouns are joined by or or
nor, they need a singular verb.
On most days, Oscar or Lorraine drives to work.
STRUCTURE 59
■ If one plural and one singular subject are joined by or or
nor, the verb agrees with the closest subject.
Neither the teacher nor the students like the textbook.
Neither the students nor the teacher likes the textbook.
■ If a sentence asks a question or begins with the words
there or here, the subject follows the verb. The verb must
agree with the subject. The subjects are underlined in
the following examples.
Here is the evidence to prove it.What are his reasons?
Practice
Circle the correct verb in each sentence. Find the answers on
page 82.
5. The chief executive officer and the chairman of the
board agrees/agree about the new benefit package.
6. All of the children sleeps/sleep at naptime.
7. One of the first modern detectives in literature was/were
created by Edgar Allan Poe.
GETTING PRONOUNS RIGHT
Pronouns are words that take the place of a noun or another pro-
noun. The nouns represented by pronouns are called antecedents.
Just as subjects and verbs must agree in number, pronouns and
antecedents need to agree in number. If the antecedent is singu-
lar, the pronoun is singular; if the antecedent is plural, the pro-
noun is plural. In the following examples, pronouns are italicized
and the antecedents are underlined:
60 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
The teachers received their benefits.
Maggie wants to bring her digital camera on the trip.
Sometimes pronoun agreement is tricky. Review these guide-
lines so you can identify common pronoun errors in the TOEFL
exam:
■ Indefinite pronouns (pronouns that don’t refer to a
specific person) like each, either, neither, anybody, anyone,
everybody, everyone, no one, nobody, one, somebody, and
someone always require singular pronouns.
Each of the boys wore his favorite costume.
Neither of the tenants could find her copy of the lease.
■ If two singular nouns or pronouns are joined by and, use
a plural pronoun.
When Grandma and Grandpa visit, they always bring
presents.
■ If two singular nouns or pronouns are joined by or, use a
singular pronoun.
Remember to give Sophie or Jane her application.
■ If a singular and a plural noun or pronoun are joined by
or, the pronoun agrees with the closest noun or pronoun
it represents.
The coach or players will explain their game strategy.
The players or the coach will explain his game strategy.
Troublesome Pronouns
Its/It’s
Its means “belonging to it.” The dog wagged its tail.
It’s is a contraction for “it is.” It’s time to go. (It is time to
go.)
Your/You are
Your means “belonging to Your phone is ringing.
you.”
You are is a contraction for You’re right about that. (You 
“you are.” are right . . . )
Their/They’re/There
Their means “belonging to Their plane is ready for 
them.” take-off.
They’re is a contraction for They’re going to miss the 
“they are.” plane. (They are going . . . )
There is an adverb describing There goes the plane!
where an action takes place.
Whose/Who’s
Whose means “belonging Whose sweater is this?
to whom.”
Who’s is a contraction for Who’s coming to dinner? 
“who is” or “who has.” (Who is coming to dinner?)
Who/That/Which
Who refers to people. The man who fixes my car
has retired.
That refers to things. This is the car that I told you
about.
Which introduces clauses The band, which started out
that are not essential to the in Boston, is now famous in
information in the sentence, Europe and Japan.
unless they refer to people. Maya, who plays in the 
In that case, use who. band, lives upstairs.
62 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
Practice
Circle the correct pronoun in each sentence. Find the answers
on page 82.
8. No one in her/their right mind would follow your advice.
9. Arnold or Jacques will bring his/their recorder so he/they
can tape the interview.
10. Bring your/you’re fishing pole along if your/you’re
coming.
11. Interstate 235, who/which/that runs through town, is
being repaired this summer.
12. Its/It’s your/you’re turn to do the dishes.
ADJECTIVES AND ADVERBS
Study careful! This is an example of a common mistake: confus-
ing an adjective for an adverb. The correct statement is “study
carefully.” Adjectives and adverbs are modifiers, or words that
describe other words. However, adjectives and adverbs describe
different parts of speech. In the preceding example, carefully is an
adverb describing the verb study.
Adjectives describe nouns or pronouns and answer one of
three questions: which one? what kind? and how many?
which one? → that tree, the other shoe, her last time
what kind? → elm tree, suede shoe, exciting time
how many?→ five trees, many shoes, several times
Adverbs describe verbs, adjectives, or other adverbs and
answer one of these questions about another word in the sentence:
where? when? how? and to what extent?
STRUCTURE 63
where? Place your baggage below your seat.
when? Call your mother tomorrow.
how? Kyoko turned suddenly.
to what extent? Ben could hardly wait.
To recognize grammatical mistakes involving adjectives and
adverbs, review these common trouble spots:
■ Verbs that deal with the senses (touch, taste, look,
smell, sound)—Deciding which modifier to use with
these verbs can be especially tricky. If the modifier is
describing a noun or pronoun that comes before the
verb, use an adjective. If the modifier is describing a
verb, use an adverb.
The entire group felt sick after lunch. (Sick is an adjective
describing the noun group.)
The trainer felt gently around the player’s ankle. (Gently
is an adverb describing the verb felt).
■ Adjectives that follow the verb—Sometimes an
adjective comes after the verb, but it describes a noun or
pronoun that comes before the verb. In this example, the
noun is in bold and the adjective is underlined:
These pickles taste salty. (salty pickles)
■ Misplaced modifiers—Modifiers should be placed as
closely as possible to the words that describe.
64 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
Incorrect: My uncle told me about raising cattle in the
kitchen. (Why were cattle in the kitchen?)
Correct: In the kitchen, my uncle told me about raising
cattle.
Problem Modifiers
Fewer/Less
Fewer describes plural The school enrolls fewer
nouns, or things that can children than it once did.
be counted.
Less describes singular Julian has less time than you 
nouns that represent a do.
quantity or degree.
Good/Well
Good is an adjective. Caroline felt good about her
test results. (Good describes
Caroline.)
Well is an adverb, used to Sophia performed well on 
describe an action. the test. (Well describes the
verb performed.)
Bad/Badly
Bad is an adjective. Owen felt bad after his
lengthy workout. (Bad
describes Owen.)
Badly is an adverb, used to The band played badly at 
describe an action. the concert. (Badly describes
the verb played.)
STRUCTURE 65
■ Dangling modifiers—Words, phrases, or clauses set off
by commas at the beginning a sentence sometimes
modify the wrong noun or pronoun.
Incorrect: Broken and beyond repair, Grandma threw
away the serving dish. (Why was Grandma broken?)
Correct: Grandma threw away the broken serving dish that
was beyond repair.
Practice
Choose the correct word in parentheses in each of the following
sentences. Find the answers on pages 82–83.
13. The music sounded (strange, strangely).
14. My cowboy boots feel less (comfortable, comfortably)
than my pumps.
15. Ask (polite, politely) if you would like a second serving.
16. Phoebe makes (fewer, less) money than her sister does.
17. He runs so (good, well) that he often wins local road races.
DON’T BE TOO NEGATIVE
Although in Shakespeare’s time, a double negative—the use of
two negatives in the same sentence—could be used to emphasize
a point, today double negatives are considered a grammatical
mistake. Be on the lookout for sentences that “double up” on the
following negative words:
no neither nobody scarcely
not nothing nowhere barely
neither no one hardly
66 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
MAKING COMPARISONS
Adjectives and adverbs change form when they are used to make
comparisons. To create comparisons, follow these general rules:
When comparing two things,
■ add –er to short modifiers of one or two syllables (taller,
wiser).
■ use the word more or less before the modifiers of more
than two syllables (more dependable, less outrageous).
When comparing more than two things,
■ add –est to short modifiers of one or two syllables
( funniest, rudest).
■ use the word most or least before modifiers of more than
two syllables (most intelligent, least precisely).
Special Cases: The following comparative modifiers don’t
follow these rules—they change form completely.
Modifier Comparative Superlative
good better best
well better best
many more most
much more most
bad worse worst
little less or lesser least
STRUCTURE 67
Practice
Circle the correct modifier in each sentence. Find the answers
on page 83.
18. The judge looked skeptical/skeptically at the attorney.
19. Pasta does not taste as good/well if it is overcooked.
20. Pleasant Lake is the best/better trout lake around.
ACTION WORDS
Verbs form the heart of a sentence—they express the action or
state of being of the subject. The tense of the verb tells readers
when the action happens, happened, or will happen. Verbs have
five basic forms:
1. The infinitive is the base form of the verb plus the
word to. →to swim, to hope, to be
2. The present tense expresses action that happens now
or happens routinely. →The baby smiles a lot.
3. The present participle describes what is happening
now. A helping verb (am, is, are) precedes the -ing form
of the verb. →The baby is smiling again.
4. The past tense shows an action that happened in the
past. →School officials warned the students last fall.
5. The past participle expresses an action that happened
in the past. It uses a helping verb such as has, have, or
had. →The reporter has followed the story since it broke.
REGULAR VERBS
Regular verbs follow a standard set of rules for forming the 
present participle, past tense, and past participle forms. The
68 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
present participle is formed by adding –ing. The past and past
participle are formed by adding –ed. If the verb ends with the let-
ter e, just add d. If the verb ends with the letter y, for the past
tense, change the y to an i and add –ed. Here are some examples:
Present Past
Present Participle Past Participle
talk talking talked talked
exercise exercising exercised exercised
multiply multiplying multiplied multiplied
notice noticing noticed noticed
IRREGULAR VERBS
Approximately 150 verbs in English are irregular. They do not
follow the standard rules for changing tense. Irregular verbs fall
into three categories:
■ irregular verbs with the same past and past participle
forms
■ irregular verbs with three distinct forms
■ irregular verbs with the same present and past participle
forms.
The table on the next few pages lists the most common irreg-
ular verbs.
STRUCTURE 69
Irregular Verbs with the Same Past and Past
Participle Forms
Present Past Past Participle
bite bit bit
dig dug dug
bleed bled bled
hear heard heard
hold held held
light lit lit
meet met met
pay paid paid
say said said
sell sold sold
tell told told
shine shone shone
shoot shot shot
sit sat sat
spin spun spun
spit spat spat
swear swore swore
tear tore tore
creep crept crept
deal dealt dealt
keep kept kept
kneel knelt knelt
leave left left
mean meant meant
send sent sent
sleep slept slept
70 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
Present Past Past Participle
spend spent spent
bring brought brought
buy bought bought
catch caught caught
fight fought fought
teach taught taught
think thought thought
feed fed fed
flee fled fled
find found found
grind ground ground
Irregular Verbs with Three Distinct Forms
Present Past Past Participle
begin began begun
ring rang rung
sing sang sung
spring sprang sprung
do did done
go went gone
am was been
is was been
see saw seen
drink drank drunk
shrink shrank shrunk
sink sank sunk
stink stank stunk
STRUCTURE 71
Present Past Past Participle
swear swore sworn
tear tore torn
wear wore worn
blow blew blown
draw drew drawn
fly flew flown
grow grew grown
know knew known
throw threw thrown
drive drove driven
strive strove striven
choose chose chosen
rise rose risen
break broke broken
speak spoke spoken
fall fell fallen
shake shook shaken
take took taken
forget forgot forgotten
get got gotten
give gave given
forgive forgave forgiven
forsake forsook forsaken
hide hid hidden
ride rode ridden
write wrote written
freeze froze frozen
steal stole stolen
72 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
Irregular Verbs with the Same Present and Past
Participle Forms
Present Past Past Participle
come came come
overcome overcame overcome
run ran run
Review these common errors involving verb tense, so that you
can identify them on the structure test:
■ Mixed verb tenses—Switching tense within a sentence
can change its meaning. Generally, a passage that begins
in the present tense should continue in the present
tense.
■ Improper past tense—Don’t use past tense to make a
statement about a present condition.
Incorrect: Zelda met the new director. He was very tall.
(Isn’t he still tall?)
Correct: Zelda met the new director. He is very tall.
■ Subjunctive mood—The subjective mood of verbs
expresses something that is imagined, wished for, or
contrary to fact. The subjunctive of was is were.
If I were rich, I’d quit my job and move to Tahiti. (I am
not rich.)
If you were a dog, you would be entirely dependent upon
human beings. (You are not a dog.)
STRUCTURE 73
Practice
Circle the correct verb in each sentence. Find the answers on
page 83.
21. Statistics was/were my most difficult course in high school.
22. The clerk rings/ring up the sales while the customers
waits/wait in line.
23. Has/Have either of the tenants paid the rent?
24. If I was/were on the school board, I’d abolish the dress
code.
25. I stayed at a bed and breakfast inn in Vermont. The
building is/was Victorian.
TRICKY VERBS
The sets of verbs on the next page confuse even native speakers
of English. To keep them straight, think about which verb in each
pair needs an object. For example, lie describes an action per-
formed by a subject: I will lie down. Lay, on the other hand, needs
an object to make sense: He lays the baby in the crib. To make things
more confusing, the past tense of lie is lay! Review this chart and
practice using these tricky verbs in context.
PREPOSITIONAL IDIOMS
Knowing which preposition (to, of, about, for, with, about, on, upon,
etc.) is appropriate in a sentence is a challenging part of master-
ing English. Review these common prepositional idioms:
according to depend on/upon next to
afraid of equal to of the opinion
74 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
anxious about except for on top of
apologize to (someone) fond of opposite of
apologize for (something) from now on prior to
approve of from time to time proud of
ashamed of frown on/upon regard to
aware of full of related to
blame (someone) for glance at/through rely on/upon
Lie/Lay
Lie means to rest, to recline.” Don’t just lie there like a
(subject) lump, do something!
past tense: lay, had lain Last night, he lay on the
couch and fell asleep.
Lay means “to place, to set I always lay my keys on the 
down.” (needs an object) counter. (The object is keys.)
Past tense: laid, had laid Ruben laid the blankets on
the bed yesterday.
Sit/Set
Sit means “to rest.” (subject) She always sits behind her
desk.
Set means “to put or place.” He set the files on my desk.
(needs an object) (The object is files.)
Rise/Raise
Rise means “to go up.” After it is filled with hot air,
(subject) the balloon rises.
Raise means “go move The town officials are raising 
something up.” (needs property taxes this year.
an object) (The object is taxes.)
STRUCTURE 75
blame (something) grateful to (someone) respect for
on grateful for (something) responsible for
bored with in accordance with satisfied with
capable of incapable of similar to
compete with in conflict sorry for
complain about inferior to suspicious of
composed of insist on/upon take care of
concentrate on in the habit of thank (some-
concerned with in the near future one) for
congratulate on interested in tired of
conscious of knowledge of with regard to
consist of
QUICK QUIZ
Answer the questions below. If the question has a blank, select
the correct answer to fill in the blank. If the question has four under-
lined words or phrases, choose the underlined word or phrase that
is incorrect. Find the answers on page 83.
1. Louise read the book very thorough, but she performed
A B C
poorly on the test.
D
a. A
b. B
c. C
d. D
76 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
2. If your interested in pleasing customers, don’t make them
A B C
wait for service.
D
a. A
b. B
c. C
d. D
3. In 1868, newspapers were filled with the accounts of men
________ claimed to have become rich overnight in Cal-
ifornia’s gold fields.
a. whom
b. that
c. which
d. who
4. Each of the managers want to renew her contract before
A B C D
the new fiscal year.
a. A
b. B
c. C
d. D
STRUCTURE 77
5. The city doesn’t need no more taxes; everyone pays too 
A B C
much already.
D
a. A
b. B
c. C
d. D
6. The distinct geology of Cape Cod began ________ about
20,000 years ago.
a. formed
b. form
c. to form
d. was forming
7. In contrast to its soft body and muscular feet, some mol-
A B C
lusks have hard shells.
D
a. A
b. B
c. C
d. D
78 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
8. Surprisingly, my younger sister dresses more conservative
A B C
than I do.
D
a. A
b. B
c. C
d. D
9. Jackson Pollock, the twentieth-century American painter,
was concerned ________ the connection between the
unconscious and artistic creativity.
a. with
b. in
c. of
d. for
10. After they vandalized the school, the teenagers ________
the scene.
a. flew
b. flied
c. fleed
d. fled
STRUCTURE 79
11. In 1963, Betty Friedan’s expose of domesticity, The Fem-
A
inine Mystique, became an immediate bestseller and 
B C
creating a national sensation.
D
a. A
b. B
c. C
d. D
12. Homesteaders on the Great Plains brang few possessions 
A B C
to their new home.
D
a. A
b. B
c. C
d. D
13. Since his release from jail in 1990, Nelson Mandela has
emerged as the ________ spokesman for South Africa’s
anti-apartheid movement.
a. more prominent
b. more prominently
c. most prominent
d. most prominently
80 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
14. Neither the actors nor the producer ________ the adver-
tisement for the movie.
a. to like
b. liking
c. like
d. likes
15. Less people stood in line for the concert, even though
A B C
there were more tickets available.
D
a. A
b. B
c. C
d. D
16. Of the three girls that recently joined the basketball team, 
A B C
Frieda is the tallest.
D
a. A
b. B
c. C
d. D
STRUCTURE 81
CHAPTER HIGHLIGHTS
■ Sentences must have a subject and a predicate and
express a complete thought.
■ A subject is the sentence part that tells who or what the
sentence is about.
■ A predicate is the sentence part that describes what the
subject is or what the subject is doing.
■ A clause is a group of words with a subject and a
predicate.
■ An independent clause stands alone and expresses a
complete thought.
■ A dependent clause needs an independent clause to
complete its meaning.
■ The parts of speech are noun, verb, helping verb,
adjective, adverb, and preposition.
■ For subject-verb agreement, the subject of a sentence
must match the verb in number.
■ Familiarize yourself with the common pitfalls involving
subject-verb agreement.
■ For pronoun agreement, a pronoun and its antecedent
must match in number.
■ Know how to identify common pronoun errors and
troublesome pronouns.
■ Adjectives describe nouns or pronouns.
■ Adverbs describe verbs, adjectives, or other adverbs.
■ Review the common grammatical mistakes involving
modifiers and problem modifiers.
■ Avoid using two negative pronouns or modifiers in one
sentence.
82 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
■ Learn how to create the comparative and superlative
forms of modifiers.
■ The five basic verb forms are infinitive, present tense,
present participle, past tense, and past participle.
■ Study and memorize the forms of the most common
irregular verbs.
■ Review the common errors involving verb tense and
problem verbs.
■ Review and memorize common prepositional idioms.
Practice Answers
1. I went for a walk downtown and mailed your letter.
2. If it is hot tomorrow, let’s go to the beach.
3. The 20-foot-tall, long-necked giraffe is the tallest living
animal on Earth.
4. The log cabin quilt was probably designed as a way to
give a second life to unwieldy but warm fabrics salvaged
from suits and coats.
5. agree
6. sleep
7. was
8. her
9. his, he
10. your, you’re
11. which
12. It’s, your
13. strange
14. comfortable
15. politely
STRUCTURE 83
16. less
17. well
18. skeptically
19. good
20. best
21. was
22. rings, wait
23. Has
24. were
25. is
Quiz Answers
1. b.
2. a.
3. d.
4. b.
5. b.
6. c.
7. b.
8. c.
9. a.
10. d.
11. d.
12. b.
13. c.
14. d.
15. a.
16. b.

Chapter 4
Reading
Developing strong reading skills means that you interactwith what you read—ask questions, locate main ideas, anddraw conclusions. Because the materials you read in col-
lege—from textbooks to websites—will be in English, good read-
ing comprehension skills are essential. The reading section of the
TOEFL exam tests your ability to read and understand short pas-
sages about academic topics like those you will encounter in uni-
versity courses. You will read short passages, usually from one to
five paragraphs in length, and answer several questions about each
passage.
COMPUTER TEST VS. PAPER TEST
The formatting and number of questions differ in the computer-
based vs. the paper-based reading test. However, the type and dif-
ficulty of the reading passages are the same. In both exams, you
85
86 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
can skip questions and return to them later. You can also change
your answers. The following chart compares the reading com-
prehension segments on the two tests:
Computer Test: Paper-and-Pencil:
Reading Reading 
Comprehension Comprehension
70–90 minutes 55 minutes
44–55 questions 50 questions
5–6 reading passages 5–6 reading passages
6–10 questions per passage 7–12 questions per passage
Most questions are multiple All questions are multiple 
choice, but some follow choice.
special directions.
SKILL BUILDERS
Becoming an active reader takes practice. To improve your com-
prehension skills, try the following techniques while you read:
■ Skim ahead. Scan the text before you read. Note how
the text is broken into sections, what the main topics are
in each section, and the order in which the topics are
covered. Look for highlighted key words and ideas.
■ Jump back. Review the text after you read. Go over
summaries, headings, and highlighted information. This
process will help you remember information and make
connections between ideas.
READING 87
■ Look up new words. Keep a dictionary on hand as you
read and look up any unfamiliar words. List new
vocabulary words and their definitions in a notebook so
you can review them later.
■ Highlight important information. Highlight or
underline key terms, main ideas, and new concepts as
you read. (If you don’t own the book, use a notebook to
jot down information.)
■ Take notes. Record your questions, observations, and
opinions about what you read. What is the main idea of
the passage? Do you agree with the author?
■ Connect what you read with your own experience or
with another topic you have studied. For example, if you
are reading about the 1989 student protest in
Tiananmen Square, you may note how it was similar to
or different from student protests in the United States in
the 1960s.
QUESTION TYPES IN THE READING SECTION
The reading comprehension questions on the TOEFL exam fall
into nine categories:
Test Time Saver
To use your time effectively during the exam, answer all of
the questions about one reading passage before going on
to the next one.
88 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
1. Main idea. This question type asks you to locate the
main idea of a passage or paragraph.
Examples:
■ Which sentence best summarizes the main idea of
the passage?
■ What is this paragraph mainly about?
■ What is the author’s main purpose in this passage?
■ What would be the best title for this passage?
2. Supporting details. For this kind of question, you will
identify a specific fact or detail described in the
passage.
Examples:
■ What causes Type II diabetes?
■ How many people in the United States have Type II
diabetes?
3. Exceptions. For this question type, you will identify a
specific fact or detail that was not mentioned in the
passage.
Examples:
■ Which characteristic does NOT describe the
cuttlefish?
■ The author mentions all of the following as
important causes of acid rain EXCEPT:
4. Location of information. These questions ask you to
find the place in the passage where specific information
is given.
READING 89
Examples:
■ Where in the passage does the author define the
term ecosystem?
■ Computer test only: Click on the sentence in
paragraph 3 in which the author mentions the
symptoms of lupus.
5. Vocabulary. There are two kinds of vocabulary
questions: one asks you to determine the meaning of a
word based on how it is used in the passage; the other
asks you to choose a synonym for the vocabulary word.
Examples:
■ The word intrinsic in paragraph 2 most likely means:
■ The word commotion in paragraph 5 could best be
replaced by:
■ Computer test only: Look at the word decadent in the
passage. Click on another word in the bold text that
is closest in meaning to decadent.
6. Inferences. For this question type, you will draw a
logical conclusion based on the information in the
passage.
Examples:
■ The author suggests that cloning will lead to:
■ This passage suggests that racial profiling is
discriminatory because:
7. Reference. These questions require you to determine
what a specific word (often a pronoun) or phrase refers
to in the passage.
90 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
Examples:
■ The word it in line 7 refers to:
■ Computer test only: Look at the word one in the
passage. Click on the word or phrase in the bold text
that one refers to.
8. Paraphrased sentences (computer test only). This
question type asks you to identify the sentence that
best paraphrases, or restates, one or more sentences in
the passage.
Examples:
■ What does the author mean by the sentence
Woodstock should have been a colossal failure?
■ What does the author mean by the statement
Unfortunately, many state governments have not only
permitted gambling but sponsor it through lotteries?
9. Sentence insertion (computer test only). For these
questions, you will identify the best place within a
passage to insert a new sentence. You will see several
choices marked on your computer screen with a small
square (■).
Example:
The following sentence can be added to paragraph 1.
The Everglades National Park is the largest
remaining subtropical wilderness in the continental
United States. Where would this sentence best fit in the
paragraph? Click on the square (■) to add the sentence
to the paragraph.
READING 91
LOCATING THE MAIN IDEA
Writing is communication—a writer tries to convey his thoughts
to a reader through words. When standardized tests ask you to
find the main idea of a passage, they are asking you to uncover
the writer’s motive, or why she wrote what she did.
To determine the main idea of a passage, think about a gen-
eral statement that brings together all of the ideas in a paragraph
or passage. Do not confuse the main idea of a passage with its main
topic. The topic is the subject—what a passage is about. The main
idea is what the author wants to express about the subject. To pre-
sent a main idea, many textbook writers follow the basic format
of general idea → specific support. First, they state their main
idea and then provide support for it with specific facts and details.
A first sentence may contain a main idea. However, sometimes
an author builds up to her point, in which case you may find the
main idea in the last sentence of the introductory paragraph or
even the last sentence of the entire passage.
Practice
Read the passage and then answer the following question.
Space shuttle astronauts, because they spend only about a week
in space, undergo minimal wasting of bone and muscle. But
when longer stays in microgravity or zero gravity are contem-
plated, as in a space station or a two-year roundtrip voyage to
Mars, these problems are of particular concern because they could
become acute. Fortunately, studies show that muscle atrophy can
be kept largely at bay with appropriate exercise. Unfortunately,
bone loss caused by reduced gravity cannot.
92 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
Question: What is the main point of this paragraph?
a. The U.S. government is currently planning a voyage
to Mars.
b. Muscle atrophy and bone loss are major problems for
astronauts in extended space flight.
c. Astronauts confront many dangers in space flight.
d. Short stays in space cause little bone and muscle dam-
age in humans.
Choice b is correct—It represents a general statement that
holds together all of the information in the paragraph. Choice d
is too specific to be the main idea. Choice c is too general to be
the main idea. Choice a may be true, but the passage does not
give this information.
FINDING SUPPORTING DETAILS
Supporting details are facts or specific information that provide
evidence for an author’s main idea. They often answer the ques-
tions what? when? where? why? or how? Three question types on
the reading test ask you about specific information within a pas-
sage: supporting-detail questions, exception questions, and loca-
tion of information questions. You will need to be able to:
■ identify supporting details from a passage
■ recognize information that is not provided in the passage
■ identify the place in the passage where specific
information is given
READING 93
How can you recall one fact from a passage that is five para-
graphs long? Follow these techniques as a guide:
Do not memorize. The reading test does not ask you to have
perfect recall. Instead, it measures your ability to read
carefully and know where to look for specific information.
Look for language clues as you read the passage. Writers
often use one of the following phrases to signal that they
are introducing a fact or example:
one reason is in one case specifically
for example for instance in particular
Use key words from the question. Questions have two or
three important words that tell you exactly what informa-
tion to look for in the passage. For example, in the ques-
tion How many species of penguins are there worldwide? the
key words are how many, and species. They signal to you to
look for a sentence in the passage that has a number and
the word species.
Take note of structure. As you read, pay attention to how
information is presented and in what order. Understand-
ing the organization of a passage will help you locate the
facts you need. See pages 100–103 for more about structure.
Practice
Read the following passage carefully and answer the questions that
follow it. Find the answers on page 111.
(1) Great Barrier Reef is the world’s largest network of coral
reefs, stretching 2,010 km (1,250 miles) off Australia’s
94 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
northeastern coast. (2) Although coral looks like a plant, it is
the limestone skeleton of a tiny animal called a coral polyp. (3)
The reef’s 300 species of coral create an underwater garden of
brilliant colors and intricate shapes.
(4) From microorganisms to whales, diverse life forms
make their home on the reef. (5) Over 1,500 fish species, 4,000
mollusk species, 200 bird species, 16 sea snake species, and six
sea turtle species thrive in the reef’s tropical waters. (6) The
reef is also a habitat for the endangered dugong (sea cows), moray
eels, and sharks.
(7) Although protected by the Australian government,
Great Barrier Reef faces environmental threats. (8) Crown-
of-thorns starfish feed on coral and can destroy large portions
of reef. (9) Pollution and rising water temperatures also threaten
the delicate coral.
1. How many species of coral are there in the Great Barrier
Reef?
a. 30
b. 200
c. 300
d. 3,000
2. Which of the following NOT a threat to the Great Bar-
rier Reef?
a. dugong (sea cows)
b. crown-of-thorn starfish
c. pollution
d. rising sea temperatures
READING 95
3. In which sentence does the author describe the coral polyp?
a. sentence (1)
b. sentence (2)
c. sentence (4)
d. sentence (5)
TIPS FOR VOCABULARY QUESTIONS
Active readers make a habit of looking up unfamiliar words. But
in a testing situation, you can’t use a dictionary. The following
strategies will aid you in figuring out what unfamiliar terms mean:
■ Look at context—the words and sentences surrounding
the word—for clues about meaning. For example, you
can determine what the word gullible means from this
context: Fred is so gullible. He will believe anything that
Oliver tells him. The phrase “he will believe anything”
restates the meaning of the word gullible and suggests its
meaning of being easily duped or cheated.
■ Is the word negative or positive? Using the context of
the passage, determine whether the unfamiliar term is a
negative or positive one. In the preceding example, you
can conclude that gullible is not positive in that context.
Thus, you can eliminate any answer choices that are
positive terms.
■ Replace the vocabulary word with the remaining
answers, one at a time. Does the answer choice make
sense when you read the sentence? If not, eliminate that
answer choice.
96 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
Practice
Choose the correct meaning of the italicized word. Find the
answers on page 111.
4. When you are in an interview, try not to show any overt
signs that you are nervous. Don’t shift in your chair, shake,
or stutter.
Overt means
a. subtle.
b. obnoxious.
c. obvious.
d. confident.
5. Although teaching is not a particularly lucrative career, I
wouldn’t do anything else. Knowing I’m helping others to
learn is far more important to me than money.
Lucrative means
a. highly profitable.
b. highly rewarding.
c. highly exciting.
d. highly repetitive.
MAKING INFERENCES
Inference questions on the TOEFL exam ask you to draw logi-
cal conclusions about what you read. Sometimes a writer does not
explicitly state his or her main idea or offer a conclusion. You must
infer the writer’s meaning. To do this you must carefully read the
details and facts of a passage and look for context clues that reveal
a writer’s attitude.
READING 97
Word choice—the specific words a writer chooses to describe
people, places, and things—is one of the best clues to how a
writer feels about her subject. Word choice, also called diction,
includes these forms:
■ the particular words a writer uses
■ the way words are arranged in a sentence
■ repetition of words or phrases
■ inclusion of particular details
For example, consider how word choice affects the two sen-
tences below:
A: Improved job training would reduce workplace injuries.
B: Improved job training would minimize workplace injuries.
The only difference between the two sentences is that sen-
tence A uses the word reduces and sentence B uses minimize. Both
sentences state that improved job training would result in fewer
workplace injuries. However, sentence B is stronger because of
its word choice: to minimize means to reduce to the smallest pos-
sible amount.
Even words that have similar dictionary definitions may have
different connotations, or suggested meanings. For example, con-
sider the words rich, wealthy and affluent. Although similar in
meaning, each word evokes different thoughts and feelings. Rich
implies having more than enough to fulfill normal needs, wealthy
suggests the possession of property and things of value, and afflu-
ent implies increasing wealth.
98 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
Practice
Read the passage below and answer the questions that follow. Find
the answers on page 111.
Storytelling should speak first to the heart and only second to the
intellect. It should, in Isaac Bashevis Singer’s words, “be both clear
and profound,” and it should also entertain. The new writer
should avoid creating pieces that are deliberately obscure and
impossible to understand except by a small, elite group of other
writers.
6. What is the passage suggesting about new writers?
a. They are excellent writers.
b. They write better than those who have practiced the
art of writing.
c. They think that good writing should be difficult to
understand.
d. They aim to please a wide audience.
7. What is the author implying about most readers?
a. They are not very smart.
b. They are not interested in obscure prose.
c. They do not like writing that affects their emotions.
d. They are snobs who look down on others.
ANSWERING REFERENCE QUESTIONS
Reference questions measure your understanding of what a par-
ticular sentence means. Read each passage carefully and try this
three-part strategy to find the correct answer:
1. Eliminate any answers that you know are incorrect.
2. Insert each remaining answer choice into the sentence.
READING 99
3. Decide whether the answer makes sense in the context
of the sentence. If not, eliminate it and try another.
For example, look at how the strategy works with the following
reference question.
The word they in paragraph 2 refers to:
a. the victims of heat stroke
b. the treatments for heat stroke
c. the people who administer aid to victims of heat stroke
d. the characteristics of heat stroke
Here’s the sentence in which they is used:
They are a high body temperature (which may reach 106
degrees F or more); a rapid pulse; hot, dry skin; and a blocked
sweating mechanism.
They clearly does not refer to people, so you can rule out choices
a and c. When you replace they with the remaining answer choices,
you can easily narrow your answer to the correct choice: d.
In Your Own Words
Questions that ask you to paraphrase, or reword, a
sentence test the same skills as reference questions. They
measure your ability to comprehend a sentence or
paragraph. As you read, think about what the material is
stating, then try rewriting it (on paper or in your mind) in
new terms. This will increase your comprehension skills
and improve your chances of answering paraphrased
sentence questions correctly.
100 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
RECOGNIZING STRUCTURAL PATTERNS
Just as an architect needs a blueprint when designing a building,
writers must have a plan that organizes their information and ideas.
Learning organizational strategies will help you identify common
patterns so that you can guess at what is coming ahead.
Recognizing structural techniques also helps you answer two
types of questions on the TOEFL exam: supporting-detail ques-
tions (you will be able to locate specific information in a passage)
and sentence-insertion questions (you will know where best to
place new information in a passage).
The four most common organizational patterns that writers
use are:
1. chronological order (time)
2. order of importance
3. comparison and contrast
4. cause and effect
Chronological order describes events in the order that they
happened, will happen, or should happen. History texts, mem-
oir, personal essays, and instructions often use this organization.
Writers often provide clues in the form of transitional words or
phrases to guide readers through events. Here are some common
chronological transitions:
first, second, third before after Next
now then when as soon as
Immediately suddenly soon during
while Meanwhile later Finally
in the meantime at last eventually afterward
READING 101
Order of importance arranges ideas by rank instead of time.
Writers may organize their ideas:
■ by increasing importance (least important idea→most
important idea), or
■ by decreasing importance (most important idea→least
important idea)
Newspaper articles follow the principle of decreasing impor-
tance; they give the most important information first (the who,
what, when, where, and why about an event). Arguments may fol-
low the principle of increasing importance, saving the most per-
suasive points for the end. Transitions offer clues about this type
of organizational pattern, too. The following are common tran-
sitions used to indicate order of importance:
first and foremost most important more important
moreover above all first, second, third
last but not least finally
Comparison and contrast arranges two things side by side
to show their similarities and differences. In this way, a writer can
analyze two items by seeing how they measure up to one another.
For example, this description of the two movie versions of King
Kong uses comparison and contrast:
Both versions of the monster movie used the most sophisticated
effects of their day (comparison). However, the stop-motion
animation of the 1933 film retains its magic, whereas the 
102 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
state-of-the-art special effects of 1976 seem hopelessly out of date
today (contrast).
Here are common transitions that signal that a writer is orga-
nizing her ideas through comparison and contrast.
Words Showing Similarity
similarly in the same way likewise
like in a like manner just as
and also both
Words Showing Difference
but on the other hand yet
however on the contrary in contrast
conversely while unlike
Cause and effect arranges ideas so that readers can see why
something took place (cause) and what changes happened as a
result (effect). For example, a historian may write about the causes
of the stock market crash of 1929 in the United States (investors
borrowing money on easy credit to buy stock) and the effects of
the crash (lost fortunes, business and bank closings, unemploy-
ment). The following are key words that give clues about when
a writer is describing cause and effect.
Words Indicating Cause
because of created by
since caused by
READING 103
Words Indicating Effect
therefore so
hence consequently
as a result
Practice
Consider the structure of the passage below and then answer the
following sentence-insertion question. Find the answer on page 111.
Theodore Roosevelt was born with asthma and poor eyesight. (1)
To conquer his handicaps, Teddy trained in a gym and became
a lightweight boxer while at Harvard. (2) Next, he went west
to hunt buffalo and run a cattle ranch. After returning east in
1886, he became a civil service reformer and also a police com-
missioner. (3) He entered national politics in 1896 when he
became assistant navy secretary under President McKinley. He
served in that post during the Spanish-American War. (4) Later
he led the Rough Riders on a cavalry charge up San Juan Hill
in Cuba. After achieving fame, he became Governor of New York
and then Vice President under McKinley. When McKinley died
in 1901, he assumed the presidency. In 1904, he was elected pres-
ident in his own right.
The following sentence can be added to the passage:
Yet this sickly child later won fame as a political leader, Rough
Rider, and hero of the common people.
104 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
8. Where would this sentence best fit in the passage? Choose
the number to indicate where you would add the sentence
to the passage.
a. (1)
b. (2)
c. (3)
d. (4)
QUICK QUIZ
The following are two reading passages like those you will find
on the TOEFL exam. Read each one carefully and then answer
the questions that follow.
Passage 1
The Woodstock Music and Art Fair—better known to its participants
and to history simply as “Woodstock”—should have been a colossal fail-
ure. Just a month prior to its August 15, 1969 opening, the council of
Wallkill, New York, informed the fair’s organizers that it was with-
drawing its permission to hold the festival.
Amazingly, the organizers found a new site, a large field in Wood-
stock, New York, owned by a local dairy farmer. Word spread to the pub-
lic of the fair’s new location. The event drew a larger audience than the
organizers had expected. On the first day of the fair, crowd estimates of
30,000 kept rising; traffic jams blocked most roads leading to the area.
Some musicians could not reach the site to appear at their scheduled times.
In addition, fences that were supposed to facilitate ticket collection never
materialized, so the organizers abandoned all attempts at taking tickets.
But that was not all: as the large crowd gathered, so did summer
storm clouds. It started raining on opening night and continued for much
of the three-day event. To deal with the crowd, which reached an esti-
READING 105
mated 500,000 by the third day, helicopters flew in food, doctors, and
medical supplies.
Despite all of its problems, the festival featured some of the great-
est musicians of the 1960s, including Janis Joplin; Joan Baez; Crosby,
Stills, Nash, and Young; Sly and the Family Stone; Creedence Clear-
water Revival; and Jimi Hendrix. Today many people think of Wood-
stock not only as a milestone for rock music but as the defining moment
for an entire generation.
1. The main idea of this passage is best expressed in which
sentence?
a. Most Americans think of Woodstock as a bunch of
kids dancing to music in the mud.
b. The organizers underestimated how many people the
festival would attract.
c. Despite poor planning, Woodstock was a success and
a high point for a generation of Americans.
d. The organizers succeeded in their goal of creating a
historically significant event.
2. What was the final crowd estimate?
a. 20,000
b. 30,000
c. 50,000
d. 500,000
3. Which of the following was NOT a problem faced by the
event’s organizers?
a. blocked access to the site
b. attracting musical talent
c. bad weather
d. finding a location for the festival
106 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
4. The phrase defining moment in paragraph 4 could best be
replaced by which word or phrase?
a. symbol
b. belief
c. anecdote
d. fun time
5. Where in the passage does the author describe the weather
conditions during the event?
a. at the end of paragraph 2
b. at the beginning of paragraph 3
c. at the end of paragraph 3
d. at the beginning of paragraph 4
6. The word facilitate in paragraph 2 is closest in meaning to
a. make easier.
b. make more difficult.
c. build a facility.
d. increase.
7. What does the author mean by the statement the Woodstock
Music and Art Fair should have been a colossal failure?
a. Woodstock should not have happened.
b. Woodstock was a financial failure because the orga-
nizers did not collect tickets.
c. When you mix dairy farmers with young rock fans, you
are asking for trouble.
d. The large crowd and other problems could easily have
resulted in a crisis.
READING 107
8. The passage suggests that
a. a free concert would never happen today.
b. area residents thought the rock fans were weird.
c. the impact of the event exceeded expectations.
d. music brings people together in a way other art forms
cannot.
Passage 2
The largest of the world’s 17 penguin species, emperor penguins stand
nearly four feet and weigh up to 90 pounds. These sea birds never set
foot on dry land. (1) An estimated 200,000 breeding pairs live in about
40 penguin colonies scattered along the coasts of Antarctica. (2) Their
waterproofed feathers, flipper-like wings, and streamlined bodies make
them excellent swimmers and divers. On ice they can travel distances
up to 50 miles by “tobogganing”—gliding on their stomachs while
pushing with their wings and feet.
(3) Emperor penguins breed during the Antarctic winter in some
of the world’s most severe weather conditions (temperatures of –80 F
and winds up to 112 miles per hour). Breeding during the winter
allows chicks to mature in midsummer when food is plentiful. After the
female lays a single egg, the male holds it in a fold of skin near his feet
for a two-month incubation period. During this time he huddles with
other males to keep warm. (4) The male moves very little and does not
eat, usually losing up to a third of his body weight. Meanwhile the females
go to sea and dive for fish so that when they return they can feed and
care for the newly hatched chicks. After the male restores his body
weight, both parents take turns caring for their young.
The world’s emperor penguin population declined in the last 50 years
due to a period of warming ocean temperatures. Warm water shrinks
ice cover and reduces the population of krill—a small crustacean that
108 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
is the emperor penguin’s staple food. Today the emperor penguin popu-
lation has stabilized, but warming trends could again threaten this mag-
nificent sea bird.
9. What is the author’s main purpose in this passage?
a. to describe the recent plight of the emperor penguin
b. to show the differences between penguin species
c. to describe the characteristics and breeding practice of
the emperor penguin
d. to describe the eating habits of the emperor penguin
10. Which of the following is NOT true of the emperor
penguin?
a. They can travel 50 miles by gliding.
b. They breed during Antarctic summer.
c. The male incubates the egg.
d. They can withstand severe weather.
11. The word stabilized in paragraph 3 is closest in meaning to
a. held steady.
b. increased.
c. slowed.
d. fluctuated.
12. The passage suggests that
a. the female emperor penguin should take better care of
her young.
b. no animal can survive in subzero temperatures.
c. scientists have never been close enough to observe the
emperor penguin.
d. changes in the global environment can threaten the
emperor penguin.
READING 109
13. What makes up the staple diet of the emperor penguin?
a. cuttlefish
b. krill
c. seaweed
d. fried clams
14. Where in the passage does the author describe the char-
acteristics that make emperor penguins excellent swim-
mers?
a. at the beginning of paragraph 1
b. at the end of paragraph 1
c. at the beginning of paragraph 2
d. at the end of paragraph 2
15. Why do male emperor penguins form a huddle?
a. to protect the eggs from sea lions
b. to share their food supply
c. to maintain body heat in harsh temperatures
d. to share parenting advice
16. The following sentence can be inserted into the passage:
Instead they feed and breed in the frigid waters and sea ice of
the southern Ocean.
Where would this sentence best fit in the passage? Choose
the number to indicate where you would add the sentence
to the passage.
a. (1)
b. (2)
c. (3)
d. (4)
110 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
CHAPTER HIGHLIGHTS
■ Practice active reading techniques, such as highlighting
and taking notes.
■ Schedule regular reading time into your study plan.
■ Familiarize yourself with the reading question types,
including those on the computer-based exam.
■ Main ideas are general statements that bring together all
the ideas in a passage.
■ Supporting details are specific examples and facts that
back up a main idea.
■ Inferences are conclusions based on what the writer
suggests or implies.
■ Word choice is the particular words a writer uses to
describe his subject.
■ Connotation is the suggested meaning of words.
■ Learn the strategies for determining the meaning of
unfamiliar vocabulary words.
■ Review the three-part strategy for answering reference
questions.
■ For paraphrased sentence questions, practice “rewriting”
material as you read.
■ Study the four most common patterns writers use to
organize their ideas.
■ Familiarize yourself with the transitional phrases used to
introduce specific information, chronology, important
points, comparisons, contrasts, causes, and effects.
READING 111
Practice Answers
1. c.
2. a.
3. b.
4. c. Because overt is not a positive characteristic in this con-
text, you can eliminate choices a and d, which are posi-
tive words in this setting. Choice b is too negative;
nervous behaviors are not considered obnoxious.
5. a. Because the writer says that money is not important
to him, you can determine the meaning of lucrative has
something to do with money. When you replace lucra-
tive with “highly profitable” in the sentence, it makes
sense.
6. c.
7. b. The author uses the phrases “deliberately obscure” and
“impossible to understand” to give a negative description
of the “new writers” he is addressing. When the author
states that obscure writing is “impossible to understand
except by a small, elite group of other writers,” most likely
he is not putting down the average reader but implying
that most readers are not interested in obscure writing.
8. a. This passage is organized by chronological order.
Note the use of the transitional words next, later, when,
and then.
112 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
Quiz Answers
1. c.
2. d.
3. b.
4. a.
5. b.
6. a.
7. d.
8. c.
9. c.
10. b.
11. a.
12. d.
13. b.
14. b.
15. c.
16. a.
Chapter 5
Writing
C ollege success depends on your ability to express your-self clearly and accurately in written English. At theuniversity level, you will receive numerous writing assign-
ments—term papers, essay exams, lab reports—and you will need
to show you can organize and develop your thoughts through writ-
ing. The writing section is a required part of the computer-based
TOEFL exam; everyone must complete an essay on the day of
the test. The paper-and-pencil version of the TOEFL exam does
not include a writing section. The writing test is a separate exam
called the Test of Written English (TWE), which is offered in
the United States five times a year.
Both the writing portion of the TOEFL exam and the TWE
exam test your ability to generate ideas and support them through
details and evidence. They measure how effectively and logically
you organize your thoughts, using correct grammar, appropriate
word choice, and varied sentence structure and vocabulary. In both
113
114 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
tests, you will be given 30 minutes in which to compose a short
essay (about four to five paragraphs long) about a given topic. The
topics are designed to be general so that you do not need any spe-
cialized knowledge to respond to them.
COMPUTER TEST VS. PAPER TEST
The writing section of the computer-based TOEFL exam differs
from the paper-based TWE exam. Although the types of writ-
ing prompts are the same, the TWE exam is offered separately
from the paper-based TOEFL exam and at limited times, whereas
the computer-based test requires that you write an essay on the
same day as the rest of the TOEFL exam. Both tests give you 30
minutes to respond to one pre-selected topic. The following
chart compares the two tests:
Paper-and-Pencil:
Computer Test: Test of Written English 
Writing (TWE)
Mandatory part of the Separate test (not part of 
computer test. the paper-and-pencil TOEFL 
exam).
Offered whenever the Offered only five times a 
computer test is given. year. If you need to take the
TWE exam, select a TOEFL
exam date when the TWE
exam is also offered. (There
is no additional cost.)
WRITING 115
TYPES OF WRITING PROMPTS
The computer test and the TWE exam use the same type of writ-
ing prompt—a general topic and a question about that topic. Most
prompts present a statement, situation, or scenario and ask you
to take a position and explain it. They can be broken down into
three parts:
1. a statement or situation to consider
2. a question
3. directions
Note the three parts in this example:
Essay topic randomly All test-takers respond to 
selected by computer. same essay topic.
Other test-takers may 
have different topics.
Essay topics posted on No published list of TWE 
www.toefl.org. exam essay topics.
You may handwrite your You must handwrite your 
essay or type it on the essay.
computer.
Your writing score is com- Your TWE exam essay score 
bined with your score on is reported separately from 
the structure section. It your TOEFL exam score.
counts as 50 percent of your 
total structure/writing score.
116 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
(1) Many people feel that American society is too competitive. (2)
Do you agree or disagree? (3) Use specific reasons and examples to
support your position.
Some prompts skip the first part (statement/situation). Oth-
ers incorporate the first part within the question. Here is an
example of the latter:
(1 and 2 combined) Do you agree that “honesty is the best pol-
icy”? (3) Use specific reasons and examples to support your answer.
Although all of the writing prompts fit the basic formula
described above, they can be divided more specifically into five
types:
1. Agree or disagree. The most common prompt on the
TOEFL exam, this type asks you to agree or disagree
with a statement. Here is an example:
Test Time Saver
Decide beforehand if you are going to handwrite or type
your essay.
If you are typing it, familiarize yourself with the word-
processing software used on the TOEFL exam (you can do
this at www.toefl.org). Handwritten essays must fit on two
sides of a single page. Represent yourself in the best light
by writing legibly and neatly.
WRITING 117
Thomas Edison, the renowned inventor, once said, “Genius is
one percent inspiration, ninety-nine percent perspiration. Do
you agree or disagree with this statement? Use specific reasons
and examples to support your answer.
2. Explain your position. The second most common
prompt, this type asks you to state your position on a
general issue. Often prompts follow this pattern:
“Some people prefer x. Others y. Which do you
prefer?” Here are some examples:
Some people prefer to live in the quiet of the country; others
prefer the hustle and bustle of the city. Which do you prefer?
Use specific reasons and examples to support your answer.
Who makes a better leader: someone who is loved, or someone
who is feared? Take a position and explain your answer.
3. Describe a characteristic. This prompt asks you to
identify an important characteristic of a person, place,
or thing. Unlike the first two kinds of prompts that
narrow your responses, this type allows you to choose
the characteristic you want to discuss.
What are some of the qualities of a good teacher? Use specific
reasons and examples to support your answer.
People define “success” in different ways. In your opinion, what
one characteristic best defines success? Use specific reasons and
example to support your choice.
118 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
4. What if? This prompt presents you with an “if-then”
type of scenario: If x happened, then what would you
do? Questions may be open-ended or may limit your
choices to two possible reactions to the situation.
If you could travel anywhere in the world, what one place would
you go to? Why? Use specific reasons and examples to support
your choice.
If you could meet a famous person from any historical time
period, who would it be? Why? Use specific reasons and exam-
ples to support your choice.
5. Cause or effect. For this type of prompt, you will
consider a phenomenon and look for its causes, or you
will consider a cause and look at its effects. You do not
need expert knowledge to respond; use your common
sense and personal experiences to answer.
The Internet allows people to access information in an instant.
How has the speed of this technology changed people’s behavior?
Use specific reasons and examples to support your answer. (Dis-
cuss effect.)
Some citizens do not vote in elections. Why do you think some
people do not take advantage of their right to vote? (Discuss
cause.)
TIPS FOR THE WRITING TEST
To save time and get your best score on the writing test, follow
these guidelines:
WRITING 119
Stick to your assigned topic. You cannot choose your own
topic. If you write about a different topic, you will receive
a score of “0.”
Read questions carefully. If a prompt asks you to discuss only
one characteristic, limit yourself to one. If you write about
three characteristics, you will receive a lower score.
Limit your focus. For example, if a question asks you to
describe some of the qualities you value in a friend, quickly
choose two or three characteristics for your essay. You do
not have enough time or space to discuss more.
Impose conditions. Some questions give you only two
choices for your response, but that does not mean you are
limited to a simple “yes” or “no” answer. For example, a
prompt may ask you: “Do you agree or disagree that all stu-
dents should wear school uniforms instead of whatever
clothing they desire?” You can impose some conditions in
your answer: “Students should not have to wear school
Find Topics Online
All of the writing prompts used on the computer-based
TOEFL exam are available online. Although you cannot
select which one you want to write about on the test,
make sure to review the topics list. Pick several prompts
and practice composing essays (be sure to time yourself ).
To view the topics:
1. Go to www.toefl.org.
2. Click on “Test Prep.”
3. Click on “Writing Topics.”
120 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
uniforms, but there should be restrictions about what kind
of clothing students can wear.”
ALL ABOUT SCORING
The scoring system for the computer test and the TWE exam is
the same: two readers independently rate your essay and give it
a score from 0–6. The two scores are then averaged to determine
your final essay score. For example, if one reader gives your essay
a score of 6 and the other a 5, your score will be 5.5. If there is a
discrepancy of more than one point, (e.g., one reader rates your
essay a 4, and the other a 6), a third reader will independently score
your essay.
The developers of the TOEFL exam created a scoring guide
to aid readers in rating essays. The guide names specific criteria
for each score. The official writing guide is available online at
www.toefl.org or in the exam bulletin. Review the qualities of a
top-rated essay. The more you know about what official exam read-
ers are looking for, the more likely you will meet those expecta-
tions. The following guidelines are adapted from the TOEFL
exam “Writing Score Guide.”
Your Guide to Scoring
Score An essay with this score:
6 ■ fully addresses the essay topic
■ makes a clear thesis statement (main idea)
■ gives appropriate details and examples to support its
thesis
■ is organized logically and develops ideas thoroughly
WRITING 121
■ uses correct grammar and makes appropriate word
choices consistently
■ demonstrates variety in sentence structure and
vocabulary
5 ■ addresses the essay topic, but responds to some parts
more effectively than others
■ makes a thesis statement
■ gives details and examples to support its thesis
■ has an overall effective organization and develops
ideas (e.g., four or five well-developed paragraphs)
■ uses correct grammar throughout most of the essay
■ demonstrates some variety in sentence structure and
vocabulary
4 ■ addresses the essay topic, but does not respond to all
of its parts
■ uses some details to support a thesis
■ is organized but does not use the most effective or
logical approach
■ develops ideas adequately (e.g., four developed
paragraphs)
■ includes grammatical and usage errors that may
confuse meaning
■ demonstrates less variety in sentence structure and a
more limited vocabulary
3 ■ does not have a clear thesis
■ has weak organization and development (e.g., two or
three short paragraphs)
■ offers few or irrelevant details to support its thesis
■ uses words and phrases inappropriately
■ makes several grammatical errors
122 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
2 ■ lacks focus
■ gives few or no details
■ is disorganized and underdeveloped (e.g., only two
short paragraphs)
■ makes serious and frequent grammatical errors
1 ■ is incoherent
■ is underdeveloped (e.g., only one paragraph)
■ makes serious and persistent grammatical errors
0 ■ is blank
■ simply copies the essay topic but does not respond 
to it
■ addresses another topic
■ uses a language other than English
■ consists only of a series of random keystrokes
KEEPING TIME ON THE ESSAY EXAM
You have just half an hour to write a top-rated essay. Should you
plunge right in or take time to plan your essay first? Even though
time is limited, your chances of doing well increase if you organize
your thoughts before you write. The writing process includes three
important steps: planning, writing, and proofreading. To make time
for each step, follow these guidelines during the writing test:
5–10 minutes plan (choose a thesis, brainstorm, and outline
your essay)
15–20 minutes write
5 minutes proofread (reread for errors or to adjust word
choice)
= 30 minutes
WRITING 123
CREATING A STRONG ESSAY
Planning is an essential part of good writing, even within the lim-
ited time frame of the writing test. Your prewriting process should
include formulating a thesis, brainstorming for supporting details,
and making a basic outline of what you will write.
To begin, carefully read the writing prompt. Make sure you
fully understand it. Then consider your answer to its question.
Your answer will be the main idea or thesis of your essay. A
strong thesis does not merely repeat or restate the question or
the essay prompt. A thesis statement should:
■ answer the question asked in the prompt
■ tell the reader what your subject is
■ let the reader know what you think or feel about the
subject
■ use active, clear language
Consider the following prompt:
Do you agree or disagree with the following statement? E-mail
(electronic mail) is a less personal form of communication than
letter writing. Use specific reasons and details to support your
answer.
The following sentences are not thesis statements:
■ E-mail is an easy, instantaneous kind of communication.
■ Many people like to use e-mail for their personal
correspondence.
124 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
These statements do not answer the question directly, nor do
they tell the reader what the writer thinks or feels about the subject.
The following are thesis statements. They respond directly
to the question:
■ I believe that e-mail has made communication between
people more personal than ever.
■ In my opinion, e-mail is a less personal form of
communication than letter writing.
Practice 1
Create thesis statements for three to five writing prompts (use
some from this chapter or select some from the writing topics list
at www.toefl.org). Check your statements against the criteria
listed in this section and see how they rate.
NEXT STEP: BRAINSTORMING
Once you know how you will answer the question in the prompt,
you can begin to brainstorm—think up ideas—that will support
your thesis. Use one sheet of paper to list three to five reasons,
examples, or details that support your main idea.
Brainstorming, also called free writing, is a technique in
which you write down whatever comes to mind. To brainstorm,
follow this strategy:
■ Write non-stop for two to three minutes. Keep your
hand moving to get your ideas out.
■ Write down as many ideas as you can. Don’t edit
yourself; write whatever comes to mind.
■ Pick the strongest ideas for your essay.
WRITING 125
For both the computer-based test and the TWE exam, you
will be given a piece of scrap paper for making notes. Because this
paper will not be graded, don’t worry about grammar or struc-
ture while you brainstorm. You can also write your notes in your
native language if you choose—just be sure to use standard Eng-
lish in your essay.
The following is an example of how you might brainstorm
supporting details for the e-mail prompt above:
Thesis: In my opinion, e-mail is a less personal form of com-
munication than letter writing.
Why?
■ people take less time to write e-mails than letters
■ people don’t choose their words carefully in e-mails
■ e-mails don’t show a person’s handwriting or choice of
stationery
■ e-mails are just words on a machine; letters tell more
about a person
Examples:
e-mails I write to my friends
letters my grandparents wrote to each other during their
courtship
Practice 2
Brainstorm three to five reasons, examples, or details to support
the thesis statements you formulated in Practice 1. Check your
ideas against the criteria listed in this section and see how they
rate.
126 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
MAKING AN OUTLINE
Outlines are an important part of your planning process. They
help you to put your ideas in a logical order and alert you to any
gaps in your supporting examples that you need to fill. Gener-
ally, essays follow a basic structure that includes three parts: an
introduction (states your thesis), the body (explains and supports
your thesis), and a conclusion (restates your thesis). Follow this
structure in your outline, too. Plan on writing a five-paragraph
essay, listing one point on your outline for each paragraph. Note
how the body of the essay is divided into three supporting ideas:
1. Introduction
2. Body: Support 1
3. Body: Support 2
4. Body: Support 3
5. Conclusion
The following is an expanded outline based on the e-mail
prompt described earlier in this chapter. The outline organizes the
supporting ideas by increasing importance. It includes reasons that
support the thesis and examples that support each reason:
1. Introduction
Thesis: In my opinion, e-mail is a less personal form of
communication than letter writing.
2. Body
Reason 1: People take less time to write e-mails than
letters.
Examples: My friends & I write quick, short e-mails—
they don’t take a lot of thought.
WRITING 127
My grandparents took hours, even days, to write
long letters.
3. Body
Reason 2: People don’t choose their words carefully in e-
mails.
Examples: I don’t bother to check my spelling or
grammar in my e-mails.
My grandparents wrote their letters using care-
ful, correct sentences.
Winning Formula: Order of Importance
The locations of your introduction and your conclusion are
obvious. However, you need a pattern, or structure, to
organize the ideas in the body of your essay. Because the
prompts on the writing exam ask you to take a position on
a subject, you are essentially developing a brief argument
in your essay. And the most effective strategy for making
an argument is to organize your ideas by their importance,
or rank. Order of importance can arrange ideas in two
ways:
• by increasing importance (least important
idea→most important idea).
• by decreasing importance (most important
idea→least important idea).
Either arrangement is appropriate. However, if you
develop your essay by increasing importance, you present
your least important idea first and save your strongest idea
for last, making a greater impact in your conclusion.
128 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
4. Body
Reason 3: E-mails are just words on a machine; letters tell
more about a person.
Examples: I read and write e-mails on an impersonal,
gray computer screen.
My grandmother’s lilac-scented stationery and
cursive writing reveal a little about who she was.
My grandfather’s blue airmail letters capture a bit
of history.
5. Conclusion
I believe that electronic mail is a convenient, fast way to
communicate, but not as personal as letter writing. Unlike
e-mails, the careful sentences and characteristic hand-
writing in my grandparents’ letters leave a personal record
of who they were, how they lived, and what they felt.
Practice 3
Make an expanded outline for one of the prompts you used in
Practice 1 and 2. As you create your outline, you will probably
notice where you need to add examples or work out your ideas.
A STRONG INTRODUCTION
With a detailed outline in hand, you are ready to write. Because
you only have 15 to 20 minutes to compose your essay, don’t waste
time perfecting your introduction. A good way to begin is to restate
in your own words the statement or situation in the prompt and
then give your thesis. Here is an example:
Some people prefer living in the country. Others prefer the
crowds and energy of the city. For me, the noise, lights, and
WRITING 129
movement of the city are more comforting than a quiet, dark,
and still night in the country.
Another way to write a strong introduction is to include your
thesis and a summary of the evidence (supporting details) you will
present:
Today, the Internet allows us to access information in an instant.
This technology has improved our lives by making it easier to
research topics that interest us, find and buy products we need,
and exchange information with others.
Note how this introduction outlines the three main parts the
essay’s body: how the Internet makes it easier to (1) research top-
ics, (2) find and buy products, and (3) exchange information.
THE BODY: SUPPORTING PARAGRAPHS
After you have written your introduction, begin composing the
body of your essay (about three paragraphs long). To create an effec-
tive essay, each paragraph in your essay needs to be effective, too.
Follow these guidelines as you write each supporting paragraph:
■ Avoid introducing several ideas within one para-
graph. By definition, a paragraph is a group of sentences
about the same idea.
■ Treat each paragraph as a mini-essay, with its own
thesis (a topic sentence that expresses the main idea of
the paragraph) and supporting details (examples).
■ List at least one detail or example for each main
supporting idea.
■ Keep each paragraph about 3–4 sentences long. Your
130 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
essay for the TOEFL exam will be short. If you write
more sentences in each paragraph, you may run out of
time and space. If you write fewer, you will most likely
not develop your idea sufficiently.
■ Use transitions. Key words and phrases like more
important, similarly, first, for example, and in particular can
help guide your reader through your essay. For more
transitional phrases, see pages 100–103 in Chapter 4.
ACTIVE VS. PASSIVE VOICE
For clear, direct writing, use the active voice. In English, voice
expresses a relationship between the verb and the subject of the
sentence or its direct object. When you write in the active voice,
the subject of the sentence causes, or is the source of, the action
(verb). When you use the passive voice, the subject does not per-
form the action, but rather is acted upon. Sentences in the pas-
sive voice are often wordier and more difficult to understand. Here
are some examples of active vs. passive voice:
Active voice: We suggest that you organize your ideas by
importance.
Passive voice: It is suggested that you organize your ideas
by importance. (Note that this sentence does not say who per-
formed the action.)
Active voice: Her brother typed the letter.
Passive voice: The letter was typed by her brother. (Here
the doer of the action is the direct object brother, not the sub-
ject of the sentence, letter.)
WRITING 131
IN CONCLUSION
Use the last paragraph of your essay to sum up your argument.
Avoid introducing new topics or ideas. Your concluding paragraph
should:
■ show that you have covered your topic fully
■ restate your thesis in different words
■ make readers feel that have learned something
meaningful from your argument
Here is a sample conclusion using the writing prompt about
whether one prefers living in the city or the country:
Give me the grime and rush of the city over the “peaceful” coun-
tryside any day. Some people find inspiration in the solitude of
the country, but I find my inspiration in the mix of people, sky-
scrapers, and the fast pace of the city.
THE LAST STEP: PROOFREADING
Because you have only about five minutes to proofread, you don’t
have time to substantially revise or rewrite your piece. Organiz-
ing your argument and providing adequate support must happen
before you write, when you are outlining your essay. The goal of
proofreading is to give your essay a final “polish” by checking your
spelling, correcting grammatical errors, and, if needed, chang-
ing word order or word choice. To proofread, carefully read your
essay, paying attention to anything that doesn’t sound right. The
following checklist outlines some basic grammatical problems to
look out for as you proofread. (For more information about each
of these topics, review Chapter 3, Structure.)
132 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
Make sure your nouns and verbs agree. The subject of the
sentence must match the verb in number. If the subject is
singular, the verb is singular. If the subject is plural, the verb
is plural.
Make sure pronouns and antecedents agree. An antecedent
is the noun represented by a pronoun. Pronouns and
antecedents must agree in number. If the antecedent is sin-
gular, the pronoun is singular; if the antecedent is plural,
the pronoun is plural.
Check your modifiers. Even native speakers of English con-
fuse adjectives and adverbs. Adjectives modify nouns and
pronouns; adverbs describe verbs, adjectives, or other
adverbs.
Avoid double negatives. The use of double negatives is
unnecessary and redundant. Remember that there are more
negatives than the obvious no, not, never, neither, and nor.
There is also hardly and barely that act as negatives in your
sentences.
Keep your verb tense consistent. Switching tense within
a sentence can change its meaning. Generally, a sentence
or paragraph that begins in the present tense should con-
tinue in the present tense.
Review prepositional idioms. If you have studied the list of
prepositional idioms on pages 73–75, you may be able to
“hear” whether a preposition (to, of, about, for, with, about, on,
upon) sounds right with a particular phrase or verb.
COMMONLY CONFUSED WORDS
The following list contains 20 of the most commonly confused
word pairs or groups, along with a brief definition of each. Mark
the words that you often confuse and study them.
WRITING 133
Confusing Words Quick Definition
accept recognize
except excluding
access means of approaching
excess extra
affect (verb) to influence
effect (noun) a result
effect (verb) to bring about
assure to make certain (assure someone)
ensure to make certain
insure to make certain (financial value)
beside next to
besides in addition to
bibliography list of writings
biography a life story
complement match
compliment praise
decent well mannered
descent decline, fall
desert arid, sandy region
dessert sweet served after a meal
disburse to pay
disperse to spread out
disinterested no strong opinion either way;
impartial
uninterested don’t care
elicit to stir up
illicit illegal
134 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
farther beyond
further additional
imply hint, suggest
infer assume, deduce
personal (adjective) Individual, private
personnel (noun) employees
principal (adjective) main
principal (noun) person in charge
principle standard
than in contrast to
then next
their belonging to them
there in a place
they’re they are
who substitute for he, she, or they
whom substitute for him, her, or them
your belonging to you
you’re you are
Practice Writing Prompt
Time yourself (30-minute limit) and compose an essay answer-
ing the following writing prompt.
We are often surprised, even awed, by the experiences of our ances-
tors. Describe a time when you learned something important about
your family history. Use specific reasons and examples to support
your answer.
WRITING 135
The following are model essays based on the writing prompt
above. The first is a sample 6 score, followed by a sample 4 and
sample 1 score. After you read each of them, consider how you
would rate your own essay using the criteria of the TOEFL exam
listed on pages 120-122.
Sample 6 Score
My dad was not usually the type to talk about much, especially
about his past. I knew some things about his background: He left
Hungary in 1956, after the Revolution. He had fought with the
rebels in Budapest. When he settled in France, he left behind his
parents and 11 brothers and sisters. That was all I knew.
When I turned fourteen, my dad began to tell me more. He
thought I was old enough to hear about his role in the Hungar-
ian Revolution. The Revolution started as a student protest
against the Communists in October of 1956. It ended in Novem-
ber when Soviet tanks rolled into Budapest and crushed the rebel-
lion. My father, who was only 22 years old, served in the rebel
army.
I wanted to know all the details. How did he get involved?
How did he escape? But the question I most wanted to know was
this: Why did he fight? I wanted to know how a young man could
believe in something so strongly that he was willing to die for it.
My dad gave a lot of reasons for his role in the rebellion. First,
the Communists were ruining the economy. Even though he
worked as a toolmaker, my dad could not always afford to buy
clothes or food. “But what I really could not live with,” he said,
“was not being able to say what I wanted.” If you spoke up against
the government, you could go to jail, or worse.
Today, my dad sometimes complains about France. He says
136 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
that the politicians are crooked, criminals have too many rights,
and parents are not strict enough with their children. But I don’t
need to remind him that at least in his new country, he can com-
plain as loudly as he pleases.
Sample 4 Score
The summer I was fourteen, I learned something about my dad.
He never talked much and I didn’t really know that much about
him. When I turned fourteen, he thought I was old enough to
hear more. He decided it was time to tell me about the Hungar-
ian Revolution.
My dad was a toolmaker in Hungary. Because he didn’t like
the Communist government, he decided to join the protests led
by students angry at the government. That’s how the rebellion
started. The Communists wouldn’t let anyone talk bad about the
government, and the protesters were attacked. That started the
fighting. My dad was only 22 years old then.
I wanted to know why he decided to fight. He told me that
because of the communist government, he couldn’t make enough
money to buy food and clothes. The most important thing,
though, was freedom of speech. He couldn’t say what he wanted.
You could go to jail for criticizing the government.
My dad escaped with the other refugees, and he has lived in
France since 1956. He complains about France a lot, especially
the politicians. But he knows that here, no one is going to put
him in jail for that.
Sample 1 Score
I was surprised by my dad when he told me about the Hungar-
ian revelution he fought. I knew before that he fought but I didn’t
no anything else about it. It was a short war and the communists
WRITING 137
one. He was in the army. He didn’t like to talk much so that’s part
of why I was so surprized. One question I had, was, why did he
fight. He said he didn’t like the government and they’d take you
away for just saying that. I can’t imagine such a thing. I would
want to fight to. That’s not the way it is in France or America.
This is a really grate country and I’m glad to live here.
CHAPTER HIGHLIGHTS
■ Review the list of TOEFL exam writing prompts at
www.toefl.org.
■ Time yourself and practice writing essays about several
prompts.
■ Familiarize yourself with the scoring system and the
criteria for a top-rated essay.
■ Do not write about a topic other than the one assigned
to you. If you write about a different topic, you will
receive a score of 0.
■ Plan on writing five paragraphs: an introduction, three
supporting paragraphs, and a conclusion.
■ Aim to write about three to four sentences in each
paragraph.
■ Give yourself about 5–10 minutes to plan, 15–20
minutes to write, and 5 minutes to proofread your essay.
■ The prewriting process includes stating your thesis,
brainstorming, and outlining.
■ Use your outline to organize your essay and fill in gaps
where supporting details are needed.
■ Proofread for grammatical errors and word choice; do
not revise or rewrite.

Appendix A
Test Details
T he computer TOEFL exam is offered almost every day inthe United States. However, every test location does notgive the exam every day. Depending on demand, test cen-
ters may give the computer test daily, weekly, or monthly. You may
be able to schedule a test date in as little as three days, but plan to
register at least six to eight weeks in advance (as spaces can fill
quickly). When registering, keep in mind that the busiest testing
months are October, November, December, April, and May.
The paper test is given less frequently and is available in
fewer locations. At the time of publication, the test dates for the
paper exam in 2004 include the following:
■ January 17, 2004
■ March 12, 2004
■ May 15, 2004
139
140 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
Note that not all test locations are open on all dates. Con-
tact your Regional Registration Center (RRC) to ask about avail-
able test dates.
REGISTRATION FOR THE COMPUTER TEST
To schedule a test date for the TOEFL computer exam, follow
one of these methods:
■ Call 800-468-6335 for a test center in the United
States, Canada, or a U.S. territory. You will need a credit
card to schedule by phone.
■ Call 443-751-4862, if you live outside the United
States, but plan to take the exam at a U.S. test center.
■ Complete the registration form in the TOEFL
Information Bulletin and mail the form with your
payment (credit card, check, or money order) to
Before You Start:
Get the TOEFL Information Bulletin
The TOEFL Information Bulletin for Computer-Based and
Paper-Based Testing includes important information about
the exam: a list of test sites, institution codes (to report
your scores to the college or university to which you are
applying), a registration form, test instructions, and other
details. You can pick up a bulletin at an admissions or
international student office at most universities or:
• call the ETS at 609-771-7100.
• download a bulletin online at www.toefl.org.
TEST DETAILS 141
Educational Testing Service, P.O. Box 6159, Princeton,
NJ 08541-6159.
To take the test in another country, call the Regional Regis-
tration Center (RRC) in your area. A complete list of RRCs is
available in the TOEFL Information Bulletin. You can also sched-
ule a test date by mailing or faxing an International Test Sched-
uling Form (available in the exam bulletin) to your RRC.
REGISTRATION FOR THE PAPER TEST
You can register for the TOEFL paper exam in two ways:
■ Fill out the registration form in the TOEFL Information
Bulletin and fax or mail the form to Educational Testing
Service, P.O. Box 6159, Princeton, NJ 08541-6159,
U.S.A. (fax: 609-771-7710).
■ Register online at www.toefl.org. You will need a credit
card to schedule online.
If you can’t make your test date, you may reschedule or can-
cel your appointment. To reschedule or cancel, call 800-468-
6335 (for U.S. test centers) or contact your RRC at least three
days before your scheduled test date. If you decide to resched-
ule, you will be charged a $40 fee. For canceled dates, you can
How Much Does the Test Cost?
Both the computer and paper versions of the TOEFL exam
cost $130 in the United States. The test fee may vary in
certain countries.
142 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
receive a partial refund of $65 if you contact the testing center
within the proper time frame and fill out a Refund Request Form
(available in the exam bulletin).
SCORING: THE COMPUTER TEST
Test takers of the computer TOEFL exam will receive a total score
of 0 to 300 points. The total score is made up of three sections
with the following score ranges:
Listening 0–30
Structure/Writing 0–30
Reading 0–30
To determine your total score, add your section scores, mul-
tiply by 10, and divide by 3.
Your essay is graded separately on a scale of 0–6. The essay
rating is then incorporated into your Structure/Writing score,
making up about half of the 30 points for that section. For more
information about the scoring system of the essay test, see pages
120–122 in Chapter 5.
You will be able to view your Listening and Reading scores
on your computer screen immediately after completing the exam.
Because your essay will not yet be read and graded, you will see
only a score range for the Structure/Writing portion of the test.
SCORING: THE PAPER TEST
The scoring scale for the paper-and-pencil TOEFL exam ranges
from 310 to 677 points. Each of the test’s three sections makes
up one-third of your total score. The TWE exam is scored
TEST DETAILS 143
separately on a scale of 1 to 6, and reported separately from your
total TOEFL exam score.
A score of 500 to 517 points on the paper test corresponds
to a score of 173 to 187 points on the computer test. Tables avail-
able on the TOEFL exam bulletin offer more information about
how the computer-test scores compare to paper-test scores. The
bulletin also offers percentile charts that help you interpret your
TOEFL exam score.
The TOEFL exam has no passing or failing scores. Each insti-
tution decides the minimum test score that it accepts. Aim to score
above the minimum admission requirement set by the college or
university to which you are applying.
CANCELING YOUR SCORE
For those taking the computer test, you can elect to cancel your
scores when you view them on your screen after you complete
the test. The paper test allows you to cancel your scores by fill-
ing out the score cancellation section of your answer sheet at the
test center or by calling 609-771-7100 within seven days of your
test date. However, you cannot cancel your scores after you have
received your score report.
Once canceled, your scores will not be reported to you or any
institutions and you will not receive a refund of your test payment.
Canceled scores on the paper-based TOEFL exam cannot be rein-
stated. If you cancel your scores on the computer-based exam, you
can reinstate them within 60 days by faxing or mailing a written
request to Educational Testing Service, P.O. Box 6159, Prince-
ton, NJ 08541-6159 (fax: 609-771-7710). Your request should give
144 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
your name, date of birth, daytime phone number, appointment
number, and a $10 reinstatement fee.
OFFICIAL SCORE REPORTS
You will receive one free examinee score report and up to four
official free score reports sent to institutions of your choice. You
must select which institutions will receive your scores on the day
of the test. You can order additional score reports by filling out
a Score Report Request Form (available in the exam bulletin) and
paying a $15 fee for each report. Note that scores older than two
years are not kept on file and can’t be reported.
The following chart describes when your test scores will be
mailed to you:
Notify ETS if you haven’t received your scores after 4 weeks
(computer test with typed essay); 7 weeks (computer test with
handwritten essay); or 8 weeks (paper-and-pencil test).
SCORES BY PHONE
To find out your scores on the same day they are mailed, call one
of the following numbers:
Exam Type Mailing Date
Computer test with typed essay 2 weeks after test
Computer test with handwritten essay 5 weeks after test
Paper-and-pencil test 5 weeks after test
TEST DETAILS 145
■ 888-863-3544 (United States, Canada, or U.S. territories)
■ 609-771-7262 (all other locations
■ 609-771-7714 TTY (hearing impaired only)
This service costs $10. To learn your scores by phone, you
need a touch-tone phone, your 16-digit appointment number or
7-digit paper registration number, your date of birth, your test
date, and a credit card to pay the fee.
TAKING THE TEST AGAIN
You may take the TOEFL exam as many times as you wish. How-
ever, you can’t take it more than one time in a calendar month,
even if you have canceled your scores. If you take the test more
than once in this time period, your scores will not be reported
and your test payment will not be refunded.
WHAT TO BRING ON TEST DAY
Test takers must provide proper registration and identification
papers on the day of the exam in order to be admitted to the test
center. Don’t let your studying go to waste by forgetting your doc-
uments. Collect the items listed below before your test day.
For the computer test, you must bring:
■ Identification with photograph. Test takers must fulfill
strict identification requirements to be admitted.
Acceptable forms of identification include a
government-issued ID (a passport, driver’s license,
national or military identification) or a student ID. For
other valid forms, review the exam bulletin.
146 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
■ Your appointment confirmation number. You will
receive this number when you schedule your appointment.
■ Your CBT voucher. This only applies if you registered
for the test by mail rather than by telephone. 
For the paper test, you must bring:
■ Identification with photograph. See the information
above.
■ Your admission ticket and a signed photo file record
with a recent photo attached. Glue or tape your photo to
the form. Do not use staples. Laminated copies or
photocopies are not acceptable. (For more details, see
the exam bulletin.)
■ Pencils. Bring at least two sharpened, medium-soft (#2
or HB) black lead pencils and an eraser.
FOLLOW THE RULES
Arrive at least 30 minutes before the test begins in order to reg-
ister and present your identification. You will be assigned a seat
and asked to sign your name any time you leave or enter the test-
ing room. If you are taking the computer test, your photo will be
taken and reproduced on your score report and on the computer
monitor you are using. If you encounter a problem during the
exam, raise your hand and alert the administrator.
You must follow the directions of the test administrator dur-
ing the exam. The test administrator can dismiss you from the
test and cancel your scores without a refund if you do any of the
following:
TEST DETAILS 147
■ take the test for someone else
■ fail to provide acceptable identification
■ use a test aid (such as a dictionary, calculator, book,
highlighter, or translator)
■ copy from someone else
■ eat, drink, smoke, or chew gum during the test
■ give or receive help
■ leave the testing room without permission
■ exceed the time allowed for the break
■ create a disturbance
■ bring a weapon into the test center
■ try to remove notes or scratch paper from the testing
room
■ tamper with the computer
■ reproduce, disclose, or remove test questions from the
testing room
Disability Accommodations
Test takers with disabilities can request disability services
and accommodations. Download a copy of the Guide for
Test Takers With Disabilities from www.toefl.org or contact
TOEFL Disability Services, Educational Testing Service, P.O.
Box 6054, Princeton, NJ 08541 (phone: 609-771-7780; fax:
609-771-7165; TYY: 609-771-7714).
148 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
CONTACT ETS
If you have any remaining questions about the TOEFL exam, you
can contact the ETS by one of the following ways:
E-mail toefl@ets.org
Mail TOEFL Services
Educational Testing Services
P.O. Box 6151
Princeton, NJ 08541-6151
Telephone 609-771-7100
Fax 609-771-7500
TTY 609-771-7714
Appendix B
Resources
OFFICIAL TOEFL EXAM INFORMATION
The TOEFL exam is administered by the Educational Testing
Service (ETS). Most questions you may have about the TOEFL
exam can be answered at www.toefl.org. You can contact the
TOEFL offices at:
TOEFL/TSE Services
P.O. Box 6151
Princeton, NJ 08541
Telephone: 609-771-7100 (Monday–Friday, 8:00 A.M.
to 8:00 P.M. EST)
Fax: 609-771-7500
149
150 TOEFL EXAM ESSENTIALS
RESOURCES
Here are some additional resources on the TOEFL exam, as
well as on the topics testeed—reading, listening, grammar/
structure, and writing.
Print
501 Reading Comprehension Questions, 2nd edition (New York:
LearningExpress, 2001).
Bonet, Diana, Ed., et al. The Business of Listening: A Practical
Guide to Effective Listening (Menlo Park, CA: Crisp
Publications, 2001).
Chesla, Elizabeth. Read Better, Remember More, 2nd edition
(New York: LearningExpress, 2000).
Chesla, Elizabeth. LearningExpress’s TOEFL Exam Success
(New York: LearningExpress, 2002).
Kurtin, Mary, et al. Grammar Workbook for the TOEFL Exam
(Lawrenceville, NJ: ARCO, 2001).
Lougheed, Lin. How to Prepare for the Computer-Based TOEFL
Essay: Test of English as a Foreign Language (Hauppage, NY:
Barron’s, 2000).
Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary, 11th edition
(Springfield, MA: Merriam-Webster, 2003).
Preparation for the Computer-Based TOEFL Test: Powerprep
Software (Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service,
2000).
Sharpe, Pamela. Passkey to the TOEFL, 4th edition (Hauppage,
NY: Barron’s, 2001).
TOEFL Sample Tests, 6th edition (Princeton, NJ: Educational
Testing Services, 2001).
RESOURCES 151
Yates, Jean. The Ins and Outs of Prepositions: A Guide Book for
ESL Students (Hauppage, NY: Barron’s, 1999).
Online
www.a4esl.org—Quizzes for ESL speakers/writers, covering
slang, holidays, reading, culture, writing, grammar, idioms,
vocabulary. Helpful links to other websites.
www.toefl.org—This is the official TOEFL site from which
you can download the TOEFL Bulletin, find answers to
common questions about the exam, and order official
Educational Testing Service test-prep materials.
http://owl.english.purdue.edu/handouts/esl—An online writing
lab with explanations, workshops, exercises, and links to
other writing help centers. There is a section especially for
ESL students with a grammar refresher course.
