ARMENIAN TERROR 
IN NAGORNO-KARABAKH
TRAGEOY OF
GARADAGHLY
FEBRUARY 17,1992
Qanun -2010
This book has been published with the fınancial assistance by 
The Council o f State Support to Non-Governmental Organizations 
under the President o f the Repubiic o f Azerbaijan
Assosiation fo r Civil 
Society Development in  
Azerbaijan
Author: Dr. History 
Maharram Zulfugarli
ARMENIAN TERROR IN NAGORNO-KARABAKH 
TRAGEDY OF GARADAGHLY (FEBRUARY 17,1992)
BAKU: Qanun, 2010, 36 p.
O 1100C14015 
AB 022051
© Qanun, 2010
© M.Zulfugarli
C O N T E N T S
Preface ............................................................................... 4
I. Situation of the village before the tragedy....................... 9
II. Occupation of Garadagly............................................18
III. Eyewitnesses of the tragedy.................................... 23
References .....................................................................33
P R E F A C E
One of unexamined in depth pages of the history of 
Azerbaijan is the genocidal events perpetuated in the villages 
and regions resided by Azeris in the course of the Nagorno- 
Karabakh conflict, stirred up again.
During these events, many historical monuments have been 
destroyed, along with extermination of a number of local azeri 
population by the Armenian occupants. From the beginning of 
the conflict, 547 architectural buildings, including 5 of interna- 
tional, 393 of country and 149 of local importance, 205 archeo- 
logical monuments, 927 libraries, 808 club institutions, 85 
schools of music, 12 monuments, 22 museums, 4 galleries of 
picture, 10 parks of culture and rest, 4 state theatres and 2 insti- 
tutions of concert have been destroyed and nearly 40.000 
museum exponents of high value of international importance 
from XI-XIX centuries looted by the Armenian aggressors. (1) 
Research of historiography of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict in 
1988-2010 finds out that numerous books and articles have 
been published on this subject. (2) But overwhelming majority of 
these publications were addressed to local readers and the 
international community is almost unaware of them.
A number of purposefui activities have been conducted to 
convey the realities of the Khojaly tragedy to the world commu- 
nity after adoption of the decision on the day of the Khojaly 
tragedy by the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan. Some 
books and articles have been published on the Khojaly tragedy
(3) and even foreign mass media covered the tragedy during the 
period of its occurrence. (4)
Association for Civil Society Development in Azerbaijan 
(ACSDA) also did some important works to deliver objective 
information about the Khojaly tragedy to the world community 
and has published 3 books. (5) Online versions of the books are 
available in the web-site www.avciya.az. Starting from 2006, 
the Association launched the signature company with demand 
of international recognition of the Khojaly tragedy, gathered sig- 
natures of one million of citizens of Azerbaijan and sent to the 
international institutions of the book, "Khojaly genocide (in doc- 
uments, facts and foreign press) in Azerbaijani, English and 
Russian which he published.
Although some works have been done connected with the 
piercing the information blockade on the Khojaly tragedy, unfor- 
tunately it was not the same with other tragedies. One of such 
tragedies which stayed aside of attention and was researched 
little is the tragedy which took place in the Garadagly village of 
the Khojavand region. Even there is no information in the 
chronology of 1992 of an article titled "Aggression of Armenia 
against Azerbaijan” posted in the official site of the Milli Majlis of 
the Republic of Azerbaijan (www.meclis.gov.az) about the 
Garadagly tragedy. In our view, the reason is the huge number 
of Armenian atrocities in Nagorno-Karabakh and scarcity of 
information regarding the majority of these crimes.
In modern history, events similar to the Garadagly tragedy 
happened in different parts of the world and the international 
community is well aware of them. For example, in July 1995, 
ethnic Serbian nationalists mass murdered more than 10 thou- 
sand Muslim populatiön of the Bosnian town of Srebrenica aged 
between 17-70, people had been buried lively in mass graves.
Mass murders have been perpetuated against Muslims in 13 
settlements of Bosnia in this period. More than 200 thousand 
innocent people have been murdered, thousands wounded and 
2 million became refugees as a result of these events. Although 
United Nations, European Parliament and other international 
organizations recognized at least Srebrenica genocide, one of 
the 13 genocides that took place in the 13 Bosnian settlements, 
they prefer to keep silence numerous genocides perpetuated 
against Azerbaijanis by Armenians. (6)
Eyewitnesses of this tragedy remember it as equal to Khojaly 
tragedy. Some call the Garadagly as a second Khojaly.
In our view, reasons for scarcity of information on crimes per- 
petuated in the Garadagly village of the Khojavand region in 
Nagorno-Karabakh and other settlements resided by Azeris for 
long time are followings:
• Efforts by local authorities directed from Moscow to cover- 
up information on tragedies and hiding from public;
• Efforts by internal and exterior forces to use the tragedies 
for their own purposes interested in violation of political stability 
in the Southern Caucasus, as well as Azerbaijan;
• Indifference of international powers interested in collapse 
of the USSR, to the tragedies;
• Isolation of the tragedy sites from the rest of the world and 
dangerous and hard conditions of obtaining information from 
that sites;
• Preventive measures by criminals to dissimulate signs of 
their crimes;
• Deaf ear of international organizations to the voice of 
Azerbaijan during the period of crimes or their reluctance to hear 
the voice of Azerbaijan etc.,
In spite of scarcity of information on Garadagly tragedy, 
accounts by eyewitnesses help to shed light on dark pages of 
the modern history.
When researching the tragedy of Garadagly, it was found out 
that there are 16 villages carrying the same name in regions of 
Azerbaijan. In brief, there are villages whose names are 
Garadagly in Shaki, Khachmaz, Gadabay, Salyan, Shusha, 
Aghdam, Fuzuly, Jebrail, Kalbajar, Beylagan, Tartar, Goranboy, 
Kangarly, Barda, Agdash, Ujar rayons of Azerbaijan, also 
Darband rayon of Autonomous Republic of Dagestan of Russia 
resided by Azeris.
Even there has been a village of Garadagly in Gamarly 
(Artashat) region of Armenian SSR resided by Azeris. But later 
its name was changed. Existence of Garadagly region in the 
Southern Azerbaijan, situation of Bazz fortress, residence of 
khorramids in this region, its being birthplace of Sattarkhan, the 
heroic son of the Azerbaijani people, leader of the 1905-1911 
movement who was named as sardar-e-melli (national general) 
and other facts prove that people of Garadagh are historically 
heroes and braves. (7) Furthermore, massive information even 
in the books of foreign historians (8) about heroism performed 
by the Khojavand horsemen against Russian occupants during 
I and II Russian-lranian wars indicated that people residing in 
these lands are brave men who are ready to die for their moth- 
erland.
If to have in view that there are also Garadagly villages of 
Shusha, Aghdam, Fuzuly, Jebrail, Kalbajar under occupation 
and have been exposed to tragedies, it is necessary not to con- 
fuse the problem which is being researched with others.
Even there are many villages by name of Garadagly in the 
Southern Caucasus and Southern Azerbaijan, tragedies and
horrors of Garadagly village of Khojavand differ with their scale 
from others.
Joint investigation group of Ministries of Internal Affairs and 
National Security and Prosecutor Office of the Republic adopt- 
ed a decision on responsibility of 286 people connected with 
their crimes committed against humanity in Khojaly, Garadagly, 
Meshali, Baganis Ayrim and other Azerbaijani villages. 6 people 
have been found responsible by the joint investigation group 
connected with the Garadagly genocide. Activities are underway 
to bring them under investigation as accused persons. (9)
The above mentioned facts on Gardagly tragedy cover very 
few parts of the Armenian atrocities. Many are unaware of terri- 
ble eyewitness accounts on live burial of the residents of the vil- 
lage in silos by Armenians.
Publication of some books and articles on the tragedy of 
Garadagly village of Khojavand region in recent years is a pos- 
itive case. (10) But there is an urgent need to boost these activ- 
ities, uncover new facts hidden from public and publish and 
spread obtained materials in foreign languages along with 
Azerbaijani.
I. S ITUATION OF GARADAGLY  
BEFORE THE TRAGEDY
Garadagly was a big Azeri village of 800 houses situated on 
the highway linking Khankandi and Khojavand (Martuni), in 
entourage of 14 Armenian villages. During the soviet authority 
the Azeri population of neighboring Varandapi, Bahramli and 
Khanliq villages were forcibly deported and their lands annexed 
to the Armenian villages.
Various provocations had been committed by Armenians 
against Azeri population of Nagorno-Karabakh, including 
Garadagly, in the periods of tsar's Russia and soviets. One of 
them took place in 1967. In this year, Armenians slandered and 
made arrested three Azeris from Garadagly on purpose to insti- 
gate a conflict on national basis. Despite their acquittal, 
Armenian bandits burned those innocent people pouring gaso- 
line on them in a plain day in Khankandi in front of watching 
eyes of soviet soldiers.
In the soviet period Garadagly had been united in one 
kolkhoz with Gagarza and Baravat villages resided by 
Armenians for sometimes. Only Armenians were being appoint- 
ed to leading positions in the kolkhoz. Armenians were perma- 
nently violating the rights of people of Garadagly, keeping them 
aside from the leadership of the village and appropriating their 
salaries. In 1971, people of Garadagli appealed to government 
to be separated from the Armenian villages and to be an inde-
pendent kolkhoz and achieved this goal. From that year people 
of Garadagly seceded and united in a kolkhoz named after 
Narimanov. During the secession the Armenian leadership of 
Khojavand region left no part from the estate of the previous 
kolkhoz for Garadagly. Garadagly people even were not allowed 
to use their ancestral lands. Finally, after hard struggle, they 
succeeded in getting some part of estate and 100 hectares of 
land in a place called as Bargiz Tapa. Although 30 km distant 
from the village, this field played an important role in develop- 
ment of the village.
In the 5th year of its independent activity the kolkhoz named 
after Narimanov became one of the leading economies of 
Khojavand (Martuni) region.
A meeting unusually held only in Armenian language in 
Khojavand on February 12, 1988, banned Azeri language there, 
offensive remarks by Armenians on Azeris after the meeting, 
holding of antiazeri slogans and the same activities of 
Armenians at the meeting of the activists held in Khankandi the 
next day got concerned ail Azeri population of Nagorno- 
Karabakh, including Garadagly. After this, nationalist meetings 
and demonstrations started in Khankandi and all Armenian pop- 
ulated towns and villages of Karabakh.
At the wake of these events, a group of habitants from 
Garadagly village went to Agdam and demanded the region 
authority to inform Baku about the Armenian provocations and 
take serious steps. They also sent written appeals to the lead- 
ership of the Republic and USSR on Armenian provocations. 
lnstead of taking measures, the authority sent complaint letters 
to the Armenian authorities of the region, thus making the con- 
dition of the people harder. Left on their fate by the leadership
of the Republic as all Azeri population of Karabakh, the people 
of Garadaghli had to find a way out of their deplorable situation. 
Popular people of the village, Mazahir Agalarov, head of the 
Reserve Agency of the region, Nusrat Azizov, the only Azeri, 
working in the executive body of the region, Nobil Zeynalov, the 
principal of the school of the village, Jahid Mammadov, Soltan 
Bayramov proceeded to take some actions to protect Garadagly 
from Armenian provocations.
In such a hard situation of the village, Adalat Mammadov, a 
chief lieutenant serving in the soviet army, returned to his native 
village in response to the appeals of his compatriots in March 
1988. Telman Tagiyev, a teacher of military at the school of the 
village, a reserve officer, Mammad Mammadov, Mohammadali 
Bayramov and other patriot sons closely assisted to Adalat 
Mammadov in organization of the defence of the village. Agalar 
Mammadov, a head of the cell of the Popular Front of 
Azerbaijan in Garadagly, played an important role in establish- 
ing of a voluntary defense unit. Passing of his defense unit 
under command of Adalat Mammadov closely assisted in found- 
ing defense battalion of the village. Although the volunteers of 
the village started to military trainings, lack of arms to defend the 
village created serious hardships. After beginning of Armenian 
provocations in Nagorno-Karabakh in 1988-1989, official author- 
ities three times conducted arms confiscation operations in 
Garadagly, taking simple hunting weapons from the people. To 
get out of the situation, the population of Garadagly appealed to 
their friends and acquaintances from the surrounding regions 
and they obtained some hunting weapons and sent them to the 
defenders of Garadagly. Although late, the Azerbaijani leader- 
ship got interested in the Nagorno-Karabakh problem after
some months of its beginning. At that time, communication of 
Garadagly with the region center and surrounding buildings was 
cut off and people from Garadagly were fired from their jobs. To 
resolve the problem, bake houses, shops and canteens started 
to function in the village. Affiliation of the sewing factory N 1 of 
Baku, sections of carpet sewing factory of Ganja and affiliation 
of Baku refrigerator factory opened in the village. Besides, con- 
struction of buildings for school, kindergarten, library, house of 
culture and hospital started. More than 60 new houses were 
built in sites allocated for young families. Some works were 
done for defense of Garadagly. Recruitment of 30 residents of 
the village by the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Azerbaijan SSR 
as militias for defense of the village, assignment of some staff 
from Agdarn police to Garadagly by rotation increased defense 
capacity of the village.
From middle of 1989, Armenian provocations against the vil- 
lage intensified. On October 12 of that year, a group of 
Armenian bandits raided a cattle farm near the village, seizing 
the cattle and burning out the building of the farm and hays. 
Adalat Mammadov, Faig Tagiyev, Garib Mustafayev, Nazim 
Valiyev, defenders of the village reached the site and gave a 
hard repulse to the bandits.
In December 1989, Armenians began to let down burning 
barrels full of gasoline from the surrounding mountains every 
night in order to intimidate and force to flee the population of the 
village. As a result of steps taken by defenders, this savage act 
of Armenians was rebuffed too.
On January 15, 1990, nearly 15 Armenians came close 
to Garadagly and fired on nearby houses. Reaching the incident 
site and engaging first open combat with the Armenians,
defenders repulsed them back, On April 10, 1990, Armenian 
bandits again attacked the village. Ilgar Aliyev, a resident of the 
village was badly wounded during the shooting.
On November 24, 1990, at 17.00 p.m., an escort of cars car- 
rying a bride, was attacked by the Armenian bandits disguised 
in Russian military uniforms, killing 3 people from Garadagly. 
Surrounding the site of the incident, the bandits were not letting 
to take the corps, demanding coming of President Ayaz 
Mutallibov. After two hours, the people succeeded in taking the 
corps from Armenians with difficulties.
After this incident, the defenders of Garadagly decided to 
build fortified defense posts, pillboxes and digging trenches 
around the village. 5 block posts were established and provided 
with reliable defense devices around the village.
Three block posts were established on the road coming from 
Khankandi. The post established at the direction of Khojavand 
region, entrance of the village was being considered as the first 
post for its importance. Nobil Zeynalov, director of the schooi 
undertook to provide this post with guards. Young people who 
had been pupils of his school and schoolchildren were guarding 
that post.
A block post established a littie distant from asphalt road, not 
far from the kolkhoz agency was being considered as the sec- 
ond. Mirzali and Mazahir were responsible for this post.
Nazi, Garib, Telman, Vidadi and others were guarding the 3rd 
post established on the asphalt road at the exit of the village.
The 4th post established at the direction of Kandkhura was 
also one of important ones. Most of raids against the village 
were being conducted from this direction. Faig, Rabil, Khudayat 
and their friends were on guard here. Finally, the 5th post was
established on the river of Khonashen, dividing the village into 
two, in front of the gorge of Zinki. Brave sons as Mammad, 
Shamil, Algama and Aladdin were charged to defend the Zinki 
block post. From November 1990, armed guards were in charge 
of posts throughout the day.
A tragedy that took place in the beginning of 1991 worsened 
the situation. In January 10, Sultan Bayramov, one of well- 
known people of the village had left the village for neighboring 
Amrallar village to discuss the issue of common fight against 
Armenian bandits. While on his way back to the village, his 
"UAZ-469" with plate number of 53-55 AQT was suddeniy fired 
on by Armenians at 4 km from the first block post. Although 
Karam Tagiyev, a driver of the car could drive away the car into 
the village, to save the life of Karam Tagiyev was impossible. He 
passed away because of the bullet wounds after 2 hours.
On Sultan's burial day, news of murder of Salatin Askerova, 
a reporter, on the road of Lachin-Shusha reached the village. 
Becoming furious as soon as they heard the news, the popula- 
tion of the village set on to March to the villages of the Armenian 
bandits to protest them. But a group of defenders of the village 
succeeded to stop them telling that there was no use to go 
against Armenian bandits unarmed.
After these tragic events, the people of Garadagli made a 
plan of operation to prevent the Armenian provocations. The 
operation was being led by Adalat Mammadov. The operation 
group was made up by llgar Huseynov, Elmidar Bayramov, 
Telman Tagiyev, Eldar Dadashov, Rafig Guliyev, Garib 
Mustafayev, Mammad Mammadov and Mammad Mustafayev. 
Being divided into two groups, they gained control on road link- 
ing Khankandi and Khojavand from both exit and entrance. A
car "UAZ" that was driving hastily from Khankandi to Khojavand, 
carrying 6 Armenian bandits was seized and destroyed by the 
defenders of the village. Thus, vengeance of Sultan Bayramov, 
Salatin Askerova and other martyrs was taken on the bandits. 
Armenians accompanied by the Russian militaries, took their 
corps from the forest only after 3 days. After this, Armenians 
stopped to use the Khankandi-Khojavand road. In this revenge 
operation, defenders of Garadagli seized 6 foreign made auto- 
matic guns, one hunting rifle and many bullets.
On March 9, 1991, Armenian bandits suddenly attacked a 
cattle farm near the village and murdered two people. On June 
28 of the same year, the village of Garadagly was fired on by 
Armenians with canons, machine guns and automatic guns at 1 
a.m. Some houses of the village were set on fire, some were 
destroyed. Women, olders and children were forced to shelter in 
basements to get protected from the fire.
At that night, the greatest tragedy took place at the farm situ- 
ated in Varandali site, 5 km distant from the village. Along with 
firing on the village, the bandits rushed into the houses at the 
farm and shot dead six innocent workers of the farm and threw 
them into one of the burning houses in order to dissimulate the 
crime. After this, they moved aside and kept firing on until com- 
plete burning out of the farm.
The people of the village led by Bayverdi Novruzov, came to 
the site of the incident and succeeded in pulling out corpses of 
the three people burned out and holed with bullets. After putting 
off the fire of another room, wholly burned corpses of three peo- 
ple were found out.
After three days of the burial of the martyrs, Ruzigars 
Mammadov made an operation plan together with 2 officers of
the police of Agdam. They get armed, moved towards Armenian 
viilage of Kandkhurda and kept a position near to one of control 
block posts. They took revenge on a commander of Armenian 
armed men when they appeared for check-up of the block posts 
at night.
Here are the accounts of Chingiz Mammadov, Karam 
Agalarov and Shafgat Mammadova, residents of Garadagly, on 
hard days of the village:
"September 8, 1991, was the election day of Ayaz Mutallibov 
as a president. The people of Garadagli were voting at polling 
station in the morning. After the voting, the residents of the vil- 
lage got in a bus in front of the polling station and left for Agdam 
for shopping. When returning back, the bus was fired on with 
automatic guns from all sides at 3 km from Khojavand and 2 
men, 6 women were killed, 23 wounded from 40 passengers. 
Wounded people urgently were taken to the hospital of 
Aghdam".
After the bus tragedy, on September 25, at night, Elnur 
Suleymanov, Khanali Huseynov and Rayet Quliyev, 3 of brave 
youngs of Garadagly got armed and got rear side of the village 
of Ashan seized by Armenians. They moved close to the village, 
firing on and killing three armed Armenian militaries who were 
taking a walk at the outskirt. Although Rayat received a hard bul- 
iet wound during this operation, his comrades saved his life tak- 
ing him to the village through the forest, then to the hospital of 
Beylagan.
After the incident of September 8, 1991, Mazahir Agalarov, 
Nobil Zeynalov, representatives of the people of Garadagly 
together with 20 people from there went to Baku and met with 
president Ayaz Mutallimov informing him of the hard situation of
the village.
A. Mutallibov promised them to be personally busy with the 
defense of Garadagly and after 3-4 days a group of 11 militaries 
were sent to Garadagly. They were located in the house of 
Abbasov, situated in the upper part of the village. The defenders 
of the village succeeded in preparing and carrying a revenge 
operation together with that group. A band of 21 men attacked a 
farm of strategic importance and guarded by many armed 
Armenian bandits, rendering harmless three of them and forcing 
the rest to retreat to the neighboring Armenian villages.
But after nearly one month, a mysterious call back of the mil- 
itaries sent for assistance to the defense of the village worsened 
hard situation of Garadagli more.
II. OCCUPATION OF GARADAGLY
Date of occupation of the villages of Khojavand region resided 
by Azeris and other facts prove that civil population struggled and 
fought to the end for their lands. Although they were alone and 
helpless, performing heroism and bravery in unequal combats 
with military units of the enemy, the local population resisted 
heroically against the enemy more than 5 years for their mother- 
land. Beginning of provocations from February 1988, occupation 
of the villages of Tug and Salatakin on October 30, 1991, 
Khojavand region November 19, 1991, village of Nakhullu on 
January 10, 1992, Garadagly on February 17, 1992, Muganli, 
Amirallar, Kuropatkin on October 2, 1992, Khatai on August 20, 
1993, Gunashli on August 23, 1993 are evidences for that.
Situated between Khankandi and Khojavand region center, 
Garadagly had been continuously attacked by bands of 
Armenian bandits from the very beginning of the Nagorno- 
Karabakh conflict because of its being encircled by Armenian vil- 
lages. Garadagly had been attacked 305 times from February 
1988 until February 1992 excluding some gunfire from surround- 
ing heights. In all these combats the village had suffered from 
casualties. One of favorable conditions for Armenians to commit 
inhuman atrocities in Garadagly was that the village had been cut 
off from land communications with other Azerbaijani settlements 
and it had no air communications because of intense fire on Azeri 
helicopters over the village surrounded from all sides.
From summer of 1991, an operation for evacuation of civil 
population from Garadagly had almost been completed.
Garadagly was being defended by 125 men on the eve of occu- 
pation. Only 14 of them were from the National Army arrived from 
Agdam and 70 were combatants of the local self-defense unit. 
Along with them, 17 men aged more than 60 and 13 schooi- 
children had stood ready for fighting arms in their hands. 11 
women aged more than 50 had stayed voluntarily in the village 
assisting their husbands, sons and brothers. Hero Azerbaijani 
women, Zivar, Sitara, Tavar, Garakmaz, Mina, Minara, Seadet, 
Mirvari, Minaya, Gular and Haqiqat were closely assisting to 
those 125 from December.
Hit of an helicopter carrying also state officials of Azerbaijan 
over Garakand on November 20, 1991, increased concerns of 
the local population more. Communication with the encircled vil- 
lage was possible only by helicopters. Afterthis, helicopters land- 
ing in the village began to carry a part of the population of the vil- 
lage to safe places. Armenian armed units were attacking the vil- 
lage almost every day and defenders had to answer them with 
fire from every direction.
On January 8, 1992, Armenians conducted a massive attack 
on the village. Fighters of the National Army and voluntary 
defense unit rebuffed the attack and forced the bandits to retreat. 
In this combat, Aligismat Karimov, Alov Azizov, Namig 
Huseynov, Arastun Mammadov, llgar Huseynov performed hero- 
ism, rendering harmless numerous Armenian armed men. 
Although wounded in the combat, Mazahir and Hidayat were 
taken to the hospital of Agdam by helicopter landed in the village 
on January 8, to save Mazahir's life was impossible.
On January 12, the bandits did not let a helicopter to land in 
the village that is why it was obliged to drop food and ammuni- 
tion on the village and return back. But a little later, another heli- 
copter landed in the village with difficulties, with the martyr
Mazahir's friends who took an oath to take revenge for him. A 
fighter of the National Army Eldar Arazov was also among them.
But forces were not equal. There was a lack of fighters, 
armours and ammunition. The enemy, armed with a canon, 
"Qrad" rocket launcher, BMP, automatic, machine guns etc., had 
big advantages in human forces and arms.
Alarming voices of the people of Garadagli was being heard 
throughout the country by a portable radio transmitter. Radio 
operators Zahid Khalilov, Imran Huseynov and Haqiqat 
Huseynova had served great for this. But the leadership of the 
republic at that time depending on Moscow, was turning a deaf 
ear to the alarm of Garadagli, taking no practical steps.
On January 15, 1992, the people of Garadagli made a last 
appeal to the people of Azerbaijan and this appeal was 
announced by radio transmitter for several days. Here is the text 
of the appeal:
" Atrocities of the history cannot shake even a little, the hero- 
ic sons guarding the land of Karabakh, struggling bravely sur- 
vive the hardest tasks of the time. There are four years that 
Garadagli, a pearl part of Karabakh is being guarded by fearless 
sons, despite becoming a target of the enemy. The people of 
this forgotten village, which is not kept in our memory for years, 
live the hardest days of their lives. Houses and various admin- 
istrative buildings are being set on fire, innocent people mur- 
dered and their properties looted. In brief, the village is under 
intensive attacks by the Armenian bandits. The enemy wants to 
seize this fine, strategically important position. Because 
Garadagly had cut the road between Khojavand and Khankandi 
and hindered their movement by this road forever! After occu- 
pation of Khojavand by the units of the bandits, situation in 
Garadagly aggravated more.
My dear nation! If you have even a glimpse of honor and dig- 
nity in your blood, piease, don't stop struggle for freedom of 
Karabakh! Otherwise it could become a den of bandits with your 
own hands".
In the early morning of February 15, Armenian armed units 
attacked the village of Garadagly from all directions. Fighters 
from the neighboring Armenian villages, mercenaries, Russian 
officers and soldiers of the 366th Russian regiment also took 
part in the attack. But they could not get close to the village eas- 
ily. Nobil Zeynalov, principal of the local school, Khanali 
Huseynov, a military official and Altay Hasanov, a fighter of the 
voluntary defense unit, were guarding the first block post. The 
fighting was very heavy. The hero women of the village were 
carrying ammunition and food to the fighters under intense fire, 
giving first aid to the wounded and achieving in their returning 
back to the battle. Falling of mother Zivar, 74, in this battle, 
increased the hatred of defenders to the enemy more. Suffering 
a lot of casualties that day, Armenians retreated. But the next 
day the enemy again attacked the first post. Teacher Nobil and 
his friends of arm killed 11 Armenian bandits in bloody fighting. 
Not succeeding in seize of the pillbox heroically defended by the 
defenders of the village, Armenians began to shell the position 
of the defenders with incensing shells. Continuing to resist hero- 
ically within fire, the fighters of the first block post did not give up 
their positions until the very end. They fell martyrs fighting for 
their native village. At night of February 16, defenders of other 
posts, Gara, Novruz, Damir and Aligismat sneaked close to the 
first post and took the corpses of the heroes to the headquar- 
ters. Although it was hard, they were buried under direction of 
Mohammed, a father of martyr, as heroes.
Eldar Arazov was one of our sons who fought heroically and 
fell in martyr on the same day. He hit two pieces of enemy's mil- 
itary hardware and silenced fire positions with a rocket propelled 
grenade. Eldar Arazov fell martyr for the motherland taking 
revenge on enemy for his friend Mazahir. Arig Bayramov was 
also one of our sons falling martyr on that day.
The fierce battle had continued for five days. The last day, 
ammunition of the defenders of Garadagly was due to running 
out. In spite of their appeal for aid at the last moment, no aid 
came. Running out of bullets, the fighters gathered in the admin- 
istrative building of the kolkhoz.
Wounded and corpses of the fallen fighters were also brought 
to the headquarters. A battle for the headquarters continued until 
the morning of February 17. In the morning, the fire against the 
enemy from the headquarters weakened. The hero fighters kept 
the enemy in distance by individual fires. The last bullets were 
already being shot. Feeling this, the Armenian bandits moved 
close to the headquarters and started to shout in Russian with 
megaphones: "Get out, drop your weapons, valuable things, doc- 
uments and stand in one rank" uninterruptedly. Thus, left in his 
own fate by the leadership of the Republic, the village of 
Garadagly was occupied despite heroic resistance of its resi- 
dents.
III. EYEWITNESSES OF THE TRAGEDY
Vidadi Huseynov, a Garadagly resident, an eyewitness of this 
event, taken hostage along with 118 residents of the village by 
Armenians and later rescued from grip of the enemy thanks to 
heroism by Telman Tagiyev, remembers:
"When Armenians took us as hostages, there were a group 
of doctors in smocks. Armenian soldiers demanded our watch- 
es, money and valuabie things. They searched 15 people. They 
did not continue searching. Two trucks, "Ural" and "Kamaz" 
were there in the yard of the building of the administration of the 
kolkhoz. We were ordered to move towards the trucks. One 
Armenian officer ordered olders and women to "KAMAZ", 
youngs to "Ural" covered with a tent. I helped Avtandil Nagiyev, 
14, a schoolboy to get in the truck and myself got in after every- 
body. There was no seat to sit, so Faig pulled me to himself and 
I sat on his knees. Suddenly one middle aged Armenian wear- 
ing in civil came close to the truck and said: "I have to kill three 
turks here". Then called Eidar with his name. As soon as Eldar 
Dadashov got down, he shot him from his head from pistolet. 
They made one person to get down from another truck and also 
shot him dead. After this, none answered when they called. The 
trucks started to move. We passed by Baylik garden, after this 
mulberry garden. The trucks stopped next to silos. Armenian 
officer approached to "Ural" which was being driven behind and 
ordered 10 people to get down and opened the cab. I was first 
to get down because I had sat in the rear. Following me, they
made 10-15 young fighters get down. We knew why they made 
us get down. So, we opened our chest and shouted: "Shoot, 
you, bustards, ail the same you will be revenged on! You will be 
expelled like dogs"! Hearing this, 10-15 Armenian soldiers and 
officers took their arms on their chest and got ready to fire on. I 
was standing at the wayside. Armenians had gathered at the 
left, close to the back of the truck. Brave sons, facing death, 
were standing right to me. The last one coming to us was 
Telman Tagiyev. As soon as reaching me, he suddenly turned 
towards Armenian and walking 3-5 m threw a grenade which he 
had in his hand to the midst of them. Armenians not succeeding 
to escape, the grenade exploded. The explosion threw me into 
a brook covered with bushes near to the wayside. I lost my con- 
sciousness because of the debris wounds and blast. It hap- 
pened nearly 14.00-15.00 p.m. When I regained consciousness 
I saw that it was dark and I was in blood. By recovering con- 
sciousness I could define where I am and all what happened. In 
the middle of the night, I stood up and could reach the village of 
Abdal Gulabli of Agdam through the forests. Later I knew that 
surviving Armenians fired on armless people in the truck, mur- 
dering 33".
Another eyewitness of the incident, Aslan Tagiyev, father of 
Telman Tagiyev, witnessed heroism of his son Telman while 
being taken to Khankandi, on the road and was returned after 2 
months of Armenian captivity. Aslan Tagiyev remembers the 
incident as following:
"On February 14, Armenians surrounded and shelled our vil- 
lage. There were more defenders in the village at that time. 
Nearly 90 brave and young guys in trenches were repelling the 
attacks of Armenians day and night. Telman, my son, along with 
15 people was fighting at the block post number 3 in direction of
Gagarza. I know of their heroic fighting, because an Armenian 
fighter who was taking us as prisoners said: "The guys from the 
block post your son was from killed 64 of us". Telman was a mil- 
itary. He was very good at shooting. He was very rarely missing 
the target. On the 3rd day of the battle, February 16, bullets were 
due to run out. There were no reserve ammunition in the head- 
quarters. Nearly at 20.00 p.m. Adalat Mammadov, commander 
of the battle ordered the fighters of the all block posts to be gath- 
ered in the headquarters. The defenders one by one retreated 
and gathered in the headquarters. Telman also came there. 
After this, a fierce fighting followed with Armenians got to the 
yard of the headquarters. The fighting lasted until morning. The 
defenders were shooting their last bullets. Sensing this, 
Armenians rushed into the yard of the headquarters. The fight- 
ing continued until 10.00 p.m. morning. There were no bullets to 
be shot from our side. Armenian commanders ordered from the 
yard in Russian and Azeri: "Get out and surrender". I came to 
the spot where Telman was. He was standing in uniform with 
pride, his head up. I thought his being in uniform could stir-up 
Armenians. So, I quickly took off my leather jacket and old 
pants, handed them to Telman demanding to disguise. He 
obeyed, giving me his uniform and put on the dresses which I 
gave. At this moment, I saw him hiding a hand grenade in the 
clothes. I said, my son, if they find this on you when searching 
us, it will be your end. Put it aside. Telman said in a fragile voice: 
"No! Father, I will need this. The battle is not over yet. It is all the 
same, Armenians know who I am".
Armenians from outside were repeating their demand unin- 
terruptedly in an angry voice. Our commander Adalat 
Mammadov came back from negotiations with Armenians. After 
5 minutes of consultations it was decided to get out. We were
getting out one by one, dropping our weapons next to the door 
and standing in a row. It was again ordered to put down 
weapons, documents, money or valuable things. There was a 
big pile from money and documents. They started to search us, 
beginning from those standing behind. Nearly 15 people were 
searched but nothing was found. They stopped searching 
before Telman's turn came. I was a bit quiet.
There were two trucks, "Ural" and "KAMAZ" in the yard of the 
headquarters. They ordered youngs to "Ural", olders and 
women to sit on "KAMAZ". I wanted Telman to get in "KAMAZ", 
but Armenian officers objected. Another Turkish speaking 
Armenian officer approached to me, telling to handle him my 
jacket. I gave it to him and put on his old one. After this, he again 
ordered Telman to get in another truck. I again wanted to 
approach him to beg. But Telman said, "No, father, don't beg 
him" and got in "Ural". Everybody got in trucks. Our wounded 
were sprawling on the ground. None cared them.
The trucks were ordered to move. They did not drive even 
100 m and were stopped by demand of the people from neigh- 
boring villages. Then one person from every truck was got down 
and shot dead in front of us.
The trucks started to move again. Many Armenian men and 
women had gathered in a place ahead called a mulberry garden. 
The trucks again stopped when reached them, nearthe silos. We 
were 20 m of ahead from the truck carrying youngs. We heard 
voices of Armenian commanders: "Get out of the trucks those, 
who want to die in his motherland". At the same time, two 
Armenians fired on from automatic guns to the truck carrying 
youngs. Then some of them got out of the car. I saw Telman also 
got out. When down from the car, he looked at me. I did not know 
what he meant. Looked through the people. Suddenly ran to the
place where Armenians had stood in a mob. In a glimpse of an 
eye, he smashed himself into the Armenians. 10 Armenians were 
blasted into pieces in front of our eyes. Some of them fell wound- 
ed. Telman himself died of debris wounds on-the ground. 
Surviving Armenians shot dead 33 people as soon as regained 
situation. I still remember shouting of our men of courage "Long 
Live Azerbaijan", "Allahu Akbar'' (Allah the Great).
Finally, the trucks started to move towards Khankandi. I 
stayed in Khankandi as a hostage for two months. Armenians 
killed our sons of courage in custody with tortures. 48 women, 
older and children were released from captivity in two months. 
The corpses were buried in silos at the place of killings. Later we 
could get out 14 corpses from there and buried them. I know 
their place of burial. As soon as Karabakh gets liberated, I will 
dig out their bones and bury them decently. Long live life. Long 
live our men of courage. We shall be victorious".
Hagigat Huseynova, another witness of the events was serv- 
ing as a signal officer before. But communication had been cut 
off in the last two days and there were no hope for aid. After this, 
H.Huseynova taking up an automatic rifle, participated in the 
battles against enemy, nip and tuck with her husband. Here is 
Hagigat Huseynova's story on the events:
"We assisted more than 100 men for nearly two months. We 
had to do much more than men. There was a day that I used tan- 
door 12 times to bake. It is not easy to wash so many clothes with 
hands. Yet, it was needed to sew their tearing and repair them. My 
main job was communication. Walking under fire, I was providing 
communication between the block posts by a portable radio trans- 
mitter and reporting out. I was begging the whole Turkish world to 
help us. I never gave up hoping. In the end, after five days of 
bloody skirmishes, the fighters' bullets were due to run out. Every
fighter had 5-6 bullets. Adalat Mammadov, a commander ordered 
gradually to gather in the headquarters. On evening of February 
16, everybody gathered in the headquarters. Fighting until morn- 
ing, we kept Armenians in distance. On February 17, in the morn- 
ing, Armenians rushed in the yard of the headquarters. They 
demanded a delegate to negotiate. I said not to reply, there is no 
hope for truce. Despite this, Adalat and Alik left out for negotia- 
tions. After 10-15 minutes, Adalat came back upset and said that 
they promise to accompany us from Khojavand and see off to 
Agdam. I said that it was a lie, you could not believe Armenian 
promise. Every fighter had kept one bullet for themselves. 
Everybody was ready to shoot himself dead. Then Alik came. He 
said that Armenians gave a word of man to see us off to Agdam. I 
saw that everybody agreed. Then I protested them not to believe 
Armenians words. I seized arms of a commander of policemen 
from Agdam, begged him to shoot me dead if we surrender, 
because I didn't want to stay in Armenian captivity. He hesitated. I 
said to him "if you don't want your mother stay in captivity as a son 
of honor, don't hesitate, kill me". I seized his hand, raised his auto- 
matic gun and pointed its barrel to my chest. His finger was at the 
trigger. When he wanted to pull, Imran, my husband came close 
and said: "My son, don't shoot Hagigat in front of my eyes". I 
cursed and insulted all of them. Took up my rifle and stood up. 
Getting ready to fight said that "we shall fight until the end".
Finally, we had to get out one by one. When we got out, 
Armenian commanders ordered to drop the weapons down. 
Then I became sure that Armenians wouldn’t see us off to 
Agdam. I had got out with a rifle in my shoulder and a cartridge 
belt on my waist. I ignored angry glares of Armenians. Arastun, 
one of the fighters did not give up his weapon. He beat his 
weapon against a wall, broke and threw it away. He said he
wouldn't give an arm to an Armenian. Some of other youngs 
also did the same. Thus, 118 defenders of Garadagly were cap- 
tured. Armenians made older, women and youngs get in differ- 
ent trucks. The cars started to move. Along the way, the mili- 
taries taking us were stopping the cars and shooting our young 
guys in front of eyes of Armenian people gathered to waysides. 
Arastun, Nabi, Nahid and Ibish accepted death with dignity. 
They were opening their chests, shouting "shoot scoundrels, let 
our blood be shed on the soil of Karabakh", "You will be expelled 
like dogs from here", and giving their lives.
Ilgar Aliyev, another witness, resident of Garadagly recounts: 
"llgar Huseynov, father's name Gardashkhan, was born in 1958, 
in the village of Garadagly of Khojavand region. He was captured 
by Armenians during the defense of his village within the defense 
battalion of the village. He remembers the events as following:
"There were only 5 Azeri villages in Khojavand. One of them 
was Garadagly, among 41 Armenian villages, situated 13 km far 
from near Azeri village. All these villages had been occupied by 
November of 1991 and Garadagly had been blockaded. After 
Armenian occupation of Garadagly, they killed 33 residents of 
the village. After killings, they threw the corpses into the silos 
near a site called Baylik garden and buried there. Armenians 
were shooting the residents of the village dead, throwing still 
alive bodies into the silos. I and more than 100 people of 
Garadagly had been taken as hostages. We faced horrible tor- 
tures on the road. Armenians killed two residents of the village 
by crushing their heads with a sledge hammer. First, we were 
taken to the village of Lingin. Three of us were shot dead there, 
12 in the village of Malibayli. In Malibayli they made everybody 
get out of the trucks and walk until Khankandi. We were facing 
insults of Armenians throughout the way. 8 residents of
Garadagly died of hunger in the prison of Khankandi. I was in 
prison of Khankandi when Armenians occupied Khojali on 
February 26. On the same day, Armenians took more than one 
hundred people to the prison. Then I knew that they were resi- 
dents of Khojali and this town had been occupied. Next day, 
they beheaded more than 60 people from Khojali in front of my 
eyes. There were women and children among them". (11)
Oruj Aliyev, a resident of Garadagly, remembers the events 
that he witnessed as following" "I was taken a prisoner on 
February 17. Half of my relatives were killed on the way. They 
forcefully pulled out my teeth in prison. I was being beaten and 
tortured by Armenians almost every day. On March 17, of the 
same year, I was exchanged by Allahverdi Bagirov's assis- 
tance. The representatives of the International Red Cross 
Committee did not visit the hospital even once, until that day. 
Armenians were selling out internal organs of healthy Azeri 
hostages and prisoners. I was told of this by an Armenian whom
I knew before".
According to O. Aliyev, Robert Kocharyan, President of 
Armenia, led the operation of seizing Garadagly and murders 
which took place there. He said that he heard this when a 
patient of the hospital in Asgaran. [1]
Information varies on casualties, wounded and captured peo- 
ple in the tragedy of Garadagly. One of them reports brutal 
killings of 54, taking hostage of 50, loss of head of 42 families, 
orphaned children 140, in general, fall in martyrs every resident 
from 10 of the village (12). Another one says martyrs 90, lost 6 
and captured 9 (13).
In our opinion, the difference is due to iarge scale of the 
tragedy, facts coming from verbal sources and absence of offi-
cial investigation. Hence, there is an urgent need t'o an official 
investigation in this field.
Following are the names and surnames of those who fell in 
martyrs, taken hostage, then brutally murdered with tortures and 
whose fate are unknown so far:
Martyrs of Garadagly - Tagiyev Bakir, Mammadov Tohid, 
Shirinov lltifat, Shirinova Garagoz, Huseynova Sabiga, Huseynova 
Makhmar, Quliyev Aloglan, Quliyev Gunduz, Quliyeva Nazenim, 
Huseynova Rahila, Huseynova Rakhshanda, Huseynova Qanira, 
Huseynova Gulzanda, Babayeva Valida, Zeynalov Nobil, 
Huseynov Khanali, Hasanov Altay, Dadashov Manaf, Huseynov 
Asgar, Bayramov Rashid, Rustamova Zivar, Bayramov Arif, 
Dadashov Eldar, Huseynov Shahmurad, Huseynov Damir, 
Huseynov Fadail, Karimov Aligismat, Dolukhanov Rahim, Tagiyev 
Telman, Abbasov Salvar, Bayramov Elmidar, Kazimov Salim, 
Tagiyev Elsevar, Suleymanov Elchin, Azizov lltifat
Brutally killed with tortures by Armenians while being 
kept as hostages - Huseynov imran, Shirinov Boyukkishi, 
Tagiyev Kamil, Valdiyev Fazil, Quliyev Alaslan, Huseynov 
Shura, Nazarov Shura, Quliyev Kamal
Passed away in different dates after being released from 
custody, because of being tortured - Shirinov Familiat, 
Huseynov Zulumkhan, Quliyev Yusif, Amirkhanova Minaya, 
Huseynova Sitara, Hasanov Mahammad, Khalilov Vagif, 
Mammadov Shamil, Tagiyev Sardar, Tagiyev Avaz, Huseynova 
Mirvari, Tagiyeva Gullar, Babayev Gavanshir, Babayev Isa, 
Sadigova Mina
Whose fates are unknown - Aliyev Vatan, Akhundov Hafiz, 
Dadashov Mikayil, Huseynov Abulfat, Valiyev Fuzuli (14).
The people of Garadagü, residing in diferent places of 
Azerbaijan as internally displaced people, wait with impatiance 
for a day of returning back to the holy lands where the souls of 
their ancestors rove. Economic growth of the Republic of 
Azerbaijan, the National Army increase their belief for victory.
The confidence of the people of Garadagly for victory is once 
more confirmed by Sevil Azizova, a mother of two martyrs: 
"Soon Garadagly, as well as other occupied lands will be 
cleared out from the enemy. Because, there is an Azerbaijani 
army, capable to do this. I know that this army fill the heart of the 
enemy with fear as follows" (15).
It is needed to enlarge researches and publish new books on 
the tragedy of Garadagli, one of the crimes perpetuated against 
local Azeris at the end of the 20th century, in Nagorno- 
Karabakh, an unseparable part of Azerbaijan. In our view, it will 
let reveal many facts and truths unknown to the public yet. 
These researches could help heros, who fought the enemy with 
bravery, as Telman Tagiyev, to become known. In our opinion, 
heroism displayed by Telman'Tagiyev, as well as others, must 
be considered by the state, although it is late. It could play an 
important role in patriotism education of the young generation 
and restoration of the territorial integrity of the Republic of 
Azerbaijan.
R E F E R E N C E S :
1. Yaddan çıxmaz Qarabağ. Bakı, 2007, s. 9
2. Mahmudov Y., Şükürov K ." Qarabağ" Bakı 2005; Abbasoğlu B. 
Qəhrəmanlıq zirvəsi(Azərbaycanın Milli Qəhrəmanı, polkovnik- 
leytenant Şirin Mirzəyev haqqında).- B.: Şuşa, 2006,159 s.; 
Abbasoğlu B. Ölərkən dünyaya gələn oğullar. Qarabağ 
müharibəsində "Azərbaycanın Milli Qəhrəmanı adına layiq 
görülmüş 15 nəfər döyüşçü haqqında. B.: Şuşa, 2004, 246 s; 
Abdullayev Ə. Azərbaycana qarşı erməni təcavüzü və xarici 
havadarləq. B.: iqtisad Universiteti 2004, 214 s.; Acı həqiqətlər: 
(Qarabağ hadisələrinə dair məqalələr).- B., 1991; Dağlıq Qarabağ: 
hadisələrin xronikası (1988-1994-cü il).B. Vətən, 2005,106 
s.;Məhərrəmov B. Ölməzlik zirvəsi: (Qarabağ şəhidləri 
haqqında.).- B.: Təhsil, 2004.- 159 s.; Axundov Ə. İkinci Xocalı.- 
B.: Şuşa, 2004.- 118 s.; Aşırlı A. Türkün Xocalı soyqırımı.- B.: 
Nurlan, 2005,- 152 s.; Hacıyev H. Dağlıq Qarabağın tarixindən 
sənədlər/Red.: S.Xəlilova.- B.: Gənclik, 2005.-190 s.; Əliyev C., 
Budaqov B. Türklər, azərbaycanlılar, ermənilər: Tarixi həqiqətin 
soyqırımı,- B.: Azərbaycan, 2003,- 72 s.; Gəncə-Qarabağ 
əyalətinin müfəssəl dəftəri.- B.: Şuşa, 2000.- 575 s.; Xəlilli X. 
Qarabağ: Etnomənəvi inkişaf tarixi: Ən qədim dövrdən 1920-ci ilə 
qədər,- B.: Günəş, 2006.- 79 s.; Xəlilzadə F. İgidliyin son zirvəsi,- 
B., Nurlan, 2001.- 74 s.; ibayev V. Ermənistan-Azərbaycan,
Dağlıq Qarabağ münaqişəsi insan hüquqları kontekstində: (Tətbiq 
oluhüquq və məsuliyyət məsələləri).- B.: Elm, 2001 - 241 s;
Köçərli T. Qarabağ /Red.: O.S.Məmmədov; AMEA-nın İnsan 
Hüquqları İnstitutu.- B.: Elm, 2002,- 465 s.; İsgəndərzadə E. 
Müharibə adamı: (Mayor Azay Kərimov haqqında).- B, Şuşa,
1999.- 110 s.; Ermənilərin Dağlıq Qarabağla bağlı iddialarının heç 
bir hüquqi əsası yoxdur,- B.: Çaşıoglu, 2005.- 22 s; Seyidbəyli E. 
Qarabağtorpaq mülkiyyətinə aid arxeoqrafık materiallar. Gövhər 
ağa Cavanşirin sənədləri /Elmi red.; Tahirə Həsənzadə,- B.: 
Nurlan, 2002.; Zeynalov Niyaz. iki ay erməni əsirliyində.- B.; 
Azərnəşr, 2000.- 59 s.;Məmmədova H.Azərbaycan Xalq 
Cümhuriyyəti dövründə Yuxarı Qarabağda siyasi vəziyyət.Erməni 
terrorizminin güclənməsi ( 1918 - 1920)Bakı 2006, 150 s.; Nəvvab 
M. M. 1905-1906-cı illərdə erməni-müsəlman davası. Bakı, 
Azərbaycan, 1983,-128 s. Şuşa qədim Azərbaycan diyarı; Shusa 
- old Azerbaijan land. Baki 2009
3. Məmmədova Həvva. Xocalı: Şəhidlər, Şahidlər,- B.: Yeni nəşrlər 
evi, 2003. 197s; Xəlilqızı Əsli. Güllələnmiş uşaqlıq /Ə. Xəlilqızı; 
Red.: M. Nazimoğlu; Tərcüməçilər: A. Qorina, N. Məmmədov, 
Dizayner: T. Gəncəliyev. B.: Çaşıoğlu, 2007.- 295 s;
4. Krua l'Eveneman jurnalı (Paris), 25 fevral 1992;Sandi Tayms 
qəzeti (London), 1 mart 1992; Faynenşl Tayms qəzeti (London),
9, 14 mart 1992; Tayms qəzeti (London), 4 mart 1992; Le Mond 
qəzeti (Paris), 14 mart 1992; Valer aktuel jurnalı (Paris), 14 mart 
1992 və s.
5. Azərbaycanda Vətəndaş Cəmiyyətinin inkişafına Yardım 
Assosiasiyası (AVCİYA) "Xocalı soyqırımı (sənədlər, faktlarda və 
xarici mətbuatda)" (azərbaycan, rus, ingilis dillərində) Bakı,2006; 
ASSOCIATION FOR CIVIL SOCIETY DEVELOPMENT IN 
AZERBAIYAN- TWO PHOTO- TALKS ON A TRAGEDY.BAKU 
2010;
6. Srebrenitsa soyqırımının ildönümünə həsr olunmuş dəyirmi 
masada Xocalı ilə paralellər aparılıb. Media form. 09 iyul 2010
7. Millətin Sərdarı - Səttarxan Qaradağlı. "Bakı - Təbriz" jurnalı, 2005 
Ne 3, s. 60-67;"Ucar"da Cənubi Azərbaycan izi. "525-ci qəze t" 12 
mart 2010.
8. Jan Junior "Unudulmuş qəhrəmanlar. Çar Rusiyası ilə müharibədə 
unudulmuş qəhrəmanlarımız." (azərbaycan dilinə tərcümə edənlər 
Əlibala Hacızadə, Şahin Fazil). Bakı 2004,
9. Yeni Musavat qəzeti, 23 fevral 2007
10.Quliyev N, Quliyeva B. "Xocavənd həqiqətiəri" Bakı 2007; 
Məhəmmədqızı L. "Qaradağlı - qəlbi dağlı" Bakı : Azərbaycan 
Tərcümə Mərkəzi , 1994.52 s.; Q. Mehparə "Qaradağlı faciəsi... 
unudulan həqiqətlər" "Təzadlar" qəz., 17 fevral 2009; Ənvər 
Çingizoğlu. Qaradağlılar. Bakı, "Şuşa" nəşriyatı, 2008.
11."Şərq" qəzeti, 16 fevral 2007-ci il
12. "Azerbaycan" qəzeti, 07 mart 2010
13. "Şərq" qəzeti, 16 fevral 2007-ci il
14."Xalq" qəzeti ,21 fevral 2009
15. Anaların qüruryeri "Azərbaycan" qəzeti, 07 mart 2010
TRAGEDY OF GARADAGHLY
FEBRUARY 17, 199?
It had been sent to the print: 10.11.2010 
Format of the book 60x84 1/16 
Physical p/s 2,25 
Circulation 500
KLlILUIJNaŞİBiaB EVİ
Bakı, A Z  1102. Tbilisi pros.,
II Alatava 9.
Tel: (+ 994 12) 431-16-62; 431-38-18 
Mobil: (+ 994  55) 212 42 37 
e-mail: info@ qanun.az  
www.qanun.az
